
Ashlyn Macnamara weaves a delicious tale of two souls torn apart by circumstance and reunited by fate—perfect for fans of Julia Quinn, Eloisa James, and Sabrina Jeffries.   Henrietta Upperton is about to marry Alexander Sanford when he rushes off to India to salvage his family’s fortune. Then comes the devastating news that he has wed another. Eight agonizing years later, a storm washes Alexander ashore—injured, widowed, and hunted—and one glimpse of his ruggedly handsome face reawakens the desire Henrietta thought she had buried deep inside. Her body still yearns for his touch, but she’s determined not let him wound her again . . . not this time.   For Alexander, honor always comes first. But only now does he realize that when given the choice between two virtuous deeds, he picked the wrong one. On the run with his life in tatters and a pair of daughters in tow, Alexander burns for Henrietta. He knows he does not deserve forgiveness. And yet he longs to wrap his arms around her warm body once again. What’s more, he is sure the lady craves the same.Praise for Ashlyn Macnamara and What a Lady Craves   “Ashlyn Macnamara is a born storyteller, weaving tales rich in angst, humor, and history as she treats readers to the steamier side of Regency. Her inventive prose has secured her a place on my auto-buy list, and her memorable characters have secured a place in my heart. Don’t forget to set your morning alarm, though . . . you’ll be reading far past your bedtime!”—New York Times and USA Today bestselling author Jennifer McQuiston   “Ashlyn Macnamara brings all the elegance and romance of the Regency to life.”—New York Times bestselling author Tessa Dare   “A witty, sexy historical romance . . . Pain, scandal, forgiveness, honor, intrigue, passion, clever banter, romance and love all play a part in this delightful tale, which will keep readers turning the pages.”—Romance Junkies   “I found this read to be fast paced, highly entertaining and engrossing. If you’ve never read this author before, this would be a great one to start you on the journey of discovery of what Ms. Ashlyn Macnamara offers to her fans. It really is a win-win!”—bookworm2bookworm   “If you are looking for a historical romance that covers both the romance and the mystery aspect, you should pick up your copy of What a Lady Craves as soon as possible!”—(un)Conventional Bookviews   “The powerful connection between the lead characters and the deft writing of Ashlyn Macnamara made me glad these characters got a second chance at love.”—The Polished Bookworm   “A historical romance full of passion, depth and darkness . . . Ashlyn Macnamara is a master of intrigue. . . . She makes you crave details and insight, makes you want to discover more. The anticipation of such a journey lured me in, and I couldn’t wait to uncover the true story of what happened between Alexander and Henrietta all those years ago.”—3 Chicks After Dark   Includes a special message from the editor, as well as an excerpt from another Loveswept title.
