
Law Enforcement Agents Can Do It All. But Forgive?  John Russell is the Florida Department of Law Enforcement agent assigned to the missing Dylan Jacobs’ case. But while he’s tracking down clues in his professional life, a murderer is hot on his trail—his own flesh and blood. John’s father relentlessly seeks something John refuses to offer: forgiveness. Forced to face the source of his paralyzing fear of thunder and his stolen childhood, can John find the missing boy without his personal life completely unraveling? Ten-year-old Dylan Jacobs is missing from state care. John Russell is the team leader of the Florida Department of Law Enforcement task force trying to find him. Although the governor has declared this a top priority, all the team is turning up are corruption and crime of a different sort. Could Dylan still be alive after disappearing from the system six years ago?  Meanwhile, John’s own long-buried nightmare is unearthed when a paroled killer shows up in his driveway. He struggles to leave old horrors where they belong—in the past. Determined to protect her children and help her husband, his wife, Marie, does some investigating of her own. Because she soon realizes, what you don’t know can hurt you.  Join the agents of the FDLE as they seek the truth behind the crime and grapple with Truth in their personal lives. Dealing with depravity all day, every day, it doesn’t always seem like God is in control. Which just makes victory all that much sweeter when it comes.  “Drawing upon his real-life experience as a police detective, Mark Mynheir has given us a realistic story and characters to care for. Mark presents us with a fresh new voice who writes from a unique perspective.”  Angela Hunt, bestselling author of Unspoken  “A remarkable first novel, with strong action and a solid moral. Readers will eagerly await the next installment from Mark Mynheir.”  T. Davis Bunn, bestselling author  “Rolling Thunder is a compelling story examining the struggles, importance, and power of forgiveness.”  Bill Myers, bestselling author of Soul Tracker  Story Behind the BookMark Mynheir’s experience as a homicide detective enables him to accurately expose, from an insider’s view, the exciting world of law enforcement and crime investigation. It also sets an unassuming scene for the serious spiritual work that needs to be accomplished in Mynheir’s main character. While the story unfolds, the reality becomes clear of how many Christians welcome God’s grace and forgiveness for themselves but struggle to extend it to others. They harbor unresolved anger and resentment, often for years, against those who have hurt them. Mynheir challenges readers to identify with fictional characters and to initiate the process of forgiveness in their own lives.From the Trade Paperback edition.
