
From the New York Times bestselling author of such “sizzling Stark novels” (RT Book Reviews) as Release Me and Say My Name comes a Stark International Novel featuring provocative bad boy Dallas Sykes—the first in a new trilogy in the S.I.N. series.It was wrong for us to be together, but it was even harder to be apart.   The memory of Dallas Sykes burns inside of me.    Everyone knows him as a notorious playboy, a man for whom women and money are no object. But to me, he’s still the one man I desperately crave—yet the one I can never have.    Dallas knows me better than anyone else. We bear the same scars, the same darkness in our past. I thought I could move on by staying away, but now that we’re drawn together once more, I can’t fight the force of our attraction or the temptation to make him mine.   We’ve tried to maintain control, not letting ourselves give in to desire. And for so long we’ve told ourselves no—but now it’s finally time to say yes.Praise for Dirtiest Secret    “[A] high-octane contemporary, the first in [J. Kenner’s] new Stark International Novel (S.I.N.) trilogy . . . Kenner skillfully builds a top-notch thriller.”—Publishers Weekly   “Fans of Kenner’s steamy, decadent and daring plotlines will feel right at home in her new S.I.N. series and revel in the escapades of her tortured characters and their forbidden passion. As always, Kenner delivers a sensual and heady physical relationship, fraught with danger, forbidden love and high-stakes complications.”—RT Book Reviews   “Strong writing propels an exciting tale of longing, danger, and forbidden desire. The ending’s twist will leave readers eager for the next installment.”—Library Journal  “This book had a little bit of everything. Mystery, suspense, emotion and dirty, hot sex.”—Shameless Book Club   “Kenner wrote Dallas in such a way that you are enthralled with his character from the first page he graces. He’s sexy and extremely controlling but not quite what you think he is.”—Black Heart Reviews   “Seduction and tangled emotions led the way in this first book of the Stark International Novels (S.I.N.) series. With a happy-for-now ending that had a twist at the end, I can’t wait to see what happens next in Jane and Dallas’s intriguing story.”—Harlequin Junkie   “It was literally like [eating] the most decadently sinful piece of chocolate, knowing that you really need to lose those last ten pounds. I do believe that I just found my newest guilty pleasure and his name is Dallas Sykes.”—Hooker Heels Book Blog   “I am rooting for Dallas and Jane. They have a lot to overcome. Being together means lies, secrets, and complications that I’m sure will test their already fragile relationship.”—Book Boyfriend Blog   “Dirtiest Secret is about fighting demons and giving in to desire. It’s about secrets, forbidden love and second chances. Friends, family and lovers. Dirtiest Secret is a touching and heartrending dark romance novel with a strong hero and heroine. If you’re in for intense and twisted, Dirtiest Secret is your fix.”—Chelles Life in Books Dirtiest Secret is intended for mature audiences.
