
Yoga Beyond Belief offers a unique vision of contemporary yoga. It integrates scientific  and practical approaches providing a much-needed integrative perspective that complements  existing yoga books for all levels and styles of yoga students. Serving up a collection  of valuable insights gleaned from a lifetime of exploration, practice, study, and  teaching by one of America’s pioneering and leading teachers of yoga, the book assists  readers in making sense of the many discordant claims and teaching techniques that  currently exist in the yoga world, freeing readers to pursue their own individual  paths of yoga and personal practice. This is an essential text and reference for  all yoga practitioners. The book first sets a context for an open-minded and evolutionary  approach to yoga practice, and then explains the core principles of the many branches  of yoga. A clear foundation is given for how the physical practices of yoga work  to produce remarkable results of health and well being. The chapter Injury, Pain,  and Healing shows how to prevent injuries and how to heal injuries should they occur.  The reader is given a wealth of sophisticated of tools, insights, and anecdotes gleaned  from a lifetime of practice and teaching to develop, hone, and tune his or her personal  yoga approach. This book makes yoga come alive for the reader. The book concludes  by going beyond the physical aspects to the heart of yoga. It illuminates and gives  insight into the discovery of non-dogmatic forms and evolutionary approaches to meditation  and spirituality. It presents a clear argument showing the pitfalls of regimented  systems and how to make everything in daily life part of yoga practice and spiritual  development. Ganga White gives us his unique and creative perspectives on a time-tested  discipline for a healthy and vital life. Entertaining and thoroughly readable, this  book offers a coherent explication of yoga, its philosophy and practice. White’s  integrative views will inspire beginners and accomplished yogis to trust their inner  wisdom and creatively reassess their practice. He is a great storyteller and gives  us his personal and creative perspective, breathing fresh air into an ancient discipline.  Yoga Beyond Belief offers an original, integrative approach to body, mind, and spirit  that is practical, inspiring, and full of valuable insights to enliven and inform  anyone’s yoga practice.
