
A go-to guide for gardeners of all skill levels planting east of the Mississippi River Valley looking to add sustainable native flora to any horticultural project.Gleaned from the authors’ 75 years of landscaping experience, this user-friendly reference offers suggestions on species selection based on a plant’s performance, aesthetic appeal, and wide range of adaptability. Expert authors Tony Dove and Ginger Woolridge’s valuable resource is organized for fast and confident tree and shrub selections for specific landscape applications, and is full of vivid four-color photographs, graphs, and practical tips. A sound and giftable volume for gardeners and landscapers from New England through the Carolinas, from the east coast to the Mississippi River, including Georgia and into northern Florida.“Plant the proper trees and shrubs to nurture your local bees, butterflies, moths and birds with help from Essential Native Trees and Shrubs for the Eastern United States: The Guide to Creating a Sustainable Landscape by Tony Dove, who has managed public gardens on the East Coast for 50 years, and Ginger Woolridge, a Maryland-based garden designer. This is an authoritative catalog, organized by a range of categories: those that have attractive bark or are evergreen, those that have showy flowers or are wind, salt or drought tolerant.”—New York Times Summer Reading List for The Great Outdoors“An important new tool to our native  plant libraries. . . Beautifully illustrated, even the well-informed  gardener will find this a valuable reference.” —Doug Tallamy, author of Bringing Nature Home, co-author of The Living Landscape, and Chair and Professor of the department of entomology and wildlife ecology at the University of Delaware “Few books give such well-researched  detail into where and how to utilize both common and sorely  underutilized native trees and shrubs in the landscape. This book should  be a required reference for nurserymen and landscape designers.”new —Mark Weathington, Director, JC Raulston Arboretum at NC State University “FINALLY! In a thoughtful, organized  and simple format, this book illustrates how to build better landscapes,  gardens, and environmentally sensitive ecologies. This is a long  overdue book and it has my absolute endorsement.”  —Eric D. Groft, Principal/Vice President, Oehme van Sweden, Landscape Architecture “I was impressed with the comprehensive  plant lists at the beginning of the book. Most gardening/landscape  books place such lists in the back of the book and usually do not cover  as many areas as yours does e.g. Trees with Showy Flowers, Trees for  Planting Beneath Utility Lines, Wind Tolerant Trees, etc. I thought the  addition of pictorial representations of height as well as seasons of  interest was very useful, especially for those who are visual learners. I  particularly appreciated the colored flower, fruit, and leaf color  indications in the Seasons of Interest section – Great idea! The  inclusion of the wildlife benefits of each tree or shrub is also a  valuable tool for eco-friendly gardeners and landscapers. Essential Native Trees and Shrubs for the Eastern United States makes a great addition to the library of every serious gardener,  landscape designer/architect, land manager and other plant-related  professional.”—Margaret Shillingford, Education Programs Specialist, Mt. Cuba Center
