
Help. . . . Cubicle Life Is Killing Me!Leaving no stone unturned, no ergonomic chair unadjusted, and no leftovers in the communal fridge uneaten, this hilarious guide to cubicle life will be the salvation for the more than forty million Americans stuck in cubicles. By turns uproariously funny and enormously useful, each chapter tackles a different area of cubicle life and includes a “cube tip,” a quiz, illustrations, and examples that will have you laughing out loud. Discover• how not to disturb colleagues with unwanted sounds and smells, such as the crunch-crunch of your sour-cream-and-onion chips and the unmistakable odor of your spicy Thai shrimp• how to knock when visiting other cubicles and how to devise politically correct ways of saying “Do not disturb”• the do’s and definite don’ts of cubicle decoration• how to set up a security system that will rebuff potential thievesThe Cubicle Survival Guide could very well change your life and set you climbing the corporate ladder to success!** Results not guaranteed. Pay raises and promotions are up to your boss, but using this book couldn’t hurt.Praise for The Cubicle Survival Guide:“A spiritual air conditioner for the cubicled soul.” — Turk Regan, author of Pimp My Cubicle: Take Your Workspace from Boring to Bling!"James Thompson’s The Cubicle Survival Guide offers the rare, and definitely appreciated, combination of laugh-out-loud humor and sound advice for surviving the jungle that is Corporate America.  On some days, there’s nothing more motivating to fresh air-starved cube dwellers than a book that will simply crack them up.  This is that book.”— Alexandra Levit, Author, They Don’t Teach Corporate in College"If you must work (and I don’t recommend it), The Cubicle Survival Guide provides a wonderful way to slack off and stay entertained. You can easily kill two weeks with this book."— Josh Aiello, Author, 60 People to Avoid at the Water Cooler“Thompson provides a humorous yet thought-provoking look at what employees in today’s large organizations must deal with besides their jobs.”— Malcolm O. Munro, Author, From Cave to Cubicle
