
"Zig Ziglar epitomizes determination, perseverance, excellence, and a loving Christian spirit more than anyone I know!  The world would be a better place if more of us were just like him."–Kenneth H. Cooper, M.D., The Cooper Clinic, Dallas, TexasZig Ziglar, the motivational speaker who has galvanized audiences around the world and written more than a dozen perennially popular books, brings that same unbounded energy and clarity of vision to this candid, inspiring account of his own life and the forces that shaped it.Every year, Zig Ziglar travels all over the world delivering a resounding message of hope and commitment in forums ranging from high-powered business conferences and church leadership assemblies to youth conventions  and educational gatherings. In Zig, Ziglar chronicles another kind of journey: his own transformation from a struggling, not terribly successful salesman to the sales champion of several different companies, and finally to his current position as one of the world’s best-known and most highly regarded motivational speakers and trainers. As he describes his experiences, he brings to life the essence of his teachings: “You can have everything in life you want if you will just help enough other people get what they want.”At the heart of Ziglar’s story are the people who taught him the importance of balancing a commitment to hard work with compassion for others. His first teacher was his mother, who raised him alone after the early death of his father, and introduced him to the principles and values he has honored for the rest of his life. Her lessons were reinforced by many others–from the men and women who became his business mentors to the friends and spiritual leaders who comforted and supported him when things got tough. Paying tribute to each of them, Ziglar zeroes in on the philosophy and traits that have enabled him to achieve success in business and in his personal life: discipline, hard work, common sense, integrity, commitment, and an infectious sense of humor. Ziglar’s speaking engagements and seminars along with a wide array of audio and video materials, books, and training manuals, have helped to trigger positive changes in small businesses, Fortune 500 companies, U.S. government agencies, nonprofit associations, religious organizations, schools, and prisons. At once engaging and enlightening, Zig provides a riveting portrait of the man who has achieved so much by embracing the simple but profound goal of helping others.From the Hardcover edition.
