
“I have observed several hundred salespeople who were taught to use deceptive practices   like ‘bait and switch’ and encouraged to play negotiation games with customers… In the same industry,   I have observed countless people who had been taught to sell with high integrity.   Ironically, their customer satisfaction, profit margins, and salesperson retention   were significantly higher.” — Ron Willingham If you’ve tried manipulative, self-focused   selling techniques that demean you and your customer, if you’ve ever wondered if   selling could be more than just talking people into buying, then Integrity Selling   for the 21st Century is the book for you. Its concept is simple: Only by getting   to know your customers and their needs — and believing that you can meet those needs   — will you enjoy relationships with customers built on trust. And only then, when   you bring more value to your customers than you receive in payment, will you begin   to reap the rewards of high sales.  Since the publication of Ron Willingham’s enormously   successful first book, Integrity Selling, his sales program has been adopted by dozens   of Fortune 500 companies, such as Johnson & Johnson and IBM, as well as the American   Red Cross and the New York Times. In his new book, Integrity Selling for the 21st   Century, Willingham explains how his selling system relates to today’s business climate   — when the need for integrity is greater than ever before.  Integrity Selling for   the 21st Century teaches a process of self-evaluation to help you become a stellar   salesperson in any business climate. Once you’ve established your own goals and personality   traits, you’ll be able to evaluate them in your customers and adapt your styles to   create a more trusting, productive relationship.  Drawing upon Willingham’s years   of experience and success stories from sales forces of the more than 2,000 companies   that have adopted the Integrity Selling system, Ron Willingham has created a blueprint   for achieving success in sales while staying true to your values.
