
The revolutionary weight loss plan used by more than 5 million people, from the creators of the hit iPhone appFor years, we’ve been taught that in order to lose weight, we have to avoid the foods we love and exercise until we drop. To get lean, you have to be extreme…right? Wrong. Dieting is a zero-sum game. You can lose weight fast, but more than a third of people regain all of the weight they’ve lost within a year. So why waste time following someone else’s diet advice when you can drop the pounds on your own terms? With Lose It! by Charles Teague and Anahad O’Connor, the power to lose weight is in your hands. No deprivation, no detox, no hard-and-fast rules—just a plan that empowers you to create your own, personalized strategy tailored to your individual lifestyle, schedule, dietary needs, and goals. Despite what many “experts” would lead you to believe, weight loss boils down to simple math: calories in vs. calories out. To shed pounds, you have to end each day with a calorie deficit. It sounds easy enough, but studies show that 63 percent of Americans grossly underestimate their daily calorie intake. In fact, the average American consumes a staggering 3,790 calories a day—that’s enough calories to gain more than 10 pounds every month! Lose It!‘s life-changing philosophy and program have already helped more than 5 million people lose weight. In this, the first-ever book to be developed from an iPhone app, readers will learn the five pillars of the Lose It! strategy: 1. Embrace mindful empowerment: Take control of your body and the foods you put in it. 2. Track your calories: There are no points or complicated algorithms to follow. But every snack, taste, and bite counts! 3. Track your habits. Spot behavior patterns—good and bad—that you can modify to help you meet your goal. 4. Track your exercise. Learn how to burn more calories in less time and boost your calorie burn even when you’re not at the gym. 5. Benefit from peer support. Your social network inspires you, keeps you accountable, and provides insight and advice. With Lose It!, you can forget about following someone else’s idea of what you should and shouldn’t eat and simply learn to love food again. The best possible weight loss plan, after all, is the one that you design yourself.
