
The three books of the New York Times, USA Today, and Publishers Weekly bestselling Gemma Doyle trilogy available together for the first time, from the author of The Diviners series and Going Bovine. This collection contains the complete text of the three Gemma Doyle novels, a deliciously sweeping and haunting saga that won’t let you go. It’s the only way to get all three of Libba Bray’s critically acclaimed novels in one bundle.A Great and Terrible Beauty: Gemma Doyle finds an icy reception at the Spence Academy in London, where she becomes entangled with the leader of the school’s most powerful clique and discovers her own mother’s connection to a shadowy group called the Order. Rebel Angels: Gemma is looking forward to spending time in London over Christmas, but her troubled visions of three girls dressed in white are intensifying and only the enchanted realms can give Gemma the answers she needs. The Sweet Far Thing: In a world where rules are everything, can a girl like Gemma survive? The conclusion to the bestselling series.Praise for Libba Bray’s novels:A Great and Terrible Beauty“A delicious, elegant gothic.”—PW, Starred “Shivery with both passion and terror.”—Kirkus Reviews “A true boarding-school drama, full of cattiness, Victorian repression, and steamy schoolgirl dreams of being ravished by virile gypsies.”—The Bulletin, Recommended Rebel Angels “This extraordinary novel moves along at breathtaking speed from beginning to end . . . astounding.”—VOYA in a Perfect 10 Review“Remarkable.”—SLJ  The Sweet Far Thing“A rare treat that offers a bit of everything—romance, magic, history, Gothic intrigue—and delivers on all of it in 819 beautifully crafted pages.”—People “A triumphant conclusion of the trilogy begun in A Great and Terrible Beauty.”—PW, in its Best Books of the Year review  Going Bovine “Libba Bray’s fabulous new book will, with any justice, be a cult classic. The kind of book you take with you to college, in the hopes that your roommate will turn out to have packed their own copy, too. Reading it is like discovering an alternate version of The Phantom Tollbooth, where Holden Caulfield has hit Milo over the head and stolen his car, his token, and his tollbooth. There’s adventure and tragedy here, a sprinkling of romance, musical interludes, a battle-ready yard gnome who’s also a Norse God, and practically a chorus line of physicists. Which reminds me: will someone, someday, take Going Bovine and turn it into a musical, preferably a rock opera? I want the soundtrack, the program, the T-shirt, and front row tickets.”—Kelly Link, author of Get in Trouble  “Libba Bray not only breaks the mold of the ubiquitous dying-teenager genre—she smashes it and grinds the tiny pieces into the sidewalk. For the record, I’d go anywhere she wanted to take me.”—The New York Times  “A sublimely surreal saga.”—People “Offer this to fans of Douglas Adams’s Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy seeking more inspired lunacy.”—PW, Starred
