
Secrets and seduction make for an explosive combination in HelenKay Dimon’s edgy, thrilling new series, which kicks off with a novel about two men who can handle any threat—except the one posed by desire.RITA FINALIST—ROMANTIC SUSPENSE Fisher Braun knows how to keep a secret. As a covert paramilitary operative, his job—and his life—depends on it. He’s at the top of his game, ready for action and always in control. No enemy has ever brought him to his knees, but one lover has: Zachary Allen, the man currently sharing his bed. The perfect package of brains and brawn, Zach is someone worth coming home to, and Fisher hates keeping him in the dark about what he does. But the lies keep Zach safe. Until the day Fisher loses everything. . . .   Zachary Allen is no innocent civilian. Although he plays the tech geek, in reality he’s deep undercover for the CIA. In a horrible twist of fate, the criminal enterprise he’s infiltrated has set its sights on the man whose touch drives him wild. Zach would do anything for Fisher—except blow his own cover. Now, in order to save him, Zach must betray him first. And he needs Fisher to trust him with all his heart if they want to make it out alive.  Fall in love with the men of HelenKay Dimon’s thrilling novels:   The Tough Love series: MR. AND MR. SMITH | THE TALENTED MR. RIVERS | GUARDING MR. FINE   The Dirty series: DIRTY DEEDS | DIRTY GAMESPraise for Mr. and Mr. Smith  “If you like hot men, action, nerve-wracking situations and police books, you should read Mr. and Mr. Smith.”—The Book Adventures of Annelise Lestrange “This book is . . . a whole heck of a lot of fun, with a large cast of characters, lots of women in power, some angry-hot sex, physically improbable stunts, and lots of shit blowing up. If you like your romance with a little dash of Die Hard, this is the book for you.”—Binge On Books “If you are looking for some sexy, exciting, romantic suspense, I would definitely give Mr. and Mr. Smith a try. It is a fun story with lots of thrills and it looks to be the start of a great new series.”—Joyfully Jay “Mr. and Mr. Smith is a suspense-filled story. There are moments of abrasive and emotional tantrums . . . and inspiring scenes of one man’s love for another. The premise is entertaining; the characters are an eclectic mix of intense, impassioned, and real; the romance is a fight to the finish.”—The Reading Cafe Includes an excerpt from another Loveswept title.
