
In her sweeping historical debut, Ella March Chase explores a thrilling possibility:  that the Tudor bloodline did not end with the Virgin Queen. As captivating now as it was more than four centuries ago, the reign of Elizabeth I—with its scandal, intrigue, and resilience—has sparked the imaginations of generations. Tucked away in the country  estate of her beloved father, Lord Calverley, young Nell de Lacey feeds her hungry  mind with philosophy, language, and studies of science. Her mother, once a devoted  lady-in-waiting to Henry VIII’s last wife, Katherine Parr, would rather her daughter  stop dabbling in the grand affairs of men and instead prepare for her eventual duties  as a wife. She knows all too well what menace lurks in royal courts.But Nell’s  heart yearns for something more, and a chance meeting with Princess Elizabeth, then  a prisoner of the Tower of London, pushes her closer toward finding it. Now, years  later, Nell’s chance arrives when she is summoned to serve as a lady-in-waiting to  the newly crowned Queen Elizabeth. Nell is entranced by the splendor and pageantry  of royal life, unaware of the danger and deception that swirls around the monarch  and her courtiers. But a lingering rumor about nine unaccounted for months in the  Virgin Queen’s past reignites when the flame-haired Nell—a mirror image of Her Majesty  both physically and intellectually—arrives at court. Quickly she catches the eye  not only of the cunning Elizabeth, but of those who would see the queen fail. With  strong evidence to connect Elizabeth to her newest maid of honor and the politics  of England in turmoil, the truth could send Nell and those she loves to the Tower  to join in the wretched fates of those who’ve gone before her.Engrossing and enlightening,  The Virgin Queen’s Daughter brings to life one of the greatest mysteries of one of  the greatest monarchs. Ella March Chase’s vivid storytelling gives due credence to  a daughter who might have been and a mother who never was.
