
During the past decade, the image of America in many parts of the world has steadily deteriorated. In this perceptive analysis of the causes of anti-Americanism, Glenn and Carole Schweitzer — coauthors of the acclaimed Superterrorism: Assassins, Mobsters, and Weapons of Mass Destruction — chart a proactive course for change that will create a more positive attitude toward America and deter terrorism, while encouraging international cooperation to solve some of the world’s most pressing problems. The authors begin by showing how and why growing American military and economic power in recent years, coupled with questionable foreign policy choices, have generated negative foreign perceptions of America, especially in Muslim countries. They also address how the growing Muslim populations, with few resources and little room to expand, display increased resentment toward American wealth, while their overcrowded cities have become breeding grounds for hatred directed toward America. Beyond highlighting key problem areas, the Schweitzers devote most of the book to recommending realistic, doable solutions. They want to see U.S. leadership that gives priority to:A new emphasis in foreign assistance on job creation and sustainable solutionsExpanded international educational opportunities and the adoption of modern university curricula, particularly in the Muslim worldA change in current U.S. policies that justify military interventionsGreater support of capabilities in the developing countries to control infectious diseasesModification of the U.S. double standard that allows for the increase in American nuclear weapons capabilities while denying others the use of nuclear technology for peaceful purposesA strengthening of the role of the United Nations to prevent and resolve international security crisesMore assertive U.S. actions in resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, a major source of much of the anti-American feeling in the Middle East.The authors also stress the importance of listening to and considering the views of leaders of other societies, in contrast to simply pronouncing U.S. policies and intentions. Also, they urge more effective support of local television stations to communicate accurate and balanced views of American society, culture, and policies.Reflecting decades of experience in international relations, this important assessment of America’s role in the world will interest everyone concerned with American security and the prospects for global peace.
