
The truth paves a path for a second chance at love in a captivating Thistle Bend novel from the award-winning author of Should’ve Said No (“A small-town gem of a read, sparkling with humor and warmth.”—Zoe Dawson). Having recently returned to Thistle Bend, Colorado, Ellie London is working hard to make a living as an artist, and to get over her broken engagement. She’s focused only on guarding her heart and healing her mind . . . until a cocky, undeniably sexy out-of-towner rides in on his motorcycle. Turns out, Ellie might have just found the perfect opportunity to prove to herself that she’s over her cheating fiancé. After his own engagement falls through, EPA Inspector Collin Cooper is eager for a change of scenery in Thistle Bend. His principle rule of the road is not to get too involved with a new woman—and yet he can’t resist beautiful, outdoorsy Ellie. But when a local river becomes polluted under Collin’s supervision, resentment floods the entire town, running even deeper with Ellie’s family. With his job on the line, Collin needs to find a way to set things right—and hold on to the woman who has captured his heart.Praise for Could’ve Said Yes“The rustic setting of Colorado once again provides a breathtaking backdrop for [Tracy] March’s small-town romances.”—Library Journal“I enjoyed this one so much, and I believe you will too.”—Keeper Bookshelf“I would highly recommend Could’ve Said Yes by Tracy March if you enjoy second-chance romances.”—Harlequin Junkie“I enjoyed this delightful, sweet, and steamy romance as much as I enjoyed this storybook sounding community. Ms. March’s writing was easy to follow, engaging, and richly descriptive. I look forward to a return trip to this picturesque community – hopefully soon.”—Books and Bindings“Could’ve Said Yes was a sweet and entertaining romance and I look forward to checking out more from this author in the future.”—Once Upon a Book Blog “If you are looking for an extraordinary romance with a unique plot, captivating characters and a small town romance that will have your toes curling, give Could’ve Said Yes a read.”—So Many Reads“Tracy March does it again with her final Thistle Bend novel! Could’ve Said Yes is charming, smart and sexy, complete with a swoon-worthy hero, a heroine you can’t help but root for, and all the marvelously unique characters you’ve come to love in this series.”—USA Today bestselling author Laura Drewry“Could’ve Said Yes is filled with Tracy March’s signature small-town charm and warmth. Returning to Thistle Bend is always a treat!”—Elisabeth Barrett, author of the Return to Briarwood series Includes an excerpt from another Loveswept title.
