
True to its name, this New England travel guide covers all the region’s major sights and attractions in easy-to-use top 10 lists that help you plan the vacation that’s right for you.This newly updated pocket travel guide for New England will lead you straight to the best attractions this region has to offer, from Freedom Trail to the White Mountains to the Boston Harbor.Expert travel writers have fully revised this edition of DK Eyewitness Travel Guide: Top 10 New England.   • Brand-new itineraries help you plan your trip to New England.    • Expanded and far more comprehensive, new laminated pull-out map now includes color-coded design, public transportation maps, and street indexes to make it even easier to use.    • Maps of walking routes show you the best ways to maximize your time.    • New Top 10 lists feature off-the-beaten-track ideas, along with standbys like the top attractions, shopping, dining options, and more.    • Additional maps marked with sights from the guidebook are shown on inside cover flaps, with selected street index and metro map.    • New typography and fresh layout throughout. You’ll still find DK’s famous full-color photography and museum floor plans, along with just the right amount of coverage of history and culture. A free pull-out map is marked with sights from the guidebook and includes a street index and a metro map.The perfect pocket-size travel companion: DK Eyewitness Travel Guide: Top 10 New England.Recommended: For an in-depth guidebook to New England, check out DK Eyewitness Travel Guide: New England, which offers a complete overview of this area; thousands of photographs, illustrations, and maps; and more.Series Overview: DK Eyewitness Travel Guide Top 10 are handy travel guides that take the work out of planning a trip. Packed with amazing ideas, informative maps, insider tips, and useful advice, DK’s Top 10 guides lead you to the very best your destination has to offer. The pocket size make these the perfect guide to take on vacation. Discover the history, art, architecture, and culture of your destination through Top 10 lists, from the best museums, bars, and sights to the places to avoid. Visit TravelDK.com to learn more.
