A gifted mathematician who be now recognize a the first computer programmer. By CLAIRE CAIN MILLER A century before the dawn of the computer age , Ada Lovelace imagine the modern-day , general-purpose computer. It could be program to follow instruction , she write in 1843. It could not just calculate but also create , a it “weaves algebraic pattern just a the Jacquard loom weave flower and leaves.” The computer she be write about , the British inventor Charles Babbage’s Analytical Engine , be never built. But her writing about compute have earn Lovelace — who die of uterine cancer in 1852 at 36 — recognition a the first computer programmer. The program she write for the Analytical Engine be to calculate the seventh Bernoulli number. ( Bernoulli number , name after the Swiss mathematician Jacob Bernoulli , be use in many different area of mathematics. ) But her deep influence be to see the potential of computing. The machine could go beyond calculate number , she say , to understand symbol and be use to create music or art. “This insight would become the core concept of the digital age , ” Walter Isaacson write in his book “The Innovators.” “Any piece of content , data or information — music , text , picture , number , symbol , sound , video — could be express in digital form and manipulate by machines.” She also explore the ramification of what a computer could do , write about the responsibility place on the person program the machine , and raise and then dismiss the notion that computer could someday think and create on their own — what we now call artificial intelligence. “The Analytical Engine have no pretension whatever to originate any thing , ” she wrote. “It can do whatever we know how to order it to perform.” Lovelace , a British socialite who be the daughter of Lord Byron , the Romantic poet , have a gift for combine art and science , one of her biographer , Betty Alexandra Toole , have written. She think of math and logic a creative and imaginative , and call it “poetical science.” Math “constitutes the language through which alone we can adequately express the great fact of the natural world , ” Lovelace wrote. Her work , which be rediscover in the mid-20th century , inspire the Defense Department to name a programming language after her and each October Ada Lovelace Day signify a celebration of woman in technology. Lovelace live when woman be not consider to be prominent scientific thinker , and her skill be often describe a masculine. “With an understanding thoroughly masculine in solidity , grasp and firmness , Lady Lovelace have all the delicacy of the most refined female character , ” say an obituary in The London Examiner. Babbage , who call her the “enchantress of number , ” once write that she “has thrown her magical spell around the most abstract of Sciences and have grasp it with a force which few masculine intellect ( in our own country at least ) could have exert over it.” Augusta Ada Byron be bear on Dec. 10 , 1815 , in London , to Lord Byron and Annabella Milbanke. Her parent separate when she be an infant , and her father die when she be 8. Her mother — whom Lord Byron call the “princess of parallelograms” and , after their fall out , a “mathematical Medea” — be a social reformer from a wealthy family who have a deep interest in mathematics. An etching from a portrait of Lovelace a a child. She be say to have have a gift for combine art and science. Smith Collection/Gado/Getty Images Lovelace show a passion for math and mechanic from a young age , encourage by her mother. Because of her class , she have access to private tutor and to intellectual in British scientific and literary society. She be insatiably curious and surround herself with big thinker of the day , include Mary Somerville , a scientist and writer. It be Somerville who introduce Lovelace to Babbage when she be 17 , at a salon he host soon after she make her society debut. He show her a two-foot high , brass mechanical calculator he have build , and it grip her imagination. They begin a correspondence about math and science that last almost two decades. She also meet her husband , William King , through Somerville. They marry in 1835 , when she be 19. He soon become an earl , and she become the Countess of Lovelace. By 1839 , she have give birth to two son and a daughter. She be determine , however , not to let her family life slow her work. The year she be marry , she write to Somerville : “I now read Mathematics every day and be occupy in Trigonometry and in preliminary to Cubic and Biquadratic Equations. So you see that matrimony have by no mean lessen my taste for these pursuit , nor my determination to carry them on.” In 1840 , Lovelace ask Augustus De Morgan , a math professor in London , to tutor her. Through exchange letter , he teach her university-level math. He later write to her mother that if a young male student have show her skill , “they would have certainly make him an original mathematical investigator , perhaps of first-rate eminence.” It be in 1843 , when she be 27 , that Lovelace write her most lasting contribution to computer science. She publish her translation of an academic paper about the Babbage Analytical Engine and add a section , nearly three time the length of the paper , title , “Notes.” Here , she describe how the computer would work , imagine it potential and write the first program. Researchers have come to see it a “an extraordinary document , ” say Ursula Martin , a computer scientist at the University of Oxford who have study Lovelace’s life and work. “She’s talk about the abstract principle of computation , how you could program it , and big idea like maybe it could compose music , maybe it could think.” Lovelace die less than a decade later , on Nov. 27 , 1852. In the “Notes , ” she imagine a future in which computer could do more powerful and faster analysis than humans. “A new , a vast and a powerful language be develop for the future use of analysis , ” she write , “in which to wield it truth so that these may become of more speedy and accurate practical application for the purpose of mankind.” Claire Cain Miller write about gender for The Upshot. She first learn about Ada Lovelace while cover the tech industry , where woman be severely underrepresented .