October 13 , 1870 OBITUARY Gen. Robert E. Lee By THE NEW YORK TIMES Intelligence be receive last evening of the death at Lexington , Va. , Of Gen. Robert E. Lee , the most famous of the officer whose celebrity be gain in the service of the Southern Confederacy during the late terrible rebellion. A report be receive some day ago that he have be smite with paralysis , but this be deny , and though it be admit that he be seriously ill , hope of his speedy recovery seem to have be entertain by his friends. Within the last two or three day his symptom have take an unfavorable turn , and he expire at 91/2 o'clock yesterday morning of congestion of the brain , at the age of sixty-three year , eight month and twenty-three days. Robert Edmund Lee be the son of Gen. Henry Lee , the friend of Washington , and a representative of one of the wealthy and most respected family of Virginia. Born in January , 1807 , he grow up amid all the advantage which wealth and family position could give in a republican land , and receive the best education afford by the institution of his native State. Having inherit a taste for military study , and an ambition for military achievement , he enter the National Academy at West Point in 1825 , and graduate in 1829 , the second in scholarship in his class. He be at once commission Second Lieutenant of engineer , and in 1835 act a assistant astronomer in draw the boundary line between the States of Michigan and Ohio. In the following year he be promote to the grade of First Lieutenant , and in 1836 receive a Captain 's commission. One the break out of the war with Mexico he be make Chief-Engineer of the army under the command of Gen. Wool. After the battle of Cerro Gordo , in April , 1847 , in which he distinguish himself by his gallant conduct , he be immediately promote to the rank of Major. He display equal skill and bravery at Contreras , Cherubusco and Chapultepec , and in the battle at the last-mentioned place receive a severe wound. His admirable conduct throughout this struggle be reward before it close with the commission of a Lieutenant-Colonel and the brevet title of Colonel. In 1852 he be appoint to the responsible position of Superintendent of the Military Academy at West Point , which he retain until 1855. On retire from the charge of this institution he be make Lieutenant-Colonel of the Second Calvary , and on the 16th of March , 1861 , receive the commission of Colonel of the First Calvary. Thus far the career of Col. Lee have be one of honor and the high promise. In every service which have be entrust to his hand he have prove efficient , prompt and faithful , and his merit have always be readily acknowledge and reward by promotion. He be regard by his superior officer a one of the most brilliant and promise men in the army of the United States. His personal integrity be well know , and his loyalty and patriotism be not doubted. Indeed , it be in view of the menace of treason and the danger which threaten the Union that he have receive his last promotion , but he seem to have be thoroughly imbue with that pernicious doctrine that his first and high allegiance be due to the State of his birth. When Virginia join the ill-fated movement of secession from the Union , he immediately throw up his commission in the Federal Army and offer his sword to the newly form Confederacy. He take this step , protest his own attachment to the Union , but declare that his sense of duty would never permit him to `` raise his hand against his relative , his child , and his home. '' In his farewell letter to Gen. Scott , he speak of the struggle which this step have cost him , and his wife declare that he `` wept tear of blood over this terrible war. '' There be probably few who doubt the sincerity of his protestation , but thousand have regret , and his best friend will ever have to regret , the error of judgment , the false conception of the allegiance due to his Government and his country , which lead one so rarely gift to cast his lot with traitor , and devote his splendid talent to the execution of a wicked plot to tear asunder and ruin the Republic in whose service his life have hitherto be spent. He resign his commission on the 25th of April , 1861 , and immediately betook himself to Richmond , where he be receive with open arm and put in command of all the force of Virginia by Gov. Letcher. On the 10th of May he receive the commission of a Major-General in the army of the Confederate States , retain the command in Virginia , and be soon after promote to the rank of General in the regular army. He first take the field in the mountainous region of Western Virginia , where he meet with many difficulty , and be defeat at Greenbrier by Gen. J. J. Reynolds on the 3d of October , 1861. He be subsequently send to take command of the Department of the South Atlantic Coast , but after the disabling of Gen. Joseph E. Johnston at the battle of Fair Oaks , in the Spring of 1862 , he be recall to Virginia , and place at the head of the force defend the capital , which he lead through the remainder of the campaign of the Chickahominy. He engage with the Army of the Potomac under his old companion-in- arm , Gen. McClellan , and drive it back to the Rappahannock. He afterward , in August , 1862 attack the Army of Virginia , under Gen. Pope , and after drive it back to Washington , cross the Potomac into Maryland , where he issue a proclamation call upon the inhabitant to enlist under his triumphant banners. Meantime McClellan gather a new army from the broken remnant of his former force , and meet Lee at Hagerstown , and , after a battle of two day , compel him to retreat. Reinforced by `` Stonewall '' Jackson , on the 16th of September , he turn to renew the battle , but after two day of terrible fight at Sharpsburg and Antietam , be drive from the soil of Maryland. Retiring beyond the Rappahannock , he take up his position at Fredericksburg , where he be attack , on the 13th of December , by Gen. Burnside , whom he drive back with terrible slaughter. He meet with the same success in May , 1868 , when attack by Hooker , at Chancellorsville. Encouraged by these victory , in the ensue Summer he determine to make a bold invasion into the territory of the North. He meet Gen. Meade at Gettysburg , Penn. , on the 1st of July , 1863 , and after one of the most terrible and destructive battle of modern time , be drive from Northern soil. Soon after this , a new character appear on the battle-fields of Virginia , and Gen. Lee find it expedient to gather his force for the defense of the Confederate capital against the determined onslaught of Gen. Grant. In the Spring and Summer of 1864 that indomitable soldier gradually inclose the City of Richmond a with a girdle of iron , which he draw close and closer with irresistible energy and inexorable determination , repulse the rebel force whenever they venture to make an attack , which they do several time with considerable vigor. In this difficult position , hold the citadel of the Confederacy , and charge with it hope and destiny , Lee be make Commander-in-Chief of the army of the South. He hold out until the Spring of 1865 , vainly endeavor to gather the broken force of the Confederacy , and break asunder the terrible line which be close around them. After a desperate and final effort at Burkesville , on the 9th of April , 1865 , he be compel to acknowledge his defeat , and surrender his sword to Gen. Grant on the generous term which be dictate by that great soldier. Lee retire under his parole to Weldon , and soon after make a formal submission to the Federal Government. Subsequently , by an official clemency , which be probably without a parallel in the history of the world , he be formally pardon for the active and effective part he have take in the mad effort of the Southern States to break up the Union and destroy the Government. Not long after his surrender he be invite to become the President of Washington University , at Lexington , Va. , and be instal in that position on the 2d of October , 1865. Since that time he have devote himself to the interest of that institution , keep so far a possible aloof from public notice , and by his unobtrusive modesty and purity of life , have win the respect even of those who most bitterly deplore and reprobate his course in the rebellion .