August 1 , 1875 OBITUARY Andrew Johnson Dead By THE NEW YORK TIMES Andrew Johnson , expanded-President of the United States and member of the Senate from Tennessee , die at the house of his daughter , Mrs. W.R. Brown , near Elizabethtown , Carter County , Tenn. , at 2 o'clock yesterday morning. The history this man leave be a rare one. His career be remarkable , even in this country ; it would have be quite impossible in any other. It present the spectacle of a man who never go to school cession of post of civil responsibility to the high office in the land , and evince his continued hold upon the popular heart by a subsequent election to the Senate in the teeth of a bitter personal and political opposition. Andrew Johnson be bear in Raleigh , N.C. , Dec. 29 , 1808. His father , Jacob Johnson , who be in the humblest circumstance , be drown while attempt to save the life of Editor Henderson , of the Raleigh Gazette , in 1812 , and six year later young Andrew , at the age of ten , be apprentice to a tailor name Selby. School be then out of the question , of course , and the outlook be that the young man would grow up to an illiterate life. But the intelle and the outlook be that the young man would grow up to an illiterate life. But the intellect that be in him be arouse through the instrumentality of a Raleigh gentleman , whose practice it be to read aloud to the tailor 's employee from book of publish speeches. The speech of some of the British statesman particularly attract his attention , and he set about learn to read with the same determination which characterize his late life. By resolute application after work hour and in moment take from sleep , he soon succeed and be able to read the speech and other book for himself. He leave Raleigh in 1824 , before his apprenticeship have expire , and go to Laurens Court House , S.C. , where he work two year at his trade , and then , after a return to Raleigh and a brief stay there , he remove with his mother to Greenville , Tenn. He soon marry , and be fortunate enough to get a wife who be a helpmeet to him in every sense of the word. She set herself at once to supply his great lack , become his teacher , give him such oral instruction a be possible while he be at work , and teach him write , arithmetic , and other branch at night. Under her faithful tuition he acquire a fair education. The native force of his mind supply the remain element of his success. We find him early in politics. In natural sympathy with the laboring class , he become their local champion , and organize a Working Man 's party in 1828 , and , a it candidate for Alderman at Greenville , defeat the more aristocratic party and break their rule in the town. In 1830 he be choose Mayor , and hold that office for three years. Four year later he gain a more than local prominence by active exertion to secure the adoption of a new State Constitution , and offer himself the next year a a Democratic candidate for the low branch of the Legislature , he be elect , win support mainly by his vigorous speeches. A grand and costly scheme of internal improvement which come before the Legislature incur his earnest opposivass of 1837 , yet his course be vindicate by the deplorable working of the enacted bill , and he be return to the Legislature in 1839. He be one of the Democratic elector in the Presidential year of 1840 , and canvass Tennessee for Martin Van Buren. His power of oratory be then first publicly reveal , and they prove very effective even against some of the noted public men of the day. He be elect to the State Senate in 1841 , and gain much credit for the introduction and advocacy of a judicious plan of internal improvement of the eastern portion of the State. But he be destine to a broad sphere of influence. In 1843 he be elect to Congress in the First Tennessee tin to a broad sphere of influence. In 1843 he be elect to Congress in the First Tennessee District , defeat Col. John A. Asken , a Democrat of the United States Bank stamp. By successive re-elections he be continue in Congress for ten years. He be during this time a prominent supporter of the national measure of his party , favor the annexation of Texas and the Mexican war , and be a conspicuous advocate of the Homestead bill , to give 160 acre of the public land to any one who would settle upon and till them. It be curious and suggestive to find him in 1848 make a long and powerful speech in favor of the veto power. By a redistricting of his State a Whig majority be create in his district , and in 1853 he be defeat in the Congressional canvass. Compensation come in his election a Governor of the State the same year , over Gustavus A. Henry , the Whig and `` Know-nothing '' candidate. The canvas be unusually spirit , even for Tennessee , and on one occasion when he be to address a large gathering , Mr. Johnson appear on the platform with a pistol in his hand. He be re-elected Governor in 1855 , and his administration of the State affair , both in that and the preceding term of office , be mark by a regard for the public interest rather than party fealty. A high honor come to him in his election to the United States Senate by the Legie interest of the laboring classes. He oppose the increase of the Army and the Pacific Railroad bill , and , a in the House , urge the passage of the Homestead bill -- which , however , be lose by President Buchanan 's veto -- and take an active part in the discussion concern retrenchment. Coming from a slave State , and himself own slave , he hold slavery to be protect by the Constitution and beyond the interference of Congress ; nevertheless , he believe in it ultimate overthrow. He denounce the John Brown raid , and in those early muttering of the come tempest he urge concession to the South to calm the rise discontent , and new guarantee for the protection of slavery. It be in the era of the rebellion that Andrew Johnson achieve his great distinction. It be not necessary for him to weigh the chance of the come struggle , or to nicely estimate it moral element , like some others of the less radical class of Southern statesmen. He be by principle and training unreservedly for the right , and he declare without hesitation for the Union , and strive with all the strength of his rugged soul against the secession faction. In the Presidential campaign of 1860 he at first support Breckinridge and Lane , who represent the ultra-Southern Democrats , but at the first unmasking of the secession design of this wing of his party he quit their camp and vehemently denounce their unhallowed purpose. He saw no threat of injustice to the South in the election of Abraham Lincoln , and in the memorable Senate debate which precede the withdrawal of the Southern member , his powerful appeal to them to remain and `` fight for their constitutional right on the battlement of the Constitution '' define most clearly his position , and will be remember a a noble and patriotic effort. But secession have then too vigorous a growth to be check by any forensic effort , however moving. One after another the Southern States secede , and finally Mr. Johnson 's own State , Tennessee , be declare out of the Union by it Legislature , though the people have vote against hold a convention to consider the question of secession. Out of this discord a condition of mob law and anarchy be speedily develop , and when Senator Johnson return home in April , 1861 , at the close of the session of Congress , he find himself expose to violence , and in the grave personal peril. He be burn in effigy in nearly every city in the State , and on one occasion a mob enter a railroad car in which he be rid declare that they be go to lynch him. He meet them with a pistol in his hand and cow them. At the East Tennessee Union Convention of May 3 , 1861 , he be prominent , and a little later , while on his way to attend a special session of Congress , he be honor by an enthusiastic public reception in Cincinnati. Through his effort the Unionists of East Tennessee , persecute and driven from their home by the rebel , be give shelter , food and protection at Camp Dick Robinson , establish by the Government. President Lincoln nominate Mr. Johnson Military Governor of Tennessee March 4 , 1862 , and on the 12th he assume the try responsibility of that office at Nashville. The rebel State Government have be drive from that city to Memphis. Mr. Johnson 's wife and child have only a little ouncing his appointment , he say that , though it might be necessary to punish conscious treason in high place , no merely vindictive or retaliatory policy would be pursued. It required no common courage to rule with the firmness he display in that dark and perilous time. Civil officer who refuse to take the oath of allegiance be at once remove and their place fill by Union men. He even imprison the disloyal clergyman of Nashville after they have express their determination not to take the oath. He levy a tax upon prominent secessionist to maintain the woman and child whose husband and father have be `` force into the army of this unholy and nefarious rebellion. '' In the Summer of 1863 the entire State of Tennessee be bring under Federal military control , and a convention be hold at Nashville in September to consider the question of restore the State to the Union. Gov. Johnson then express the belief that it have never be out of the Union , hold that there be no constitutional provision permit secession. In January , 1864 , the machinery of the State civil government be set in motion again by an election of State and county officer order by him. The National Republican Convention of June 7 , 1864 , hold at Baltimore , renominated Abraham Lincoln for President , with Andrew Johnson a the nominee for Vice President. In September hinated Abraham Lincoln for President , with Andrew Johnson a the nominee for Vice President. In September he order an election in Tennessee for the choice of Presidential Electors , and make a rigid test oath the condition of suffrage. He be inaugurate with Mr. Lincoln March 4 , 1865. Undoubtedly the great misfortune that ever befall Andrew Johnson be the assassination of President Lincoln , April 14 , 1865. It promote him to the eminent position of President of the nation , it be true , but the student of history be force to conclude that his posthumous fame would have be brighter without this high honor and the consequence it entailed. Up to this time Mr. Johnson 's public life have be such that he incur , in weighty matter , only the hostility of men whose opposition be , to an upright and honest man , more honorable than their approval ; but his Presidential act be of a kind that speedily alienate from him the party whose vote elect him , and leave him only the questionable and lukewarm support of the opposition. In a speech of welcome to a delegation of citizen of Illinois who call on him on the 18th of April President Johnson say : `` The time we live in be not without instruction. The American people must be teach -- if they do not already feel -- that treason be a crime and must be punish ; that the Government will not always bear with it enemy ; that it be strong not only to protect but to punish. '' These word seem to foreshadow a reconstruction policy which would deal with the lead secessionist severely , a the people be then in a mood to demand. He offer $ 100,000 for the arrest of Jefferson Davis , and large sum also for other lead Confederates. Early in May rule be issue govern trade with the States lately in rebellion , but on the 24th of June all restriction be removed. Then rapidly follow order restore Virginia to her Federal relation , establish provisional government in the Southern States , and ( on May 29 ) grant a general amnesty to all person esembled the popular opposition to this hasty method of reconstruction take shape in a quarrel between Congress and the President. The Republican majority hold that some substantial guarantee of good faith should be require of the rebellious States before they be admit to their former right and privilege , and that some provision should be make for protect the freedmen. The difference of opinion between the Executive and Congress lead to his veto the first Civil Rights bill and an act extend the Freedmen 's Bureau. The bill be both pass over his veto , and President Johnson , certainly with questionable taste , repeatedly assert in public that Congress be in an attitude of rebellion. It be not possible for the Cabinet chosen by Mr. Lincoln to be in harmony with his successor 's policy , and in July , Postmaster General Dennison , Attorney General Speed , and Secretary of the Interior Harlan resign , and the President at once fill their places. In the latter part of August President Johnson with Secretaries Seward and Welles , and Gen. Grant and others , set out for Chicago to attend the ceremony of lay the cornerstone of the monument to Stephen A. Douglas. It be this trip that give rise to the well-known expression `` swing round the circle. '' The President speak very freely of his policy in the different place on the route , openly denounce Congress and say many thing that be decidedly inconsistent with the dignity of his position , and unquestionably injurious to him. The Fall election show incontestably that the popular approval be with Congress. On the reassembling of Congress the President vetoed bill deny the admission of States that have not ratify the Fourteenth Amendment , and give the right of suffrage without distinction of color in Territories and the District of Columbia. Congress pass the bill over his veto , however. That body have also pass over his veto a bill establish military district in ten of the accede States and make the civil authority therein subordinate to the milig military district in ten of the accede States and make the civil authority therein subordinate to the military commander , represent the United States Government , there arise a difficulty that widen the breach between the Executive and Congress. Attorney General Stanbery decide , on application of the President , that some provision of the act be unconstitutional , whereby it enforcement by the military commander be greatly impeded. Congress pass another act in July , 1867 , make these commander responsible only to the General of the Army , and after it passage over his veto President Johnson remove the commander and substitute others. On the 12th of Arant appointed. The Tenure-of-office bill , pass the previous March , make the consent of the Senate necessary to such removal , and provide that it sanction be require , at the next ensuing session , in the case of appointment make in recess. Accordingly Secretary Stanton vacate his office under protest. The Senate , at it reassembling , refuse to sanction his removal , and Gen. Grant at once resign in his favor , but it be not in the nature of so determine a man a Andrew Johnson to yield the point thus , and he again remove Mr. Stanton , and appoint Gen. Lorenzo Thomas in his stead. The Senate at once declare that the President have exceed his authority , and the House of Representatives pass a resolution -- 126 yea to 17 nay -- that he be impeach for high crime and misdemeanors. The House agree to the article of impeachment March 3 , 1868 , and the Senate receive them two day later. They specify his removal of Secretary Stanton , his publicly express contempt for the Thirty ninth Congress and his hindrance to the execution of it measure a act call for his impeachment. The trial begin in the Senate , sit a a high court of impeachment , on March 23. The manager of the trial on the part of the accusation be Thaddeus Stevens , B. F. Butler , John H. Bingham , George S. Boutwell , J. F. Wilson , T. Williams , and John A. Logan , all member vens , B. F. Butler , John H. Bingham , George S. Boutwell , J. F. Wilson , T. Williams , and John A. Logan , all member of the House ; for the President appear Attorney General Henry Stanbery , Benjamin R. Curtis , Jeremiah S. Black , William M. Evarts , and Thomas A. R. Nelson. The vote on the two article be take May 16 and 26 , stand , in each case , thirty-five guilty and nineteen not guilty , which acquit the President , a a two-thirds vote be require to convict. Mr. Stanton at once resign , and Gen. Schofield be make Secretary of War. The remainder of his Presidential career be not especially noteworthy. He issue a full pardon to everybody who have take part in the re , Tenn. In 1870 he be a candidate for the United States Senate , but be defeat by two vote ; in 1872 he be defeat on independent nomination for Congress. He come again into public life , however , in the beginning of the present year , be elect to the United States Senate by the Tennessee Legislature after an exciting contest , receive on the fifty-fifth ballot fifty-two vote , which be only four more than be necessary for a choice. The popular demonstration and rejoicing in the city and town of his vicinity be very flatter to him , and only express the genuine satisfaction that be felt all over the country at his return to the council of the nation , in which , just then , the Louisiana affair and financial question be in active discussion. It be needless to review this late public service of Mr. Johnson , a it be recent , and fresh in the memory. Suffice it to say that he be honest and courageous a ever. Whatever else may be say of him , his integrity and courage have be seldom question though often proved. He be by nature and temperament squarely dispose toward justice and the right , and be a determined warrior for his convictions. He err from limitation of grasp and perception , perhaps , or through sore perplexity in try time , but never weakly or consciously. He be always headstrong and `` sure he be right '' even in his erity in try time , but never weakly or consciously. He be always headstrong and `` sure he be right '' even in his error .