October 30 , 1877 OBITUARY Death of Gen. Forrest By THE NEW YORK TIMES MEMPHIS , Tenn. , Oct. 29. -- Gen. Bedford Forrest , the great Confederate cavalry officer , die at 7:30 o'clock this evening at the residence of his brother , Col. Jesse Forrest. Forrest 's Career In an article publish in The New-York Times immediately before the close of the war , the characteristic type of the soldier of the South be sketched. It be point out that while Virginia , and what might be call the `` old South , '' produce gallant soldier and dignified gentleman , the South-west , the rude border country , give birth to men of reckless ruffianism and cut-throat daring. The type of the first be Gen. Robert E. Lee ; that of the latter , Gen. Bedford Forrest. At the date this article be write , ( March , 1865 , ) Forrest seem to have be consider by many a the most formidable cavalry commander then in the Armies of the South ; but he be so essentially guerrilla-like in his method of warfare , and withal be so notoriously bloodthirsty and revengeful , that it be think he would , when the other Southern commander surrender , an event then see to be inevitable , collect around him all the desperate and discontented element of the Southern Armies and maintain a guerrilla warfare on the South-western borders. This expectation be not realize , for when the crash come , everything go down in the grand ruin , and Forrest have have more than enough fight to satisfy him. He be not a trained soldier , and he make his way up to the rank he hold by sheer force of energy and fight from the rank of a private. For some year before the rebellion , ( to quote from the article refer to , ) Forrest be well know a a Memphis speculator and Mississippi gambler. He be for some time Captain of a boat which run between Memphis and Vicksburg. As his fortune increase he engage in plantation speculation , and become the nominal owner of two plantation not far from Goodrich 's Landing , above Vicksburg , where he work some hundred or more slaves. This be his status when the war break out. He be know to his acquaintance a a man of obscure origin and low association , a shrewd speculator , negro trader , and duelist , but a man of great energy and brute courage. To the first call to arm in the South Forrest promptly respond , enlist a a private in the first infantry regiment recruit at Memphis ; but his quality a horseman and fighter soon attract the notice of his superior officer , and he be make Captain of a cavalry company. He take his first lesson in cavalry skirmishing on the line of Green River , when Buel advance on Bowling Green in the Winter of 1862. From a Captaincy he rise to a Lieutenant-Colonelcy , and when Fort Donelson fell before Grant , Forrest be a senior Colonel command a brigade. On this occasion he perform his first notable exploit , for , refuse to surrender with the other force in the fort , he head his brigade in a charge through the Union line , cut his way out , and safely withdraw his command to the mountain of East Tennessee. Soon after he make a swift and stealthy march on Murfreesboro , and take the place by surprise. From that time until the close of the war he be essentially a ranger , and cover in his raid the whole territory from the Ohio River on the north to the Tombigbee on the south ; from the mountain of North Carolina to the Valley of the Mississippi. He prove himself the most regularly successful of all the Southern cavalry leaders. This be due as much to good fortune a his own talents. He never have a good officer send against him , and he seldom attack except where he greatly outnumber his enemy. As a scientific commander , he be much the inferior of Wheeler or Stuart ; but he have all the quality of a guerrilla chieftain , and the history of his exploit abundantly prove that he display them. He be swift and dare in his advance , stubborn and defiant in retreat , cool and ready in face of temporary disaster , and skillful in wield the large force he commanded. When in the height of his celebrity a a commander he be thus describe : `` In person , Forrest be a little over six foot in height , and strongly build ; apparently about 38 year of age , in the perfection of vigorous manhood , insensible to fatigue , incapable alike of sympathy or fear. The outline of his face be handsome , and the expression be generally pleasant ; but now and then , when rouse a little , his eye light with a gleam and his brow darken with a frown which stamp him with the brand of Cain. He be a consummate horseman and a dead shot with the pistol ; a spare eater and abstemious in his habits. His control over his men be absolute. He mingle familiarly with them , and be ready to talk with any of them on easy term , but with his officer he be often exacting and savage. '' A story be relate of his reprimand a young Lieutenant with such severity that the latter , stung beyond endurance , draw his pistol. Forrest deliberately walk up to him , and use his great physical superiority to the uttermost , literally cut the young man to the ground with his bowie-knife , and then coolly wipe the bloody blade of the knife , mount , and ride off a if nothing have happened. It be in connection with one of the most atrocious and cold-blooded massacre that ever disgrace civilize warfare that his name will for ever be inseparably associated. `` Fort Pillow Forrest '' be the title which the deed confer upon him , and by this he will be remember by the present generation , and by it he will pass into history. The massacre occur on the 12th of April , 1864. Fort Pillow be 65 mile above Memphis , and it capture be effect during Forrest 's celebrate raid through Tennessee , a State which be at the time practically in possession of the Union forces. Gen. Sherman have start on an expedition from Vicksburg , in February , through Mississippi ; he be to be support by Gem. Smith with a cavalry column , which , march from Memphis , be to join him at Meridian. Sherman 's march from west to east across the State be so rapidly and skillfully do that it be a mere promenade. The Confederate commander , Gen. Polk , could make no effective resistance to him , but he bend all his energy to prevent the junction of Smith 's cavalry column with Sherman. For this purpose he order all his cavalry to join Forrest , and intrust that commander with the task of head off Smith. This be do most effectually , for the conduct of Gen. William Sooy Smith seem to have be mark from the start with utter inefficiency. His start from Memphis be make late enough to give Forrest time to collect all his force for resistance ; the march of the Union cavalry be an utterly disorganized one , so that when , on the 22d of February , it reach Okalona , 100 mile north of Meridian , discipline seem to have be utterly relaxed. Here Forrest 's cavalry meet them , and at the first charge the Union force be practically routed. Everything fell into utter confusion , and Smith have to retreat , pursue by the enemy for 10 day over the wasted country through which he have just advanced. Forrest now saw his opportunity for a raid into the heart of Tennessee. The garrison there have be weaken by the concentration of force for the Spring campaign , and he have nothing to fear in the way of a superior force. Late in March he pass into that State , and the route of his advance be mark by outrage and brutality of the most cold-blooded character. He capture most of the small garrison on his line of march , in each case summon the defender to surrender under a threat that if he have to storm the work he would give no quarter. On the 12th of April he appear before Fort Pillow. This fort be garrison by 500 troop , about half of them colored. Forrest 's force number about 5,000 or 6,000. His first attack be a complete surprise , and the commanding officer be kill early in the engagement. Still the defender fight so gallantly that at 2 o'clock the enemy have gain no material advantage. Forrest then send in a flag of truce , demand unconditional surrender. While the flag be fly , Forrest 's men treacherously creep into position which they have be unable to take by fight , ( a trick they have play at other place , ) and thus be in a situation to make the assault which soon follow under every advantage. After a short consultation , Major Bradford , on whom the command have devolve , send word refusing to surrender. Instantly the bugle sound the assault. The enemy be now within 100 yard of the fort , and at the sound they rush on the work , shout `` No quarter ! No quarter ! '' The garrison be seize with a panic : the men throw down their arm and seek safety in flight toward the river , in the neighboring ravine , behind log , bush , tree , and in fact everywhere where there be a chance for concealment. It be in vain. The capture fort and it vicinity become a human shambles. Without discrimination of age or sex , men , woman , and child , the sick and wound in the hospital , be butcher without mercy. The bloody work go on until night put a temporary stop to it ; but it be renew at early dawn , when the inhuman captor search the vicinity of the fort , drag out wounded fugitive and kill them where they lay. The whole history of the affair be bring out by a Congressional inquiry , and the testimony present a long series of sicken , cold-blooded atrocities. Forrest report his own loss at 20 kill and 60 wound ; and state that he bury 228 Federals on the evening of the assault. Yet in the face of this he claim that the Fort Pillow capture be `` a bloody victory , only make a massacre by dastardly Yankee reporters. '' The news of the massacre arouse the whole country to a paroxysm of horror and fury. A force of 12,000 men be send against Forrest , under Gen. Sturgis , who so wretchedly mismanage the affair that he be utterly rout by him. Another column be send against him in July , under A. J. Smith , which meet with scarcely good success , and the next thing heard of Forrest be when , on the morning of Aug. 18 , he make a sudden and daring raid through Memphis , escape with small loss. Since the war , Forrest have live at Memphis , and his principal occupation seem to have be to try and explain away the Fort Pillow affair. He write several letter about it , which be publish , and always have something to say about it in any public speech he delivered. He seem a if he be try always to rub away the blood stain which mark him. He speak at the Union ratification meeting at Memphis in August , 1866 ; write a letter approve President Johnson 's reconstruction policy in October of the same year ; be at the Democratic National convention in June , 1868 ; speak several time during the political campaign that year , counsel friendly feeling between the North and South ; make several write and spoken defense of his war record at that time , and distinguish himself again by challenge Gen. Kilpatrick to a duel. The latter , who be also on the stump , have attack Forrest with great severity , denounce him a a butcher and a murderer. Forrest felt these reproach so keenly that he send a challenge. Kilpatrick reply that he would not fight a duel , but if he ever meet Forrest , and the latter desire to do anything , he [ Kilpatrick ] would be ready. The outcome of this be that Forrest and Kilpatrick do meet somewhere in North Carolina , the latter go into the bar-room of the hotel where he be tell Forrest was. Forrest be lean against the bar. Kilpatrick brush against him. Forrest look up , recognize his enemy , turn and leave the room , and that be the end of the matter. In December , 1873 , Forrest have a short correspondence with Gen. Sherman on the prospect of a Cuban war. Of late year , his view have undergone a considerable change. The guerrilla chieftain have soften down into the retired veteran , anxious , apparently , only for peace with everybody. He be in favor of promote good feeling between the two section , and by the term of his address to his old comrade in arm , ask them to join in decorate the graf of the dead Union soldiers. His last notable public appearance be on the Fourth of July in Memphis , when he appear before the colored people at their celebration , be publicly present with a bouquet by them a a mark of peace and reconciliation , and make a friendly speech in reply. In this he once more take occasion to defend himself and his war record , and to declare that he be a hearty friend of the colored race. Gen. Forrest would be remember only a a daring and successful guerrilla cavalry leader , be it not for the one great and indelible stain upon his name. It be evident that he felt this , a his constantly-repeated defense of himself show. His daring and recklessness give him more eclat at one period than his military service be really entitle to. Gen. Wheeler 's raid around the rear of Sherman 's army be the work of the dare man and the scientific soldier ; Gen. Forrest 's sudden dash through Memphis , with no more result than the killing of a few men on either side , be the recklessness of the mere guerrilla chief -- which Forrest essentially be .