April 21 , 1882 OBITUARY Death Of Chas. Darwin By THE NEW YORK TIMES The announcement that Charles Robert Darwin die on Wednesday at his residence , Down House , near Orpington , will be read by very few individual who have not some degree of acquaintance with the physical theory formulate and teach by this distinguish naturalist , however scanty may be their actual knowledge of his works. Darwin have be read much , but talk about more. Since the publication of his work `` On the Origin of Species '' in 1859 , and particularly within the 11 year which have elapse since his `` Descent of Man '' be give to the world , he have be the most widely know of living thinkers. Doctrines such a he set forth could not long remain the exclusive property of philosopher nor of educate people. They make their way at once into the reading and thought of the mass until the slight allusion to Darwinism be sure of instant recognition from even the most illiterate individual or audience. It be not to be suppose that every country clergyman , with a library not extend far beyond Richard Baxter , Jortin , Bishop Berkeley , and a commentary or two , become profoundly verse in the doctrine of evolution , or that little laughing schoolgirl joke each other about a monkey ancestry have follow Mr. Darwin very far in his speculation on differentiation of specie , but the minister somehow all know that evolution be an abominable heresy to be by * * * and example thrust out of men 's mind , and the school child intuitively understand that if man be descend from the ape , he can not be descend from Adam. All that part of the world which have never think of such thing before be arouse by the shock of the new idea. Previous speculation upon the origin of man have , it be safe to say , be the diversion of the learn ; the people at * * * have no part in them. But here be a scientist , not a speculative philosopher , who deal with fact and logical difference in a new way , and he speedily have the whole world for an audience. Everybody saw that the history of living form a the book teach it be widely at variance with the Mosaic account of creation , and from the moment when the Darwinian theory of evolution be publicly state the modern struggle between science and theological dogma take it rise. There have be skeptic and atheist and deist and what not before , but what grave essayist call scientific unbelief spring primarily from work of Charles Darwin , and be feed chiefly from the writing of other scientist who be at work extend and complete the frame work be erected. Mr. Darwin , therefore , may be call a epoch-making man. The quality and natural bent of his clear mind be inherited. His father and grandfather be naturalist , though the latter , Dr. Erasmus Darwin , be a much more famous and productive man than his son , Dr. R. W. Darwin. Erasmus Darwin , a botanist of renown , be best know a the author of a remarkable poem call the `` Botanic Garden , '' which , though destitute of the poetic feeling , show it author to have be deeply verse in the Linaean system of botany. Of Dr. R. W. Darwin little be know save that he be a member of the Royal Society. Charles Robert Darwin be bear at Shrewsbury , England , Feb. 12 , 1809. His early education be receive in the Shrewsbury Grammar School , under the tuition of Dr. Butler. In 1825 , when he be 16 year old , he enter Edinburgh University , and remain there two year , go then to Christ's College , Cambridge , where he receive the degree of Bachelor of Arts in 1831. In December of the same year he be select a a naturalist to make a voyage of scientific exploration around the world on board the ship Beagle. Five year be spend in this way. We may fairly suppose that Mr. Darwin be a naturalist of some competence and training when he set out on this voyage. The opportunity for research , experiment , and study which it give him , particularly during his stay in South America , be fruitful in the material and hint out of which his late theory be evolved. Indeed , in geographical and geological distribution Mr. Darwin find the weighty proof of the truth of his system. Returning from this voyage in 1836 , he begin the preparation of a `` Journal of Researches '' into the geology and natural history of the country visit by the expedition. This be publish a part of Capt. Fitzray 's `` Narrative of the Surveying Voyages of H. M. S. Beagle and Adventurer. '' In succeed year he edit , in five part , the `` Zoology of the Voyage of the Beagle , '' the note of the habit and range of mammalia be by his hand. Out of the material obtain on this cruise he prepare for publication in 1842 `` The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs ; '' in 1874 , '' Geological Observations on South America. '' Between 1844 and 1859 his publication be mostly brief monograph contribute to scientific publication or read before learned societies. But during this long period of slight literary productivity he occupy himself with untiring zeal and systematic regularity in the study of nature , make a series of observation upon the form and habit of animal , plant and mineral -- for it be hard to say whether he be most eminent in zoology , botany , or geology -- and slowly accumulate that vast mass of fact and register phenomenon to which he be later on to apply his theory of evolution. The publication in 1859 of his work `` On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection ; or , the Preservation of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life , '' be the announcement to his friend that he have at length pass over the sea of hypothesis to the firm ground of scientific assertion and to the world that it must revise or fortify it opinion on biological subjects. After make in 1862 one of those excursion into the by-ways of scientific inquiry of which he be so fond , of which the outcome be his work on `` The Various Contrivances by which Orchids be Fertilized by Insects , '' and still another in 1865 to publish the well-known book on `` The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants , '' he put forth in 1868 another important work on `` The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication , '' in two volumes. In 1871 appear the best known of all his book , `` The Descent of Man , and Selection in Relation to Sex , '' in two volumes. The following year saw the publication of `` The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals ; '' in 1875 appear `` Insectiverous Plants ; '' in 1876 , `` The Effects of Cross and Self- fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom ; '' in 1877 , `` The Different Forms of Flowers and Plants of the Same Species , '' and in 1881 `` The Power of Movement in Plants. '' Each of these book have it place in the development of the theory which bear their author 's name. All of them , even those which concern only a single order of the phenomenon , abound in illustration pertinent to his great theme , and supply those who wish to use or investigate his theory with the classified result of his accurate observations. But it be upon the `` Origin of Species '' and the `` Descent of Man , '' in which the theory of evolution be make to tell the history of life upon the earth a we now see it , that his fame chiefly rests. If ask to define Darwinism , the orthodox antagonist of the scientific unbelief of the day will reply that it be an attempt to show how blind matter become the see eye ; the biologist of the Haeckel school will say that it be a description of the mechanical process by which the cosmic system be produce out of elementary matter act upon by it own laws. Neither definition be correct , for Mr. Darwin make an extremely modest use of his great attainments. He do not construct a theory of the cosmos , and he do not deal with the entire theory of evolution. He be content to leave others to poke about in the original protoplasmic mire , and to extend the evolutionary law to social and political phenomena. For himself , he try to show how high organic form be evolve out of lower. He start with life already exist , and trace it through it successive form up to the high -- man. The central principle -- his opponent call it a dogma -- of Mr. Darwin 's system be `` natural selection , '' call by Herbert Spencer `` the survival of the fit , '' a choice which result inevitably from `` the struggle for existence. '' It be a law and fact in nature that there shall be the weak and the strong. The strong shall triumph and the weak shall go to the wall. The law , though involve destruction be really preservative. If all plant and animal be free to reproduce their kind under like and equally favorable condition , if all be equally strong and well equip for obtain sustenance and make their way in the world , there would soon be no room on the earth for even a single species. Thirty million of men in less than 700 year of unchecked reproduction , under the condition we have mention , would have live offspring enough to cover the whole earth at the rate of one for each square foot of it surface. The limit of subsistence and the power of reproduction be the bound between which the conflict rages. In this struggle the multitude be slain and the few survive. But the survivor do not owe their good luck to chance. Their adaptation to their surroundings be the secret of their exemption from the fate which overtake those less happily circumstanced. A variety of squirrel , for instance , which be capable of wander far afield in pursuit of it food , which be cunning and swift enough to evade it enemy , and have a habit of provide a store of nut for Winter use , will naturally have a good chance of survival than a variety deficient in these qualities. But Mr. Darwin also discover that natural selection create special fitness for give circumstance and surroundings. Climate , soil , food supply , and other condition act in this way , and the result be the differentiation of species. A certain thistle grows in a kind of soil which be rich in the element which go to produce the tiny hair upon the surface of the plant. The seed be thus furnish with downy wing longer than usual , and be waft far off where they have plenty of space to grow , and they , in turn , reproduce and emphasize the change to which they owe their existence. Seeds or nut develop a thick cover for the kernel be thus protect from bird and animal , and live to germinate , produce , also hard-shelled seed , and thus the process go on. Varieties which do not develop a high degree of special adaptation to their surroundings fall out of the race , unable to defend themselves against their innumerable aggressors. An infinitesimally minute variation of function or structure repeat and become more marked through many successive generation , result ultimately in the production of a variety ; or even of a specie , quite unlike the parent individual. Mr. Darwin be by no mean the discoverer of the theory of evolution. That be at least as old a Aristotle , who suppose individual to be produce , not by a simultaneous creation of a minute copy of the adult , with all the different organ , but by epigenisis -- that be , by successive act of generation or growth , in which the rudiment or cell receive additions. Other ancient philosopher , and in more modern time Descartes , Spinoza , Leibnitz , Bonnet , Lamarck , and Cuvier , have adopt and use this theory to a great or less extent. But it never have a substantial basis of fact or a thoroughly scientific application until Mr. Darwin work it out. Others , a we have say , and notably Mr. Spencer , have give it a more comprehensive scope , but within the limit he set for himself Mr. Darwin meet no rival claimant for the honor the scientific and thinking world have accord him. The dispatch announce his death say that he have be suffer for some time from weakness of the heart , but continue to work to the last. He be take ill on Tuesday night with pain in the chest , faintness , and nausea. The nausea last more or less during Wednesday and culminate in death in the afternoon. Mr. Darwin remain fully conscious until within a quarter of an hour of his death .