July 24 , 1885 OBITUARY The Career of a Soldier By THE NEW YORK TIMES A survey of the event of two-thirds of a century -- tell a story thrill to every patriot , instructive to every observer of these time , and helpful to citizen in every station and of all belief who wish their country well -- this man , humbly bear , taught only in the nation 's school , conquers a place among the great one of the earth , restore unity to a divided people , and die a plain American citizen , lament alike by grateful countryman , loyal comrade , and admire foes. Events in a Great Career I. West Point and Mexico On the 27th of April , 1822 , in the village of Point Pleasant , Ohio , 25 mile above Cincinnati on the Ohio River , be bear Hiram Ulysses Grant , the eldest of the six child of Jesse R. and Hannah Simpson Grant. His great grandfather , Noah Grant , and Noah 's brother Solomon , of Connecticut , commission officer in the French and Indian war , be kill in 1756. His grandfather , Noah Grant , serve all through the Revolutionary War. His father and also his mother 's father be bear in Pennsylvania. The father of Ulysses be a tanner by trade , and remove , the year after his son 's birth , to Georgetown , in the neighboring country , where the lad 's boyhood be passed. At the age of 17 , he receive a cadetship in the Military Academy through the Congressman of his district , who erroneously register him a Ulysses S. Grant , and so his name remain in history. Graduated from West Point in 1843 , No. 21 in a class of 39 member , young Grant be attach a Brevet Second Lieutenant to the Fourth Infantry , which , after various garrison service , two year later join Gen. Zachary Taylor 's army , assemble in Texas. War with Mexico break out in the Spring of 1846 , and Grant , then a full Second Lieutenant , take part with his regiment in many of Taylor 's operation in Scott 's campaign from the siege of Vera Cruz to the capture of the city of Mexico , be present at the battle of Palo Alto , Resaca de la Palma , Monterey , Cerro Gordo , Churubusco , Molino del Rey , and Chapultepec. For gallantry at Molino del Rey he be brevet First Lieutenant , and for gallantry at Chapultepec Captain , while his brigade commander , Col. Garland , say of him : `` I must not omit to call attention to Lieut. Grant , Fourth Infantry , who acquit himself most nobly , upon several occasion , under my own observation. '' His commission a First Lieutenant be date Sept. 16 , 1847 , two day after the surrender of the Mexican capital. Seven year of garrison life at Atlantic , Pacific , and lake station followed. In 1848 he marry Miss Julia T. Dent , of St. Louis , sister of a West Point man , Lieut. Frederick T. Dent. He have be Quartermaster of the Fourth Infantry in the Mexican war and again serve four year in that capacity until promote to a Captaincy , in 1853. The following Summer , July 31 , 1854 , he resign from the army. Seven year nearly of civil life ensue , in which he be successively a farmer at Gravois , near St. Louis ; a real estate agent in St. Louis , and finally an assistant of his father and brother in the leather business at Galena , Ill. II. At the Outbreak of War At Galena the outbreak of the civil war find him. Fort Sumter fell on the 14th of April , 1861. Ten day later Capt. Grant be in Springfield , the State capital , offer for service a company of his townsman which he have drilled. Gov. Yates , however , find well employment for his military training a a muster officer of volunteer , and a month later commission him Colonel of the Twenty-first Illinois Infantry to date from June 17 , 1861. Volunteer troop come forward in throng , and there be a great demand for West Point officer of war experience for brigade and division commands. Hardly have Col. Grant join Fremont 's department in Missouri when he be appoint , on the 7th of August , one of the new Brigadier-Generals of volunteer , to date from May 17. Assigned by Fremont to the charge of the district of Southeast Missouri , include the important region around Cairo , on the 4th of September he establish his headquarters in that city , and at once seize Paducah at the junction of the Tennessee with the Ohio. This he do on the 6th of September , have learn only the day before that the Confederate General Polk have occupy Columbus and threaten Paducah. This first act of importance in the career of Grant a a General officer singularly typify what be to follow. It be on the 5th , a have be say , that he hear of Polk 's advance to Columbus and Hickman , below Cairo. He instantly notify both Gen. Fremont at St. Louis and the Kentucky Legislature at Frankfort of this movement , and presently send another dispatch to Fremont : `` I be get ready to go to Paducah. Will start at 6:30 o'clock. '' This he follow with a third notification to Fremont : `` I be now nearly ready for Paducah , should not telegram arrive prevent the movement. '' Still no reply come from St. Louis , and at 10:30 o'clock that night he be off , with two gunboat , two regiment , and a light battery. Reaching Paducah the next morning at 8:30 o'clock , he enter the town without fire a gun , Gen. Tilghman and a few Confederate recruit hurry off at his approach. Leaving a garrison in the place he start back at noon for Cairo , where he find Fremont 's permission to take Paducah `` if he felt strong enough , '' and also , soon after , a reminder from the same source that Brigadiers ought not to communicate with State authority except through the Major-General commanding. Still , the Kentucky Legislature do not take ill this friendly communication from Grant , which seem to confidently call for patriotic action on it part. It pass a resolution that `` Kentucky expect the Confederate or Tennessee troop to be withdraw from her soil unconditionally. '' Kentucky thus commit herself to a demand which be not heed by the Confederates , and a a State she thenceforth cast her lot with the Union. The noteworthy feature of this Paducah affair be it exhibition of Grant 's promptitude , his entire willingness to take responsibility , and his instinct not to suffer the delay of others to interfere with the progress of his own plans. Four day later he give a second proof of aggressive energy in an unheeded hint to the department commander : `` If it be discretionary with me , with a little addition to my present force , I would take Columbus. '' Early in November Grant receive order to demonstrate against Columbus , 20 mile below Cairo on the Mississippi , so a to prevent Polk from reinforce Price in Missouri. On the 7th , accordingly , he present himself with a force of 3,114 men near a little settlement call Belmont , on the Missouri side , opposite Columbus , and dominate by it 140 guns. Leaving his two gunboat and some infantry to protect the landing , Grant move forward to Belmont his remain troop , 2,850 strong , include a battery. Polk meanwhile reinforce his outpost at Belmont so that there be five regiment and a battery under Gen. Pillow , in all about 2,500 men. The troop on both side be raw , but a sharp combat ensue , in which the Union force drive the enemy through his camp toward the river. There , however , they come under the fire of the heavy gun of Columbus , while four more regiment and a battalion be send across to Pillow 's aid under Cheatham , Polk in person accompany them. Grant , who have have a horse kill under him , find these heavy reinforcement vigorously press him , set fire to the capture camp and order a withdrawal to the transports. An officer at this juncture repeat to him a cry , `` We be surround ! '' heard among some of the men. `` Well , '' quietly reply Grant , `` if we be surround we must cut our way out , a we cut our way in. '' The embarkation Grant personally superintend , and then the whole expedition return to Cairo. The Union loss be 368 kill and wound and 117 prisoner or miss ; total , 485. Polk 's be 524 kill and wound and 117 prisoner or miss ; total , 641. Grant capture and bring off two gun and lose two caissons. He probably accomplish the exact task assign to him , which be not , a we need hardly say , that of capture Columbus , with it 140 gun , by the movement of one field battery and 3,000 men on the opposite shore. During this combat at Belmont , which will perhaps be know in history less for it intrinsic importance than for be the first action fight by Grant in command on the field , an incident occur which be near put an end to his career at the outset. While McClernand , who have two or three horse shoot under him , Col. Logan , afterward so distinguished , and many other officer set a good example to the men , yet Grant , a the only professional soldier present on the Union side , find that , in the retreat to the transport , he have nearly everything to supervise. Riding back from the bank alone , in order to observe the enemy , on glance at a cornfield in front , he discover a Confederate line of battle , not 50 yard off , fire on his transports. Turning his horse , he ride rapidly back to the shore , the animal slide down the bank on it haunch , and trot , under musketry fire , across the gangplank of a transport thrust out to receive him. III. Forts Henry and Donelson The Tennessee and the Cumberland , empty into the Ohio at point about 25 and 35 mile east of Cairo , offer obvious advantage for a combined military and naval advance. The Confederates , to check such an advance , establish Fort Henry on the right bank of the former river , and Fort Donelson , 12 mile eastward , on the left bank of the latter , near the boundary between Kentucky and Tennessee. With these fort , and with Columbus on the west and Bowling Green on the east , they have a defensive chain , and Grant , like Halleck and other military observer , saw that to break the line in the centre be to break it everywhere. Gen. C. F. Smith , have report to Grant on his return from an expedition that the capture of Fort Henry be easy and that `` two gun would make short work of it , '' Grant six day later , on January 28 , 1862 , telegraph to St. Louis a follow : `` With permission , I will take and hold Fort Henry on the Tennessee and establish and hold a large camp there ; '' and the next day , with his customary persistence , he revert to the subject , say : `` I would respectfully suggest the propriety of subdue Fort Henry , near the Kentucky and Tennessee line , and hold the position. If this be not do soon there be but little doubt that the defense on both the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers will be materially strengthened. From Fort Henry it will be easy to operate either on the Cumberland ( only 12 mile distant ) , Memphis , or Columbus. '' On the 2nd of February , 1862 , have at length obtain authority and instruction from Halleck , commend the Department of the Missouri , Grant start from Cairo with 17,000 men on transport , accompany by Flag Officer Foote with seven gunboat , to ascend the Tennessee and attack Fort Henry. This be an earthwork mount seventeen guns. Recognizing that his work could not be hold , Gen. Tilghman draw out over 3,000 troop for retreat to Fort Donelson , retain his single company of trained artillerists to serve the guns. On the 6th Grant order forward his troop , which have be land and take position , and Foote simultaneously open fire. After a severe artillery duel of about two hour , Tilghman haul down his flag and surrender to Foote his gallant little garrison of ninety-odd officer and men , with all his gun and garrison equipage. `` I shall take and destroy Fort Donelson , '' say Grant quietly , in announce to Halleck the fall of Fort Henry ; and this be the first mention of Fort Donelson in any dispatch between Grant and Halleck. The latter answer , `` Hold on to Fort Henry at all hazard , and transfer gun to resist a land attack. Picks and shovel be send you. Large reinforcement will soon join you. '' But for Grant Fort Henry be a bygone landmark ; and without await attack from the land side , or pick and shovel , or even reinforcement , in spite of drench rain that reduce all the road to quagmire , by the 12th his column of 15,000 men ( 2,500 be leave at Fort Henry ) and eight light battery draw up in front of Fort Donelson , a strong work , on rugged height , mount 21 gun in position , besides the field piece of eight light battery , garrison that night probably by 16,000 men -- accord to some authority by 18,000. At evening of the next day the fleet come up the Cumberland , bring supply and reinforcement , so that Grant have in the end nearly 30,000 men under his command. On the 12th and 13th there be heavy skirmishing. On the 15th a desperate effort be make by the Confederate garrison to cut it way out , but the struggle , though cost a Union loss of 2,000 men and six gun , be unsuccessful , Gen. C. F. Smith make a splendid and decisive counter-assault at the critical moment. That night the senior Confederate Generals , Floyd and Pillow , escape with many hundred troop , and the next morning , the 16th , Gen. Buckner propose an armistice until noon in order to agree on term of capitulation. `` No term , '' reply Grant , `` except an unconditional and immediate surrender can be accepted. I propose to move immediately upon your works. '' The term be agree to , and Fort Donelson be surrender , with it garrison , store , small arm , and field and heavy guns. The total Union loss be 3,329 ; the Confederate from 1,500 to 2,000 in kill and wound and probably about 12,000 prisoners. The gunboat have be of minor service , be expose to a plunging fire , which disable them. A. S. Johnston , who have fall back from Bowling Green through Nashville , retreat to Murfreesborough , and Polk from Columbus to Island No. 10. The North rang with plaudit over this sorely need victory and Grant be make a Major-General of Volunteers , date from the fall of Fort Donelson. In this capture of Fort Donelson , not less remarkable than the energy with which Grant push on from Fort Henry while Halleck be mainly anxious to `` resist an attack '' against the latter , be the indomitable resolution with which he cling to his purpose under unexpected obstacles. The rain and flood which impede his advance suddenly give place to intense cold , with the mercury below zero , and then to a drive storm of snow and hail. Grant 's troop in bivouac around Fort Donelson , with little shelter and no fire , suffer intensely through two day and night , be mostly unused to the hardship of war , and it be under such circumstance that the enemy make his desperate attack to break a way of escape through the national lines. The news of that attack be bring to Grant , who have just return to the field from a consultation with Foote , and it be add that the Confederate soldier have come out with knapsack and haversacks. Grant promptly inquire if the haversack be fill , and on examine some prisoner it be ascertain that they have three day ' rations. `` Then they mean to cut their way out , '' he say ; `` they have no idea of stay here to fight us. '' There be still at that moment great disorder among the Union troop , from the fierceness of the Confederate assault ; but Grant , intuitively grasp the exact situation , say : `` Whichever party now attack first will whip , and the rebel will have to be very quick if they beat me. '' The decisive attack of Smith follow at once , and the result show the correctness of Grant 's judgment , a it illustrate also the force of his will. As at Belmont Grant have much responsibility for detail throw upon him , the only other professional soldier present besides C. F. Smith be McPherson , of Grant 's staff. However , the Union volunteer be already develop genuine and admirable soldier through the stern schooling of the battlefield. IV. Shiloh 's Two Days of Blood With the Tennessee now open and the Confederates strongly hold the Mississippi an advance up the former river would obviously threaten the eastern railroad communication of Memphis , besides get in the rear of the work above at Forts Pillow and Randolph and Island No. 10. Halleck arrange such an expedition and give it command to C. F. Smith , after receive some complaint of Grant 's alleged carelessness of discipline in an anonymous letter , but soon restore it to Grant , to whom a gross injustice would otherwise have be done. The Confederates meanwhile be alert. Their chief line of railroad threaten be the Memphis and Charleston , which cross the Mobile and Ohio at Corinth , in the northeastern corner of Mississippi , about 20 mile distant from the bend of the Tennessee , near Pittsburg Landing. To Corinth , then , A. S. Johnston take his Bowling Green army , which be speedily swell by Bragg 's force from the South , and others collect by Polk and Beauregard. At Pittsburg Landing , on the other hand , Grant 's army , reinforce to nearly 40,000 men , be encamp , only wait the arrival of Buell 's , 37,000 strong , from Nashville , to march , combine under Halleck , against Corinth. Johnston determine to strike Grant before Buell should come up , and accordingly , on the morning of April 6 , 1862 , with an army 40,000 strong , fell upon the Union camps. These camp be not intrench , and indeed have be choose with a view to the expect advance rather than for defense , while one division be several mile distant at another landing. The opening attack fell on the three Union division encamp about two mile out from the landing , on either side of Shiloh Church , a point on the Corinth road , and they be drive back to the river. Grant , however , at no time despair , and at night , aid by his artillery , well mass on a bluff near the landing , and by the difficult ground , as well a by the cross-fire of two gunboat , he resist all attempt to drive him into the Tennessee. Beauregard , who succeed Johnston when the latter be fatally wound , at length draw off his exhausted troop until the next day. Then , however , they encounter not only their old opponent , but Buell 's army , whose advance indeed have reach the field the evening before , as well a Grant 's fresh division from Crump 's Landing. Grant assume the offensive , and after more hard fight the Confederates abandon the field and retreat to Corinth. In this battle of Shiloh , the bloody till then ever fight on the continent , the Confederate loss be about 11,000 ; the Union about 12,200. The Union army lose much camp equipage and stores. The loss in artillery be about equal. Gen. Bragg , in his official report of the battle of Shiloh , declare that the Confederate movement be one which , if successful , `` would have change the entire complexion of the war. '' There can be no doubt of it dangerous character , but the resulting battle be fight on both side with a lack of that perfect knowledge of the military art which could only be develop by experience. If the Confederates criticise their opponent for a lack of field intrenchment to protect their position and for not encamp their troop on the right bank of the Tennessee until ready to advance , the Union force be equally able to retort that the conduct of the Confederate attack might have be make more effective. And if the junction of the Union army at the rendezvous near Pittsburg Landing be less swiftly effect than it might have be at a late period in the war , not less clear be it that Johnston 's attack be also deliver a day too late to accomplish his purpose. The simple truth be that the gathering , organize , drilling , and moving of great army be then a novel experience on both sides. The prudence and skill of troop in construct earthwork wherever they might camp , and the marvel of the bridge building in late day , be still to come. The Union position on the left bank of the river be originally choose by Smith and afterward retain by Grant , in constant expectation of move forward. Johnston , on his part , have delay his attack with the view of receive important reinforcement from beyond the Mississippi , which he eventually have to proceed without. So far a Grant be personally concerned , that trait of pertinacity which afterward acquire a world-wide reknown be , perhaps , never more distinctly manifest in his military conduct than at Shiloh. The battle begin while he be absent at his headquarters at Savannah , several mile down the river. Hurrying forward , he exert himself to inspire confidence in his hard-pushed troops. Reaching the division of Sherman , he remind that officer of the experience at Donaldson. `` I saw there , '' he say to Sherman , `` that either side be ready to give way if the other show a bold front , '' and he infer that , desperate a the present battle look , it might have a like outcome. Undoubtedly the consciousness that Buell 's army be close at hand give him confidence , but it be also the temperament of the man which cause him to say , even when his exhausted troop have be drive to within a few hundred yard of the river , `` I have not despair of whip the enemy yet. '' With the combined army , far reinforce by Pope , Halleck 's way be easy to Corinth , which Beauregard abandoned. Pope have already take New-Madrid and Island No. 10. Fort Pillow be abandon on the capture of Corinth. Memphis be then take by the navy , and thus the Mississippi be open to Vicksburg. Halleck become General-in Chief at Washington in July , Grant be leave at Corinth in charge of the Department of West Tennessee with about 60,000 men , afterward reduce about a third by reinforcement send to Buell in Tennessee. The Confederates , in fact , have already strive to retrieve their fortune by a bold stroke. Bragg , have first occupy Chattanooga , march across Tennessee into Kentucky , threaten Louisville. Buell be oppose him , and to keep Grant from further reinforce Buell Price menace Corinth. Grant direct Rosecrans to check him , and this Rosecrans do on Sept. 19 in a battle fought at Iuka , 21 mile east of Corinth. Grant then move his headquarters to Jackson , leave Rosecrans in command at Corinth. There Price and Van Dorn attack Rosecrans on Oct. 3 and 4 , but after a sanguinary battle be drive off with great loss. V. Vicksburg and Chattanooga Grant now urge a campaign against Vicksburg , to free the Mississippi from source to sea. His first move be to send Sherman from Memphis with 32,000 men and 60 gun down the Mississippi on transport , with Porter 's gunboat , to the mouth of the Yazoo , which join the Mississippi just above Vicksburg. He himself undertake to co-operate by land in march along the Mobile and Ohio Railroad , and defeat Pemberton , who have succeed Van Dorn , or drive him to Vicksburg. Sherman and Porter start , but Grant 's co-operation be foil at the outset by the surrender to Van Dorn of Holly Springs , with it large store of food , arm , and ammunition , and more especially by Forrest 's raid on Grant 's own communications. Sherman assault the impregnable Haines Bluff on the Yazoo , be badly repulse , on the 29th of December , with a loss of nearly 2,000 men , the Confederates lose less than 100. Some offset be have a fortnight later in McClernand 's capture of Arkansas Post with 4,791 prisoner and 17 gun , after a total Union loss of a thousand men. Early in 1863 Grant move his whole army down the river to work out the problem of Vicksburg 's capture. Two month and more pass in fruitless operation upon the neighbor bayous , seek to evade the formidable defense by canal and the like devices. At length he determine to carry his army below Vicksburg and turn the left of Pemberton , who command the works. Sherman be send above to feint at Haines Bluff. Porter run the battery , and Grant 's main force , move along the Arkansas shore of the Mississippi , cross it at Bruinsburg , several mile below Vicksburg , and , after a sharp fight at Port Gibson , advance along the Big Black to the rear of the city , and capture the town of Raymond and Jackson , after combat at each. Pemberton , by direction of Gen. Joe Johnston , who be at hand to co-operate with a small force , sallied out to attack Grant , but be defeat on the 16th of May , at Champion 's Hill , with the loss of 3,839 men , while the Union loss be 2,408. He be immediately defeat again on the Big Black , and fell back into Vicksburg , which Grant , after be reinforce till he have have 70,000 men and 250 gun , then regularly besieged. Assaults cost the Union arm 4,000 men and the Confederate but 500 , and then Grant trust to close investment , use a part of his force to keep off Gen. Joe Johnston , who hover about but do not attack. On the 4th of July the starve garrison surrender , with about 30,000 officer and men and 172 guns. The total Confederate loss in this Vicksburg campaign be from 42,000 to 45,000 , with 60,000 small arm and 260 cannon. Grant 's total loss be not 12,000. The Confederates also lose , when Port Hudson fell , a a corollary to Vicksburg , the great Mississippi , and it resource beyond. The Vicksburg campaign be one of the most complex and interesting of the phase of the civil war , and it prove vastly important in it results. From the outset the determination of the West have be that the Mississippi should run `` unvexed to the sea. '' Very slowly , however , and almost by inch , be the Confederate grip wrench from the great river. Before Grant undertake the operation at Vicksburg several attempt upon it have fail , and all his own early effort be abortive. These have be direct either to evade the domination of the Vicksburg battery over the Mississippi or that of the Haines Bluff battery over the Yazoo. All these failure nevertheless only serve to set out in clearer light that characteristic trait of Grant 's soldiership which , defy fate and stubbornly wait for fortune to relent , at length achieve it purpose. The conception of move his whole army south of Vicksburg , cut himself entirely from his base and march into the enemy 's domain to risk everything on a series of battle in the rear of the city , may perhaps fairly be call the inevitable result of have try every other plan first. But the surpassing merit of the execution of the project consist in the method , deliberation , and stoutness of heart with which an enterprise of apparently enormous practical difficulty , be carry into effect. Even Sherman himself , who have give abundant proof of intrepid soldiership , advise that the army should be take back instead to the line of the Yallabusha to begin the campaign over again. To Grant , however , the deliberate launching of his whole army a a movable column upon a new line in the rear of Vicksburg be attractive by virtue of it boldness. Beyond question , the error of Pemberton and the failure of this officer and Johnston to effectively co-operate furnished to Grant that share of good fortune which he , like many other of the world 's famous soldier , usually receive at the time when it be most needed. Nevertheless , his own skill and energy in conduct the final operation be as indisputable a the boldness of the purpose that frame them. The country be wild with enthusiasm over this victory at the West and the simultaneous one at Gettysburg in the East. For the first time Grant 's merit a a soldier be fully recognized. He be make Major-General in the regular army , and congratulation and gift shower upon him. But serious work be to be quickly required. Buell the Autumn before , after fight the battle of Perryville with Bragg , have be succeed by Rosecrans , who at the close of the year have encounter the same General in the tremendous battle of Murfreesborough. In the Summer of 1863 he have make his Tullahoma campaign , pursue Bragg to Northern Georgia , fight the bloody engagement at Chickamauga Sept. 19 and 20 , and fall back into Chattanooga , where Gen. Thomas relieve him in command of his force , the Army of the Cumberland. To Grant be assign in October the Military Division of the Mississippi , include that army , which be now beset by Bragg on the height around Chattanooga. Hurrying forward Sherman 's corp , which have be drive J. E. Johnston from the region back of Vicksburg , Grant take command at Chattanooga , and his first care be to open a line of supply by the Brown's Ferry road , already contemplate by Rosecrans. This be handsomely accomplish on the 27th and 28th of October by Hooker 's defeat of Longstreet , who be aid Bragg , and then the siege of Chattanooga be ended. It remain to dislodge Bragg , who be post on the commanding height of Missionary Ridge , with his centre across Chattanooga Valley and his left on Lookout Mountain. On the 24th of November Hooker carry this latter mountain in his `` battle above the cloud '' or among the mists. Sherman , in Grant 's plan , be to have turn the enemy 's right , while Thomas hold him at the centre , but on the 25th Sherman find that the difficulty of the country be too great. Thomas accordingly be order to attack seriously in his front , and with amazing enthusiasm and valor his Army of the Cumberland sweep up the height and across the crest of Missionary Ridge , and Bragg be drive back into Georgia. Succor be at once send to Burnside , who have be besiege by Longstreet in Knoxville during these latter operation , and who draw off at it approach. Thomas 's loss at Missionary Ridge be about 4,000 men , Sherman 's about 1,500 , and with Hooker 's include the total be about 7,000 , while Bragg 's be still heavy , a about 5,000 prisoner be capture , besides 40 guns. VI. Command of All the Armies Congress at once order that a gold medal should be strike for Gen. Grant , and vote thanks to him and his army , a do many of the Legislatures of the Northern States. A bill to revive the office of Lieutenant-General be pass , and to that grade he be appoint March 2 , 1864 , on the 17th assume command of all the army of the United States. The vote in the House of Representatives , where the bill revive the Lieutenant-Generalcy originate , be 117 to 19 in it favor. Mr. Washburne during the debate declare that Grant have himself speak no word to bring about this memorable result. `` I say what I know to be true , '' add Mr. Washburne , `` when I allege that every promotion he have receive since he first enter the service to put down this rebellion be move without his knowledge or consent. And in regard to this very matter of Lieutenant- General , after the bill be introduce , and his name mention in connection therewith , he write me and admonish me that he have be highly honor by the Government and do not ask or deserve anything more in the shape of honor or promotion ; and that a success over the enemy be what he crave above everything else ; that he only desire to hold such an influence over those under his command a to use them to the best advantage to secure that end. '' The high hope entertain of this successful officer become additionally manifest when he take his journey eastward , for the railway station along the route be throng with his enthusiastic countrymen. Arriving in Washington on the 8th of March , he be present to the member of the Cabinet the following day by Mr. Lincoln , who read to him these word : `` Gen. Grant , the Nation 's appreciation of what you have do , and it reliance upon you for what remain to be do in the exist great struggle , be now present , with this commission constitute you Lieutenant- General in the Army of the United States. With this high honor , devolve upon you , also , a corresponding responsibility. As the country herein trust you , so , under God , it will sustain you. I scarcely need to add that with what I here speak for the Nation go my own hearty concurrence. '' The reply of the Lieutenant-General be worthy of the address : `` Mr. President , I accept the commission with gratitude for the high honor conferred. With the aid of the noble army that have fight in so many field for our common country , it will be my earnest endeavor not to disappoint your expectations. I feel the full weight of the responsibility now devolve on me , and I know that if they be meet it will be due to those army , and , above all , to the favor of that Providence which lead both nation and men. '' Sherman beseech him to remain at the West , where extraordinary success seem to attend him ; but Grant recognize that the head and front of the Confederacy be in Virginia , and that there be the hard work. He therefore assign to Sherman the Spring campaign of 1864 in Georgia , from Chattanooga to Atlanta , against J. E. Johnston , who have succeed Bragg , while he make his headquarters with the Army of the Potomac , then under Gen. Meade , for a simultaneous campaign against the army of Lee and Richmond. The unity of operation now assure by Grant 's command of all the army be of immeasurable importance. Early in the war McClellan have also be intrust with the power of a General-in- Chief , but his career have be checker , and have early come to a close. Halleck , in succeed to this command , have but sparingly exercise it in the practical conduct of operation , and even when he have exercise it have commonly do so with unfortunate results. `` The army in the East and West , '' a Grant phrase it , `` act independently and without concert like a balky team , no two ever pull together. '' His own elevation to the supreme command , however , have not come a an experiment , but a the legitimate result of his victory , which have call for high and high advancement and responsibility. He have also achieve a reputation for tenacity which his subordinate felt bound to imitate in the come campaign. Added to these advantage be his long service both in the Mississippi Valley and on the line of the Alleghanies , which make the operation prepare for the West perfectly familiar to him and subject to his control , although his own presence be reserve for Virginia. The troop he have at command number more than 500,000 in the field. Sherman 's army comprise 100,000 men and 254 guns. The force of Meade and Burnside , in Virginia , number fully 120,000 effective , and those of Butler , on the Lower James , about 40,000. Sigel and Crook have small column in the Shenandoah Valley and West Virginia. Banks , who have just be defeat in Louisiana , have troop to spare for reinforce other armies. There be various minor force on the grand theatre of war which call for a share of attention. While the detail of distant movement be leave in large measure to the discretion of the commander intrust with perform them , it may be say with truth that Grant fully exercise the office of General-in-Chief. `` So far a practicable , '' say Grant to Meade , `` all the army be to move together and toward one common centre. '' The same view be express to Sherman , Butler , and Sigel. It may be well to point out a little more specifically the character of the Virginia operation under his own supervision , a they appear to him at this time. `` You understand , '' he write to Butler on the 18th of April , `` that with the force here I shall aim to fight Lee between here and Richmond , if he will stand. Should Lee , however , fall back into Richmond , I will follow up and make a junction with your army on the James River. '' On the 29th of April he write to Halleck that his effort would be `` to bring Butler 's and Meade 's force together ; '' but he contemplate the possibility of be `` force to keep in the country between the Rapidan and the Chickahominy , in which case supply might be require by way of the York or the Rappahannock Rivers. '' This source of supply , in fact , afterward come into play. `` When we get once establish on the James River , '' he proceed , `` there will be no further necessity of occupy the road south of Bull Run. '' He likewise notify Meade on the same day that `` should a siege of Richmond become necessary , ammunition and equipment can be get from the arsenal at Washington and Fortress Monroe. '' These preliminary view be sufficient to indicate the nature of the great final campaign which Grant contemplated. Just before the opening of the campaign on which so much depend President Lincoln address to Grant a memorable letter : `` I wish to express in this way , '' he say , `` my entire satisfaction with what you have do up to this time so far a I understand it. The particular of your plan I neither know nor seek to know. You be vigilant and self-reliant , and , pleased with this , I wish not to obtrude any constraint or restraint upon you. * * * And now , with a brave army and a just cause , may God sustain you. '' Grant reply that he acknowledge with pride the confidence which the President place in him. `` From my first entrance into the volunteer service of the country , '' he say , `` to the present day , I have never have cause of complaint , have never express or imply a complaint , against the Administration or the Secretary of War for throw any embarrassment in the way of my vigorously prosecute what appear to be my duty. '' He add that he have `` be astonish at the readiness with which everything ask for have be yield , without even an explanation be asked. Should my success be less than I desire and expect , the least I can say be the fault be not with you. '' VII. Lee and the Wilderness At midnight of May 3 , 1864 , he cross the Rapidan with Meade 's army and Burnside 's Ninth Corps , afterward formally consolidate , and now aggregate 120,000 men. Butler be at the same time to make a co-operative movement up the James toward Petersburg , and Sigel to advance up the Shenandoah Valley. Lee , who , while Meade be at Culpeper , have watch him from Orange and Gordonsville , when he saw the Union army cross the Rapidan at Ely 's and Germanna ford with intent to turn his right flank , march forward to attack it. There be at this time 62,000 officer and men present for duty in the Army of Northern Virginia. Lee 's attack fell in a region aptly call the Wilderness , where for two day , May 5 and 6 , rag a battle the like of which have perhaps never be know -- a steady roll of musketry in a dense smoke-curtained undergrowth of scrub oak and low pine , where save on a few road artillery could not be use , and where the combatant could rarely even see each other. It be the desperate , prolong struggle of Lee to crush Grant 's campaign at the start. The opening shock of the encounter occur between Warren 's corp and the corp of Ewell on the Orange turnpike , near the Old Wilderness Tavern , where a murderous struggle ensue in the tangled underbrush. At length a portion of Sedgwick 's corp struggle through the chaparral in support of the Fifth , while a little later in the afternoon Hancock come up on the left , and at once hotly engage Hill , who have meantime make his way to Ewell 's right. Until 8 P.M. the battle rag in Hill 's front , when darkness in the forest put an end to it. During the night after this terrible and exhaust struggle , Grant form his plan a to what do next. It be to `` attack along the whole line at 5 o'clock in the morning. '' But resolute and prompt a be the Union General , the enemy anticipate him by resume the conflict a few minute before 5 on the morning of the 6th with an onset upon Sedgwick , who hold the Union right. Exactly at 5 o'clock the roll and gleam of musketry in Hancock 's front tell that the Union line be advance there ; and after a desperate contest it succeed in drive back the corp of Hill for more than a mile. Both side , however , have by this time be reinforced. Longstreet , who have not be present the day before , come up to Hill 's support , while Burnside move into the space between Warren and Hancock. With these disposition perfect , the oppose army find it difficult to advance , and stand in a sanguinary deadlock of conflict throughout the day. Some manoeuvring take place with but little effect , and the hard contest close with a double attack of the Confederates against the Union breastwork , both on the left and upon the extreme right flank , at which latter point several hundred Union soldier be captured. When the third day dawn on this deadly grapple for the mastery , both combatant paused. Grant have lose 2,265 kill , 10,220 wound , 2,902 missing -- total , 15,387. Lee have lose perhaps 10,000 -- there be no way of know exactly how many. What be to be the result ? The same day Grant move out once more by his left flank and point onward along the road to Richmond. Lee have the interior line , and hurry to foil this second effort to turn his right , station himself at Spottsylvania , in Grant 's path. Grant have at the outset notify Meade , who command the Army of the Potomac , that `` his objective be to be Lee 's army ; '' and the gage of battle be again take up , where Lee 's inferior number be aid by familiarity with the country and , above all , by intrenched position , cover by entanglement unprecedented in the war. For ten day Grant seek in vain to pierce or carry this position , the chief success be Hancock 's capture of 4,000 prisoner and 20 gun in assault a salient on the 12th of May. The night before , the 11th , the Second Corps have be move as near a possible to the position , which it be expect to storm , and at early dawn the men , with ring cheer , tore away such abatis a there be , and dash across the intrenchments. A brief but desperate hand-to-hand conflict result in the capture of nearly a whole division of Ewell 's corp and the pursuit of the remainder for half a mile. There , however , a new line of breastwork be encounter , while the imminent danger in which Lee 's position have be place cause him to bring forward a large force to retake the lost ground. The result be the drive back of Hancock 's corp to the line of work first captured. There , however , the Union troop hold their own. Assault on assault be make by Lee with great fury , till the ground be strew with Confederate and Union dead. The loss on both side be very heavy , but the Union troop hold their position and the honor of the day. By the 20th the Union loss at Spottsylvania have be 15,722 kill and wound , 2,001 missing -- total , 17,723. The Confederate loss be uncertain -- perhaps again 10,000 or 12,000. The Union kill and wound in the Wilderness and at Spottsylvania combine be 28,207 , and the miss 4,903 -- total , 33,110. The Confederate loss be uncertain , perhaps not far from 20,000. It be from Spottsylvania that Grant send back to Washington the memorable dispatch : `` I propose to fight it out on this line if it take all Summer. '' Meanwhile Sheridan , the renowned leader of the Union cavalry , after pioneer the way for the infantry and beat off the Confederate horseman , have raid on Lee 's communication , defeat Stuart , and , like a forerunner , have dash at the outer defense of Richmond. In the Shenandoah Valley Sigel have be defeat and succeed by Hunter. On the line of the James Butler have fight a hard battle with Beauregard , lose 3,500 men to the latter 's 2,200 , and have withdraw and intrench himself at Bermuda Hundreds , whence he forward 16,000 troop to Grant , while Beauregard send reinforcement to Lee. On the 20th of May Grant once more ordered Meade to move out by the left , and Lee , promptly march on his interior line , confront Grant at the North Anna River in a position afford so obvious a check that the march by the flank be again take up , and the oppose force next meet on the historic ground of the Pamunkey and the Chickahominy. On cross the Pamunkey Sheridan 's cavalry develop the presence of Lee and Hampton at Hawes 's Shop , where a very sharp engagement on the 28th of May end in Sheridan 's hold the important junction. The loss be very severe on both side , those of the Confederates be the heavier. During the two or three day succeed there be severe skirmishing a the Union Army advance , over a region familiar to many of them two year before , with the purpose of ascertain the position of the enemy. On the 1st of June the Sixth Corps , now under Wright , aid by portion of the Tenth and Eighteenth , under W. F. Smith , from the Army of the James , find the Confederates in force at Cold Harbor. Assaulting , they carry one line of intrenchment , capture 700 or 800 prisoner , the total Union casualty , however , be about 2,000 men. It be evident that Lee have determine to hold the line of the Chickahominy , and the other Union corp be as rapidly a possible place so a to strengthen the position already secure by Wright and Smith. On the morning of the 3d Grant move the army to the attack. The position hold by Lee be exceedingly strong , but the forcing of it promise to have a great effect on the operation against Richmond , so near be it to the outer work of that city. The Second , Sixth , and Eighteenth Corps be assign for the assault. They move to the attack most gallantly , but be mow down by a heavy combined fire of musketry and artillery. The main part of the fighting be over in an hour , in which time the number of kill and wound , include those in the Fifth and Ninth Corps , be between 5,000 and 6,000. When it become evident that the position be too strong to be carry the assault be not renewed. Meade 's aggregate loss during this stage of the campaign be 10,433 kill and wound , with a total of 12,970 casualties. The Confederate loss be perhaps 4,000 or 5,000. About 3,000 sick be send from the Peninsula to Northern hospitals. Hard a have be the hammer Grant lose no jot of confidence , and persist that the Confederacy be `` a shell '' that must soon break. Finding the Peninsula approach to Richmond so difficult he cross the James with his army in June and begin to operate against Petersburg. Practically this be a continuation of the movement by the left to get around Lee 's right. The Union kill and wound during the first series of assault on the Petersburg intrenchment number about 8,000 , and the total loss about 10,000. Those of Lee and Beauregard be also severe. Hard fighting then ensue to cut the Weldon and Southside railroad , particularly at Reams 's Station on the former , and by the cavalry on the Virginia Central. During the two month from May 1 to July 1 the loss of the Army of the Potomac be nearly 50,000 kill and wound , with a total of 61,000 ; the total loss of the Army of the James be 6,903 , exclusive of casualty on the picket line. The Shenandoah Valley casualty would bring the aggregate Union loss in the Virginia operation thus far above 70,000. Lee have also suffer very severely. VIII. The Siege of Petersburg Grant now sit down to a siege of Petersburg. During the month of July a strong line of redoubt be construct and furnish with heavy battery , face the Confederate line of defense , which comprise a chain of redans and parapet whose approach be obstruct by abatis. Toward the end of the month an officer command a regiment of Schuylkill miner in Burnside 's corp suggest the construction of a mine that should run under a point of the enemy 's work know a Elliott 's salient. The scheme be approve , but the preparation for execute it be most inadequate. The mine be spring on the 30th of July , and a yawning crater produce at the point attacked. The assault troop advance to the crater with great difficulty , the entanglement in front of their own work not have be properly removed. The lead division be improperly form and most meagrely supported. It remain in and near the crater instead of advance to the crest beyond. At length the enemy , at first paralyze by the explosion , after an inactivity of fully half an hour , begin to attack the huddled and ill-led troop at the crater , and soon a confused retreat be make to the Union lines. Gen. Grant tersely call this `` a miserable affair ; '' but it be the ruin by mismanagement of a project of much promise. The Union loss be 4,400 men , while a movement just previously make to the north side of the James cost 300 more. In August the movement to the north side be renew , under the charge of Hancock , who cross to Deep Bottom on the 13th. During several day follow severe fight take place , with a Union loss of from 2,000 to 2,800. Meanwhile , on the other flank , Warren be dispatch with the Fifth Corps to seize and hold , if practicable , the Weldon Railroad. Warren succeed in place his troop along the railroad on the 18th , and repel an assault of the enemy to recover it , lose 936 men , but probably cause a severer loss to the enemy. The following day A. P. Hill make a more determined attack on Warren , and capture over 2,500 men , besides inflict a loss of nearly 400 in kill and wounded. Nevertheless , the Union force still cling to the railroad. Two day after a third assault be make , but be bloodily repulsed. Grant 's next attempt be to destroy the Weldon Road a far south a possible , and for this purpose he determine to employ the corp of Hancock as soon a it return from Deep Bottom. The road be break in the region of Reams 's Station , but at the latter point the Union force be attack and drive back , with a loss of 2,372 men and 9 guns. Toward the end of September a movement of the corp of Ord and Birney be make on the north side of the James , where , in a gallant assault , Fort Harrison , on Chapin 's farm , be captured. The Confederates make desperate effort to retake the captured point , but be repulse with heavy losses. The Union loss in the two day of fighting be 2,272. To co-operate with this movement Grant simultaneously move out on his left again with the Fifth and Ninth Corps , the result be that that flank be extend to Peeble 's Farm , and though the operation cost 2,000 men the extension be permanent. The advance of the season now tell plainly that whatever be to be do for the capture of Petersburg before go into Winter quarter must be do quickly. Grant therefore resolve to make one determined effort to lay hold of the Southside Railroad , Lee 's main line of communication. The Petersburg work have be extend to Hatcher 's Run , where the Confederate right rested. It be propose to turn this , and in the meantime to press on to the railroad. The Second , Fifth , and Ninth Corps be assign for the task , and move on the 27th of October. Lee , however , be on the alert , and some unfortunate disposition cause the plan to result in total failure. The loss be perhaps about 1,800 men , and the troop be withdraw to their original positions. Simultaneously Butler make a co-operative movement on the north side of the James , where the loss be about 1,100 men. Grant 's Virginia campaign be now close for the year. While promise everywhere , in one quarter it end have be brilliant. In the Summer Hunter have advance up the Shenandoah Valley to Lynchburg after gain a victory at Piedmont , but be compel to retreat by Early , detach by Lee for that purpose , have do so through the Kanawha Valley , leave Early 's force to march through the Shenandoah to the very defense of Washington. Wright , hurry forward by Grant from Petersburg , in his turn force the retreat of Early , who nevertheless linger menacingly in the valley. Thither , accordingly , Grant send Sheridan , who gain four victory , at Winchester , Fisher 's Hill , Tom 's Brook , and Cedar Creek , the last give him a great personal renown. As with his habitual generosity Grant have warmly congratulate Sherman for his capture of Atlanta , so he bestow unstinted praise upon Sheridan for his victory in the valley. Of the one at Winchester he declare , `` It have be most opportune in point of time and effect. It will open again to the Government and to the public the very important line of road from Baltimore to the Ohio , and also the Chesapeake Canal. Better still , it wipe out much of the stain upon our arm by previous disaster in that locality. May your good work continue be now the prayer of all loyal men. '' After the victory of Fisher 's Hill he say to Sheridan : `` Keep on , and your good work will cause the fall of Richmond. '' No trait of Grant be more marked than the heartiness with which he praise the success achieve by those to whom he have intrust important tasks. The Spring of 1865 tell plainly that the combination and campaign of the year before under the Lieutenant-General have do their work , and that the end of the Confederacy be at hand. Historical record show that his command of all the army be no mere honorary position , but that again and again in Virginia demonstration sometimes angrily criticise a useless because have no obvious bearing on the Richmond campaign be specifically order in co-operation with effort make on distant fields. Sherman have flank and fight his way to Atlanta despite the resistance of Johnston and Hood ; when Hood 's army , steal away from Sherman 's front , hasten to Tennessee , Thomas have overwhelm it at Nashville ; Sherman have march from Atlanta to Savannah , and from Savannah be now come through the Carolinas against Joe Johnston and toward Virginia. Wilson and Stoneman be sweep through Alabama and East Tennessee. Not only Mobile and Charleston , but Fort Fisher and Wilmington , have fallen. Sheridan , take 10,000 horseman up the Shenandoah Valley , have break the neighboring railroad and the James River Canal , and now be at Grant 's left , to lead off once more in that movement to turn Lee 's right , present in Grant 's mind ever since the Rapidan be crossed. IX. Appomattox Lee , meanwhile , have see that his only hope lay in abandon Richmond and unite with Johnston at Danville to strike Sherman. On the 25th of March he seek to do this , under cover of an attack from his left against Fort Stedman. This work Gordon carry , but be then drive back , and Lee suffer an ill-afforded loss of 4,000 men , against a Union loss of 2,000. Grant , perfectly discern the meaning of this move , carry forward his own project. Sheridan on the 29th of March push out on the left , with the infantry following , and Lee , divine the purpose , soon collect everything he could on his right for a counter-blow. He strike the Union line heavily on the White Oak road , inflict a loss of nearly 2,000 men. Sheridan , to whom Grant have send a dispatch to stay by the main army , `` a I now feel like end the matter , '' be drive to Dinwiddie ; but send for assistance and receive the Fifth Corps , he fell upon Pickett April 1 at Five Forks , completely crush him and capture 4,500 men and 6 gun , with a Union loss of only 1,000. On the night after Sheridan 's great victory at Five Forks Grant 's line surround Petersburg , from the Appomattox to Hatcher 's Run , open a tremendous bombardment from all their gun , keep up the portentous roar until nearly daylight. With the first flush of dawn , on Sunday , April 2 , the Sixth and Ninth Corps , under Wright and Parke , and the Army of the James under Ord , make a general assault on the Petersburg works. The signal , the firing of a gun at Fort Fisher , be give at 4:40 A.M. , when just light enough to see. The work to be assault consisted of parapet of high relief and deep ditch , with two line of short abatis in front and battery every few hundred yard distant. No precaution be omit that would insure success -- the pioneer be in front , and the artilleryman be provide with implement for turn captured gun against the enemy. Amid a deadly fire the Union army charge the work , rapidly cut away the abatis , and rush through the opening thus made. In the 15 minute Wright alone lose 1,100 men kill and wound ; but he sweep everything before him , capture many gun and thousand of prisoners. Parke and Ord also make advance on their front , and the entire Union line draw close in upon the city. Humphreys , storm a redoubt , move up the Boydton plank road to connect with Wright 's left , while the remain division of the Second Corps , under Miles , attack Heth 's brigade near Sutherland Station on the Southside Railroad , capture two gun and 600 prisoners. Among the most sanguinary assault be one make by Gibbon with the Twenty-fourth Corps against Fort Gregg , whose capture cost 714 men kill and wounded. In that morning 's work Lee read the fate of Richmond. He instantly notify Jefferson Davis of his purpose to abandon the Confederate capital that night ; and no sooner have darkness fall than the whole Confederate Army , both north and south of the Appomattox , stealthily withdraw from it work , and , move with all speed westward , by the next morning be 16 mile away. Grant , who have announce his purpose to `` make an end of it before go back , '' be already about to achieve one part of his purpose. Before daylight of the 3d the troop push forward again to assault , but find their work already done. Petersburg be evacuate , and great flame blaze from Richmond tell that the warehouse of the Confederate capital have be fire by the retreat troops. Pillage , too , have be add to fire before the Union force march in to quench the conflagration ; and thus , on the 3d of April , 1865 , the great prize which general after general have fail to obtain during four year of struggle be in the hand of Grant. Lee 's westward race for life be to prove of no avail. Caring little for what become of Richmond , and leave to others the gratification of enter the city , Grant instantly direct his column in urgent pursuit westward along the south side of the Appomattox on a line parallel to the one take by Lee on the north side. The Confederate chief be aim to join Johnston , and , perhaps , to combine with him to overwhelm Sherman. He start with a light heart and full of hope. `` To follow me , '' he say , `` the enemy must abandon his line , and can derive no further benefit from his railroad or the James River. '' He fully expect to make his escape , and either to continue the war far south or to be able to negotiate peace on term other than those accord to a beaten and ruined army. But he have not take full account of Grant 's relentless vigor. On arrive at Amelia Court House he find Sheridan close upon him with the cavalry and the Fifth Corps , and when he pause for rest , Sheridan , still press onward , draw up at Jetersville , directly across Lee 's road to the Burkeville Junction , from which point he would have have an easy line of escape by rail to Danville. It only remain for Lee to fall upon Sheridan 's isolated force and risk all in the attempt to sweep it out of his path , or else , move westward once more , to seek escape by way of Lynchburg. But he have little or no food for either men or horse , have bring away but one day 's ration from Petersburg , and hesitate to attempt the attack till food could be procure ; in the meantime Meade bring up the Second and Sixth Corps to Jetersville , and his path be hopelessly barred. Then , at length , he move toward Farmville , the fiery Sheridan now head him , now hang on his flank , and constantly harass him with remorseless fury. Near Sailor 's Creek , on the 6th , his rear guard , consist of Ewell 's corp , be attack by Union troop , both cavalry and infantry , and almost entirely capture -- men , wagon , gun , and flags. Nothing seem leave to the proud Army of Northern Virginia at this juncture but annihilation by piecemeal. A less magnanimous soldier than Grant might have continue to press it when at his mercy , but with a generosity prompt in the hour of his long-sought triumph , he determine to himself make the overture for the inevitable end. On the 7th , at Farmville , Grant counsel Lee to surrender the remains of his army , and on the 9th of April that surrender be make at Appomattox. The capitulation of Johnston and of all the other Confederate army follow a an inevitable consequence. The Confederacy be ended. It have be hammer to piece , and amid the exhaustion of it devotee there be sign of relief that the inevitable day have come. Not less memorable in history than Grant 's victory will be his conduct to the vanquished. His interview with Lee be a marvel of simplicity. Nothing be do to pass his beaten enemy under the yoke. After his liberal and magnanimous term of surrender be fix he add : `` This do , each officer and man will be allow to return to his home , not to be disturb by United States authority so long a they observe their paroles. '' Under that promise , sign by Grant , his prisoner , from Lee down , be safe. Were it require to point out the most marked trait of Grant a a soldier , the choice should fall on his ceaseless aggressive energy under a calm demeanor , and upon his inflexible stoutness of heart in whatever trial or peril. Resolute a to end , no one be less narrow-minded or obstinate a to method of achievement. He approach Donelson with few men at first than be ensconce behind it strong work , and campaign for month against Vicksburg with hardly great force than be assign for it defense. Like Wellington , he be `` rich in save common sense , '' and the `` hard pounding , but we will see who can pound the hard , '' of the famous British soldier seem echo on field after field of the American. But Grant be destine rather to be himself an exemplar for historic comparison , and in age to come , if a great soldier be indomitable in purpose and exhaustless in courage , endurance , and equanimity ; if he be free from vanity and pettiness , if he be unpretentious , truthful , frank , constant , generous to friend , magnanimous to foe , and patriotic to the core , of him it will be say , `` He be like Grant. '' X. Reconstruction Days After the war Gen. Grant place Sheridan with a strong army of observation in the Southwest to watch the Franco-Austrian empire which have be establish in Mexico , until the death of Maximilian. The gradual reduction of the volunteer force and the reorganization of the regular army also demand his attention , and the employment of troop during the reconstruction period. In the interval of official duty he make visit to various part of the country , be everywhere receive with the great enthusiasm. Certain citizen of Philadelphia present him with a residence in that city at a cost of $ 30,000 , which he take possession of in May , 1865. On occasion of a visit to his old home at Galena , Ill. , a beautiful residence , completely furnish , be give him by his old friend and neighbors. On the 10th of November a magnificent reception and banquet be tender to him in the city of New-York. In the latter part of November and the early part of December , 1865 , he visit the South , and on his return make a report to President Johnson on the condition of affair , which be submit to the Senate in response to a resolution of inquiry. He be satisfy that the mass of think men accept the `` situation of affair in good faith ; '' that they regard the old question that have divide the section `` a have be settle forever by the high tribunal , '' and that they be `` anxious to return to self-government within the Union as soon a possible , '' but that they want and required protection from the Government `` while reconstructing. '' Early in 1866 the Thirty-ninth Congress pass an act create the grade of `` General of the Army of the United States , '' to be fill by the President `` from among those officer in the military service most distinguish for courage , skill , and ability , '' and provide that the act should cease to be in force whenever after such appointment the office should become vacant. The grade be create for Gen. Grant , and he be appoint a a matter of course , Gen. Sherman become Lieutenant-General. An incident of his official life in 1866 be a visit to Buffalo in June to take measure to stop the invasion of Canada by the Fenians , which be immediately follow by a collapse of the raid. In May he have send a letter to the Secretary of War in regard to the propose reorganization of the army , and this be immediately lay before Congress. He urge the retention of a small military force in the States lately in rebellion , hop that it would `` not be necessary to enforce the law , either State or national , '' but believe that it be need `` to give a feeling of security to the people. '' In 1867 Gen. Grant hold a very important relation to the work of reconstruct the States recently in rebellion. In preparation for the contest with President Johnson , the Thirty-ninth Congress , before it final adjournment on the 4th of March , have provide in a section of the Army Appropriation bill that all order and instruction relate to military operation should be issue through the General of the Army , and that he should `` not be remove , suspend , or relieve from command or assign to duty elsewhere than at the headquarters in Washington , except at his own request , without the previous approval of the Senate. '' The President sign the Appropriation bill with a protest against this provision , which , he say , `` virtually deprive the President of his constitutional function a Commander-in-Chief of the army. '' Thus it happen that the order to the district commander in the course of reconstruction come from Gen. Grant. In June President Johnson obtain from Attorney-General Stanbery his famous opinion of the reconstruction act , which be submit to the Cabinet , and from which the Secretary of War , Stanton , vigorously dissent , and cause it to be send to the district commander for their guidance through the Adjutant-General 's office. In reply to an inquiry from Gen. Sheridan , then in command at New- Orleans , Gen. Grant declare that the legal opinion thus distribute be not entitle to the force of an order and instruct the district commander to enforce his own construction of the law until order to do otherwise. By the supplemental Reconstruction act pass at the adjourned session in July the act of the military commander be make subject to the disapproval only of the General of the Army , give Grant practically full control of the execution of the reconstruction laws. The President a Commander-in-Chief of the army still have the power to remove the district commander , and after the second adjournment of Congress make several change , include the removal of Gen. Sheridan from the Fifth District and the assignment thereto of Gen. Hancock. The Tenure of Office act prevent him from remove any Cabinet officer without the consent of the Senate , but he determine to suspend Secretary Stanton and appoint Gen. Grant Secretary of War ad interim. On the 11th of August Gen. Grant address a letter to the President , in reply to proposition which have be make to him verbally , express his sense of the `` great danger to the welfare of the country '' involve in the design which have be broached. He regard the Tenure of Office act a `` intend specially to protect the Secretary of War , whom the country felt great confidence in. '' He defend Gen. Sheridan 's administration at New-Orleans , and deprecate his removal a calculate to encourage the opponent of the reconstruction policy. Nevertheless , Mr. Stanton be suspend on the 12th of August and Gen. Grant be designate to act a Secretary ad interim. In notify the Secretary of the fact and of his acceptance he say : `` I can not let the opportunity pas without express to you my appreciation of the zeal , patriotism , firmness , and ability with which you have discharge the duty of Secretary of War. '' After the order have be issue change the assignment of district commander Gen. Grant make another unavailing protest , and declare that there be `` military reason , pecuniary reason , and , above all , patriotic reason , why this order should not be insist on. '' Failing to move the President he continue to exercise the power of Secretary of War until the 14th of January , 1868 , when he inform Mr. Johnson that he have receive official notice that the Senate have refuse to sanction the suspension of Mr. Stanton , and that he regard his function a Secretary of War ad interim a cease from the moment of the receipt of that notice. Being unable to retain him , the President appoint Gen. L. H. Thomas Secretary ad interim , and instruct the General of the Army to disregard any order come from Mr. Stanton until he know from the President himself that they be his own orders. Gen. Grant ask that this instruction be put in writing , whereupon a correspondence follow , in which the General combat the President 's view of his power and correct statement that have be make concern his own conduct. The President claim that Gen. Grant have promise to sustain and act with him , which the latter deny , review his course clearly in a letter date Feb. 3 , in which he say : `` The course you would have it understood I agree to pursue be in violation of law and without order from you , while the course I do pursue , and which I never doubt you fully understand , be in accordance with law and not in disobedience of any order of my superior. '' In conclusion , he say : `` And now Mr. President , where my honor a a soldier and integrity a a man have be so violently assail , pardon me for say that I can but regard this whole matter , from the beginning to the end , a an attempt to involve me in the resistance of law for which you hesitate to assume the responsibility in order , and thus to destroy my character before the country. I be , in a measure , confirm in this conclusion by your recent order direct me to disobey order from the Secretary of War -- my superior and your subordinate -- without have countermand his authority to issue the order I be to obey. '' President Johnson attempt to punish the General for fail to help his design by confer on Gen. Sherman the brevet title of General of the Army , and place him in command at Washington. This Sherman decline , a do Gen. Thomas , whom the President try to use for the same purpose. Johnson then turn to Hancock , who have be send to New-Orleans to relieve Sheridan , some of whose order while there Gen. Grant felt compel to revoke. It be by Grant 's intercession that a bill for muster Gen. Hancock out of the service for the part he have take be defeated. Nevertheless the latter accept the command of the new military division with headquarters at Washington , which the President have create for the purpose of humiliate Grant. XI. First Term a President This controversy increase rather than diminish the popular confidence in the great hero of the war. Before the end of 1867 a public meeting in this city , promote by prominent citizen , include A. T. Stewart , William B. Astor , Hamilton Fish , Moses Taylor , Cornelius Vanderbilt , Peter Cooper , and Moses H. Grinnell , have declare in favor of his nomination for the Presidency. When the Republican National Convention meet in Chicago on the 20th of May , 1868 , there be no thought of any other candidate. A convention of soldier and sailor , hold on the preceding day , and compose of large delegation from most of the Northern States , declare that the `` soldier and sailor , steadfast a ever to the Union and it flag , fully recognize the claim of Gen. U. S. Grant to the confidence of the American people , and believe that the victory achieve under his guidance in war will be now illustrate by him in time of peace by such measure a shall secure the fruit of our exertion and a restoration of the Union upon a loyal basis , we declare it a our deliberate conviction that he be the choice of the soldier and sailor of the Union for the office of President of the United States. '' His nomination by the convention be unanimous on the first call of the States. His letter of acceptance , date May 29 , be very brief and quite characteristic. He say that if elect it would be his endeavor `` to administer all the law in good faith , with economy , and with the view of give peace , quiet , and protection everywhere. '' `` In time like the present , '' he say , `` it be impossible , or at least improper , to lay down a policy to be adhere to , right or wrong. Through an administration of four year new political issue not foreseen be constantly arise , the view of the public on old one be constantly change , and a purely administrative officer should always be leave free to execute the will of the people. I always have respect that will , and always shall. Peace and universal prosperity , it sequence , with economy of administration , will lighten the burden of taxation , while it constantly reduce the national debt. Let u have peace. '' At the election he receive the Electoral vote of all the States vote except Delaware , Georgia , Kentucky , Louisiana , Maryland , New-Jersey , New-York , and Oregon. Three States , Mississippi , Virginia , and Texas give no vote for President. The popular majority be 309,684 , the whole number of vote be 5,716,082. Of the Electoral vote , 214 be cast for Grant and 80 for Seymour. The First Cabinet After the canvas of the Electoral vote a committee be appoint to present Gen. Grant with the certificate of his election. In his reply to the committee he announce his determination to make know his choice of Cabinet officer before his inauguration on account of the many preference that have be urge upon him , but he declare that he should endeavor to call around him adviser who would carry out the policy of economy , retrenchment , and a faithful regard for the Government 's obligations. In his inaugural address he declare that while he felt the responsibility of his new position he accept them without fear. He urge the strict enforcement of all law , say that he know of `` no method to secure the repeal of bad or obnoxious law so effective a their stringent execution. '' He dwell especially upon the duty of pay the national debt in gold and return to specie payments. When the name of Cabinet officer be send to the Senate they create some surprise. They be E. B. Washburne , of Illinois , for Secretary of State ; A. T. Stewart , of New-York , for Secretary of the Treasury ; J. D. Cox , of Ohio , Secretary of the Interior ; Adolph E. Borie , of Pennsylvania , Secretary of the Navy ; John M. Schofield , of Illinois , Secretary of War ; J. A. J. Creswell , of Maryland , for Postmaster-General , and E. R. Hoar , of Massachusetts , Attorney-General. The appointment be promptly confirm , but it be at once discover that Mr. Stewart be disqualify by a law of 1789 , and the President ask that he be exempt from it operation by a joint resolution. A motion be make to repeal the law , but Senator Sumner object to it present consideration. Shortly after Mr. Stewart solve the difficulty by decline , and the President withdraw his request. George S. Boutwell be then appoint Secretary of the Treasury. Within a few day Mr. Washburne resign to take the French mission , and Hamilton Fish be appoint to his place in the Cabinet ; Gen. Schofield give place to Gen. Rawlins , who die in September , and be succeed by Gen. Belknap , and Mr. Borie retire , to be succeed by George M. Robeson. During 1869 the President take a deep interest in the completion of the work of reconstruction , recommend by special message the act of Congress provide for election in Virginia , Texas , and Mississippi , and urge the adoption of the act complete the work in Georgia. He write to his brother-in-law , Judge Dent , of Mississippi , to induce him not to stand a the candidate of the `` Conservative Republicans '' for Governor , a his success would result in the defeat of what he believe to be `` for the best interest of the State and country. '' Judge Dent accept the nomination nevertheless , and be defeat by the Radical candidate Alcorn. In his first annual message Gen. Grant urge still more strongly the policy of return as speedily a practicable to specie payment , and suggest the advisability of tariff revision for the reduction of taxes. He show his interest in the interoceanic canal question by announce that the Minister to Colombia have be instruct to obtain authority for a survey to ascertain the practicability of the Darien route. He also discuss the Cuban rebellion and the controversy with Great Britain over the Alabama claims. Another incident of the year be the appointment of the Quaker Peace Commission to deal with the Indians. San Domingo It be in the first year of his Administration that Gen. Grant conceive his great interest in the plan of annex a part of the island of San Domingo or acquire a naval station in the Bay of Samana. Treaties have that in view be negotiate in 1869 and be follow by a good deal of commotion in the island and opposition to the whole scheme in this country. The opposition to the treaty be lead by Senator Sumner , who have be estrange from the President by the recall of his friend Motley from the English mission. Their ratification be defeated. The President continue to urge the subject a one of great importance , and obtain authority at the beginning of 1871 to appoint a commission to go to San Domingo and inquire into the whole subject. This commission , consist of B. F. Wado , Andrew D. White , and S. G. Howe make a favorable report , and in a message submit this to Congress , April 5 , 1871 , the President say : `` And now my task be finish , and with it end all personal solicitude on the subject. '' He declare that his opinion be confirm ; that the `` interest of our country and San Domingo alike invite the annexation of that republic , '' but he suggest that no immediate action be take `` beyond the printing and general dissemination of the report. '' His apparent belief that the sentiment of the country would sustain the policy of annexation be not justify , and in this scheme be some of the seed of the opposition to his Administration which spring up in the year following. On the 30th of March , 1870 , the adoption of the fifteenth amendment of the Constitution be proclaim , and the President take occasion to notify Congress in a special message , a he consider it `` a measure of grander importance than any other one act of the kind from the foundation of the Government to the present day. '' But he express the belief that it impose upon the Government the duty of encourage and aid `` by every mean within their constitutional power '' popular education throughout the country. Other special message , in addition to one urge upon the Senate the ratification of the treaty with San Domingo , relate to measure to be take for increase commerce and building up the mercantile marine and one in relation to Cuban affairs. In the former he favor a subsidy policy , and in the latter urge a strict neutrality. A proclamation of neutrality in view of the war between France and Germany be issue in August , in which the duty of Americans be defined. The negotiation with Great Britain for the settlement of the difficulty relate to the Alabama claim and the fishery result in the treaty of Washington in 1871 and the subsequent arbitration at Geneva. In all these proceeding Gen. Grant take a conspicuous and creditable part , his treatment of the question involve evince a clear understanding and a dignified firmness in support of American right , together with a patriotic solicitude for the peaceful and equitable settlement of all difficulties. Kuklux Times The year 1871 be characterize by political disorder in various part of the South. On the 23d of March the President send a special message to Congress call attention to these , declare that the evil be beyond the control of the State authority , and that it be not clear that the power of the National Executive , act within the limit of exist law , be sufficient for the emergency , and urgently recommend `` such legislation a in the judgment of Congress shall effectually secure life , liberty , and property and the enforcement of law in all part of the United States. '' The result be the passage of the act to enforce the provision of the fourteenth amendment of the Constitution , which empower the President to suspend the writ of habeas corpus under certain defined circumstances. On the 4th of May a proclamation be issue call attention to this act and enjoin it observance. In this the President say : `` Fully sensible of the responsibility impose upon the Executive by the act of Congress to which public opinion be now call , and reluctant to call into exercise any of the extraordinary power thereby confer upon me , except in case of imperative necessity , I do nevertheless deem it my duty to make known that I will not hesitate to exhaust the power thus vest in the Executive whenever and wherever it shall become necessary to do so for the purpose of secure to all citizen of the United States the peaceful enjoyment of the right guarantee to them by the Constitution and laws. '' Disorders continue , especially in the State of South Carolina , a proclamation of warning be issue Oct. 12 , follow on the 17th by a proclamation suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus in nine county of that State. These vigorous proceeding , follow by uncompromising effort to enforce the law , finally put an end to what be know a Kuklux outrages. It be in 1871 that Justices Strong and Bradley be appoint to fill vacancy on the bench of the Supreme Court which result in the reversal of the decision of the court adverse to the constitutionality of the Legal Tender act. Steps for Civil Service Reform In his second annual message to Congress in December , 1870 , Gen. Grant call attention to the need of reform in the civil service. He say : `` I would have it go beyond the mere fixing of the tenure of office of clerk and employes who do not require the advice and consent of the Senate to make their appointment complete. I would have it govern , not the tenure , but the manner of make all appointments. There be no duty which so much embarrass the Executive and the head of department a that of appointment ; nor be there any such arduous and thankless labor impose on Senators and Representatives a that of find place for their constituents. The present system do not secure the best men , and often not even fit men , for public place. The elevation and purification of the civil service of the Government will be hail with approval by the whole people of the United States. '' In March , 1871 , by a clause in the Sundry Civil Appropriation bill , the President be authorize to `` prescribe such rule and regulation for the admission of person into the civil service of the United States as will best promote the efficiency thereof , and to ascertain the fitness of candidates. '' He be also authorize to employ suitable person to conduct the necessary inquiry and to establish regulation for the conduct of person who may receive appointment in the civil service. Under this authority a Civil Service Commission be appoint , consist of George William Curtis , A. G. Cattell , Joseph Medill , D. A. Walker , E. B. Ellicott , Joseph H. Blackfan , and David C. Cox. In December the President transmit to Congress the first report of the commission , with the rule adopt for competitive examination , & c. He say : `` We propose also that in this country the place in the public service shall be restore to those who be find to be fit for them , and if any one be dispose to think that an abuse of 40 year be a law of the republican system a little reflection will show him his error. If he believe a reform be impossible he merely show that he be the victim of the abuse , and forgets that in America every reform be possible. '' He express his determination to enforce the rule that have be adopt , but ask for them the sanction of Congress. `` The improvement of the civil service , '' he say , `` be emphatically the people 's cause , the people 's reform , and the Administration which vigorously begin it will acquire a glory only less than that of the salvation of a free Union. '' Of the sincerity of his purpose at this time there can be no doubt , and the practical failure of this first movement for civil service reform be due to a lack of support from Congress , strong pressure from politician , and the absence of a sufficiently mature and vigorous public sentiment on the subject. The change in the Cabinet near the beginning of Gen. Grant 's first term be follow by others before it close. In 1870 Attorney-General Hoar resign and be succeed by Amos T. Akerman , of Georgia , who be follow by George H. Williams , of Oregon , in December , 1871. J. D. Cox , Secretary of the Interior , also resign in 1870 and be succeed by Columbus A. Delano. XII. Re-Elected President The course of the Administration in 1871 in the treatment of political disorder in the South elicit a strong protest from the Democratic Party , which be put in the form of an address to the people by the Democratic member of Congress. In connection with the disappointment produce by some of the President 's appointment it also cause dissatisfaction among a small body of Republicans and lead to the agitation which at once secure Gen. Grant 's renomination and cause the Liberal Republican diversion of 1872. In April , 1871 , a public reception have be tender to the President at Indianapolis , in which Senator Morton take a leading part. This be regard a the beginning of a movement look to a second term , the continuance of the policy of the Administration be declare of the utmost importance to the country. Already early in the same year at St. Louis there have be public expression of disapproval of Gen. Grant 's course by Republicans. On the 10th of March , at a private meeting in Cincinnati , in which J. D. Cox , Stanley Matthews , and other Republicans take part , this opposition have assume more tangible shape , and a committee have be appoint to draft a declaration of principle and purposes. Their report , sign by 100 Republicans , be the basis of the movement which lead to the convention at Cincinnati on the 1st of May , 1872. The political agitation of 1872 be varied. The Labor Reformers nominate David Davis for President , but after the nomination of Greeley at Cincinnati he withdrew. Subsequently , declare that they would support neither Grant nor Greeley , they nominate Charles O'Conor , who never accept the candidacy. Greeley have be nominate after the convention of May 1 have be deter from name Charles Francis Adams by a somewhat singular letter from him. A month after the nomination of Greeley the Fifth Avenue conference be hold which nominate William S. Groesbeck for President , and after the Democratic Convention have accept Greeley , a convention of straight Democrats at Louisville nominate Charles O'Conor for President and John Quincy Adams for Vice-President , both of whom declined. In the midst of these dissension the regular Republican Convention at Philadelphia , on the 5th of June , have renominated Gen. Grant by acclamation , and put Henry Wilson on the ticket for the office of Vice-President. A brief letter of acceptance be date June 10 , in which the candidate for President say : `` If elect in November and protect by a kind Providence in health and strength , I promise the same zeal and devotion to the good of the whole people for the future of my official life a show in the past. Past experience may guide me in avoid mistake inevitable with novice in all profession and all occupations. '' He express the hope of leave to his successor , whether at the end of that or another term of office , `` a country at peace within it own border , at peace with outside nation , with a credit at home and abroad , and without embarrass question to threaten it future prosperity. '' He receive a popular majority at the election in November of 762 , 991 and the Electoral vote of all the States except Georgia , Kentucky , Maryland , Missouri , Tennessee , and Texas. The Treaty of Washington Gen. Grant 's first term a President be characterize by the successful negotiation and execution of the treaty of Washington and it scheme of arbitration , the failure of the project for annex San Domingo , the completion of reconstruction and a consistent adherence to the policy of protect life and political right in the South , a firm advocacy of honesty in the payment of the public debt in coin , and of a speedy return to specie payments. The President urge a liberal policy in build up the navy , encourage the merchant marine by subsidy , develop internal improvement , include a system of waterway from the Mississippi River to the Atlantic seaboard , and the promotion of an interoceanic canal at the isthmus. To him , at this time , be also due the inception of the policy of civil service reform. In his second inaugural address Gen. Grant show some feeling at the criticism and attack that have be make upon him. He make a brief explanation of his past course and future purpose , declare that in all his public service he have `` perform a conscientious duty without ask promotion and without revengeful feel toward any section or individual. Notwithstanding this , '' he add , `` throughout the war , and from my candidacy for my present office in 1868 to the close of the last Presidential campaign , I have be the subject of abuse and slander , scarcely ever equal in political history , which to-day I feel that I can disregard , in view of your verdict , which I gratefully accept a my vindication. '' Through his second term , a during the first , the foreign policy of the country be characterize by great dignity and firmness , a punctilious regard for the claim of other nation and an unwavering support of our own. The Cuban difficulty afford occasion for skillful and judicious diplomacy and be successfully dealt with. In a special message to Congress near the beginning of 1874 the President explain the incident of the capture of the Virginius by a Spanish vessel and the course which have be take by the Government , completely vindicate it authority and yet preserve amicable relation with Spain. The President recur to the San Domingo affair frequently , and in his very last message insist upon the purity of his motif and the soundness of his position , recall the ground of his action not a a `` recommendation for a renewal of the subject of annexation , '' but `` to vindicate my [ his ] previous action in regard to it. '' Specie Payments In nothing be Gen. Grant more persistent and untiring than in his effort to maintain a sound system of currency and finance. In every annual message and in several special message he urge the importance of a strict regard for the faith of the Nation and a constant adherence to the purpose of re-establishing specie payments. After the panic of September , 1873 , he write a number of letter , include one to a New-York bank President , on the relation of the Government to the crisis and it duty in adhere to a firm and consistent policy. An important opportunity come to him in April , 1874 , when Congress pass the bill `` to fix the amount of United States note and the circulation of national bank , '' know a the Inflation bill. This he veto in a message set forth clearly and vigorously his objection and his view on the question involved. In insist on the necessity of return to specie payment he say : `` I be not a believer in any artificial method of make paper money equal to coin when the coin be not own or hold ready to redeem the promise to pay ; for paper money be nothing more than promise to pay , and be valuable exactly in proportion to the amount of coin that it can be convert into. While coin be not use a a circulating medium , or the currency of the country be not convertible into it at par , it become an article of commerce as much a any other product. The surplus will seek a foreign market , a will any other surplus. The balance of trade have nothing to do with the question. '' In June of the same year , in reply to an application from Senator Jones , of Nevada , who have be `` deeply impress by the clearness and wisdom of the financial view '' which he have express in conversation , he give out a memorandum of those view for publication. In this he set forth more explicitly than he have do before the measure which he consider important for the restoration of specie payments. He advocate the repeal of the Legal Tender act to take effect in a year , a provision for the redemption of Government note in coin after another year and their cancellation , the process be facilitate by issue bond to be sell for gold a need , and the gradual withdrawal of all bill under $ 10 , and the removal of all restriction on free banking. In approve the resumption act in January , 1875 , he transmit a special message to the Senate , dwell on the importance of the act and of measure which should fully prepare for the change in the condition of the currency. This he do , he say , because he felt that the subject be of such vital importance to the whole country `` that it should receive the attention of and be discuss by Congress and the people , through the press and in every way , to the end that the best and most satisfactory course may be reach of execute what I deem most beneficial legislation on a most vital question to the interest and prosperity of the Nation. '' He do not cease so long a he be in office to exercise his utmost influence toward the permanent establishment of a sound financial policy. Up to December , 1874 , President Grant have constantly urge upon Congress the necessity of give legislative sanction to the civil service rules. In his annual message at that time he declare that it be impracticable to maintain them `` without the direct and positive support of Congress , '' and announce that if that body adjourn without positive legislation on the subject he should regard such action a a disapproval of the system and abandon it , `` except so far a to require examination for certain appointee to determine their fitness. '' Already the trouble have occur in relation to change in the New-York custom service which lead to the resignation of Mr. Curtis a head of the commission. Nominally the system be continue until Congress fail to make appropriation for it expenses. The President be accuse of disregard the principle of the system in his own appointment , for then there be no distinct classification of the grade of the service to which the rule be applicable and no authoritative sanction for their consistent application. He always profess a desire to carry out the reform faithfully within it proper scope , but fail to get the necessary co-operation and support. Disorders in the South Political trouble in certain of the Southern States do not cease so long a Gen. Grant remain in the office of President. During his last term he always deprecate any interference by the Government which be not imperatively necessary to preserve peace and good order in the States. Early in 1873 he call the attention of Congress to the controversy in Louisiana on account of the disputed election of the previous November. He state that he have recognize a the de facto Government that which have be instal a the result of the decision of the Returning Board of the State , and declare his purpose to adhere to it support if no action be take by Congress. He say : `` I be extremely anxious to avoid any appearance of undue interference in State affair , and if Congress differs from me a to what ought to be do I respectfully urge it immediate decision to that effect. Otherwise I shall feel obliged , as far a I can by the exercise of legitimate authority , to put an end to the unhappy controversy which disturb the peace and prostrate the business of Louisiana by the recognition and support of the Government which be recognize and uphold by the court of the State. '' Congress take no action , and the trouble be renew with violence in 1874 , when a new canvas take place for the election of member of the Legislature. Adherents of the McEnery and Penn ticket of 1872 resort to arm in New-Orleans against Kellogg , who appeal to the President for protection. A proclamation be issue Sept. 15 warn `` turbulent and disorderly person '' to disperse within five day and submit themselves to the law. United States troop , under Gen. Emory , be command to preserve the peace. The trouble cease for the time , and in refer to it in his December message the President defend his course a the only alternative leave him by the inaction of Congress. He could only recognize the State Government that exist in form under the State laws. The trouble break out afresh after the election , the Returning Board have leave several dispute unsettle a to the return of member of the Legislature. The President send Gen. Sheridan to New-Orleans to investigate and report , and if necessary take command of the military force there. Gen. Sheridan take side against Speaker Wiltz , who have be choose with the help of person not return a elect to the House of Representatives. At the demand of Gov. Kellogg these person be eject by Gen. De Trobriand and the Republican majority be establish with the aid of the military. The course of the President and Gen. Sheridan give rise to sharp criticism , in which some prominent Republicans take part. The President submit a special message on the proceeding at New-Orleans in January , 1875 , in which he discuss the affair at length , and deplore the necessity of interference for the preservation of order and protection of life and property. He earnestly ask for Congressional action that should leave his duty perfectly clear , `` give assurance at the same time that whatever may be do by that body will be execute accord to the spirit and letter of the law without fear or favor. '' The opponent of Gov. Kellogg , find the national authority on the side of the established Government of the State , give over the contest until the campaign of 1876. At the election in Texas , in December , 1873 , the Democrats be successful for the first time since reconstruction. The constitutionality of the law under which the election be hold be attack , and it be declare invalid by the Supreme Court of the State. Gov. Davis appeal to the President for troop to sustain him in power. The President reply with the query , `` The act of the Legislature of Texas provide for the recent election have receive your approval , and both political party have make nomination and have conduct a political campaign under it provision , would it not be prudent , as well a right , to yield to the verdict of the people a express by their ballot ? '' The Governor be also remind that his application be not make in accordance with the requirement of the Constitution and the laws. The people of the State be leave to settle the controversy , and Gov. Coke be inaugurate under protection of arm men. To a statement from the United States Marshal that a conflict seem inevitable the Attorney-General reply that there be no power to interfere with force , and the party should be appeal to settle their difference peaceably. In Arkansas there be a long controversy , begin with the election of 1872 , between Joseph Brooks and Elisha Baxter , both Republicans , and both claim to have be elect Governor. In the Spring of 1874 the President be appeal to for support by both sides. He reply to Baxter , express the hope that the difficulty could be peaceably adjust by the Legislature , promise all assistance and protection to such adjustment that could be give under the Constitution and the law , and hop that the military force on both side would be disbanded. An attempt be make at Washington under the sanction of the President to manage a compromise between Brooks and Baxter , and an agreement to abide by the action of the Legislature. This be reject by Brooks , but the Legislature in May have declare Baxter duly elect Governor and appeal for protection against domestic violence , the President issue a proclamation recognize Baxter , command all turbulent and disorderly person to disperse and submit to the constitute authorities. This be follow by provision for a Constitutional Convention in Arkansas ; a new Constitution be adopt and a new election hold , at which A. H. Garland be choose Governor , although the old term of office extend to 1877. An attempt be make to renew the controversy , and the President be again call upon to interfere in the month of November. He decline and turn the whole business over to Congress , which have order an investigation. In a special message , Feb. 8 , 1875 , he again appeal to Congress to take definite action and `` relieve the Executive from act upon question which should be decide by the legislative branch of the Government. '' Once after this , and previous to the canvas of 1876 , the President be ask to interfere to protect a State Government , the appeal come from Gov. Ames , of Mississippi , in September , 1875. In direct the Attorney-General to reply to Ames the President say : `` The whole public be tire out with these annual Autumnal outbreak in the South , and the great majority be ready now to condemn any interference on the part of the Government. I heartily wish that peace and good order may be restore without issue the proclamation , but if it be not , the proclamation must be issued. But if it be , I shall instruct the commander of the force to have no child 's play. If there be a necessity for military interference , there be justice in such interference to deter evil doers. '' He urge that the local authority should endeavor to settle their own difficulties. There be no intervention , and the Democrats carry the ensue election. Changes in the Cabinet The only change in the Cabinet at the beginning of the second term be cause by the retirement of Secretary Boutwell , who be succeed by William M. Richardson , of Massachusetts. Mr. Richardson resign in 1874 , and B. H. Bristow be appoint , accept the office June 4. On the 24th of June , the same year , Marshall Jewell succeed Mr. Creswell a Postmaster-General. In April , 1875 , Attorney-General Williams resign and be succeed by Edwards Pierrepont. In July Secretary Delano , of the Interior Department , tender his resignation , which be accept on the 22d of September , when Zachariah Chandler , of Michigan , be appoint to the vacant place. The same year Treasurer Spinner resign , and be succeed by John C. New , and Commissioner of Internal Revenue J. W. Douglass give way to Daniel D. Pratt. In 1873 , on the death of Chief- Justice Chase , Morrison R. Waite , of Ohio , be appoint to the vacancy. It be in 1875 that the fraud upon the Internal Revenue Department know a the `` whisky fraud '' be discovered. On the 10th of May 32 distillery and rectify house be seize in St. Louis by officer of the Treasury Department. Prosecutions follow , which result in the conviction and imprisonment of Special Agent John A. Joyce and Supervisor John McDonald. Indictments be find against William O. Avery , Chief Clerk of the Treasury Department , and Gen. O. A. Babcock , the President 's private secretary. The former be convict in December , 1875 , and the latter be acquit in February , 1876. At the time of the discovery of the fraud the President have urge Secretary Bristow to prosecute the offender vigorously and `` let no guilty man escape. '' Afterward he disapprove of some thing in the Secretary 's course , it be claim that the latter be use the proceeding to discredit the Administration and it friend and to advance his own political fortunes. The difference result in Bristow 's resignation June 20 , 1876 , and the appointment of Lot M. Morrill in his place. In the meantime , near the beginning of the year 1876 , Secretary of War Belknap have be charge with corruption in dispose of a trading establishment at the military post of Fort Sill. Being threaten with impeachment , he resign his place on the 2d of March , and his resignation be promptly accepted. Resolutions in favor of impeachment be adopt the same day , and the trial follow , end on the 1st of August in an acquittal for lack of two-thirds of the Senate in favor of conviction. The vote be 35 to 25 on the first article , some Senators explain that they vote `` Not guilty '' on the ground that the Senate have no jurisdiction , since the accuse have resign his office before the proceeding began. Alphonso Taft be appoint Secretary of War March 7 , 1876 , and resign May 22 to take the post of Attorney-General on the appointment of Mr. Pierrepont a Minister to England. J. Donald Cameron succeed Taft a Secretary of War. July 11 Postmaster-General Jewell resign and be succeed by James H. Tyner. Among the incident of Grant 's second term be the Centennial Exhibition at Philadelphia. This be first proclaim by the President July 3 , 1873 , and the Commissioners for the several States be appoint by him. He also take a prominent part in the opening proceedings. On the 4th of May , 1876 , the President make a spirited and dignify reply to a resolution of the House of Representatives call for information a to his performance of executive duty at a distance from the seat of government. In maintenance of the right of the executive branch of the Government , he say , he be compel to decline any specific or detailed answer to the request of the House. He be free to state , however , that it have be his habit , a it have be that of his predecessor , to absent himself at time from the capital , and that he have not neglect or forego the performance of his duty at such times. He be not aware of any failure therein that have occurred. To this message he append a memorandum of the absence from the seat of government of his predecessor , during which they have continue to perform executive duties. Third Term Talk Before the middle of Gen. Grant 's second term there begin to be talk of his nomination for a third term. This start the familiar anti-third term agitation , which be promote by the ambition of other aspirant for the candidacy. In 1875 the Republican Convention of Pennsylvania , while praise Gen. Grant 's Administration in the high term , declare itself `` unalterably oppose to the election to the Presidency of any person for a third term. '' This induce the President to write a letter to the Chairman of that convention , in which he declare that he `` never seek the office for a second nor even for a first nomination , '' but have vacate a congenial position because he be make to believe that the public good call him to make the sacrifice. After accept a first term he be subject to `` such a fire of personal abuse and slander , '' notwithstanding the conscientious performance of his duty to the best of his understanding , `` that an indorsement from the people , who alone govern republic , be a gratification that it be only human to have appreciate and enjoyed. '' As to a third term he say , `` I do not want it any more than I do the first. I would not write or utter a word to change the will of the people in express their choice. '' After express a doubt a to the wisdom of restrict that choice , he add : `` The idea that any man could elect himself , or even nominate himself , be preposterous. It be a reflection upon the intelligence and patriotism of the people to suppose such a thing possible. Any man can destroy his chance for the office , but no one can force an election or even a nomination. '' He declare that he be not and have never be a candidate for renomination and would not accept it `` unless it should come under such circumstance a to make it an imperative duty -- circumstance not likely to arise. '' In September of the same year , in a speech at the reunion of the Army of the Tennessee at Des Moines , the President make some remark upon the necessity of keep public education free from sectarianism and maintain the independence of Church and State , which be distort by his enemy -- or more accurately speak , by the friend of Mr. Blaine -- to represent him a seek support for a third term by excite prejudice against the Roman Catholics. But the anti-third term movement derive it real strength from the disfavor into which the Administration have fall in consequence of the scandal of the Belknap trial and the whisky ring prosecution and the failure of civil service reform. There be a conference of Republicans oppose to the Administration in the city in May , 1876 , which represent the demand for administrative reform. The antagonism spring from this independent element , from the supporter of Bristow and the worker for Blaine , together with a perceptible weakening of confidence in the President , be such that when the Republican Convention be hold at Cincinnati , on the 14th of June , Gen. Grant 's name be not bring forward for the nomination at all. The Campaign of 1876 During the canvas which follow the convention of 1876 the Government take measure for the preservation of order and the protection of right in the South. By an order of the War Department , date Aug. 15 , Gen. Sherman be instruct to have all available force `` in readiness to be use upon call or requisition of the proper legal authority , for protect all citizen , without distinction of race , color , or political opinion , in the exercise of the right to vote , a guarantee by the fifteenth amendment , and to assist in the enforcement of certain condign and effectual punishment upon all person who shall attempt , by force , fraud , terror , intimidation , or otherwise , to prevent the free exercise of the right of suffrage , a provide by the law of the United States ; and have such force so distributed and station a to be able to render prompt assistance in the enforcement of law. '' This be follow in September by a circular of instruction from the Attorney-General to United States Marshals respect their duties. The only call for troop prior to the election come from Gov. Chamberlain , of South Carolina. A proclamation be issue on the 17th of October command unlawful combination to disperse and the same day Gen. Sherman be direct to place all available force in the division of the Atlantic at the command of Gen. Ruger at Columbia , to be station where they could be most effectually use , in case of resistance to the authority of the United States. After the election , and while the result be in dispute in South Carolina , the President give order for the use of the military to preserve order only. Gen. Augur , in Louisiana , be instruct , Nov. 10 , `` to preserve peace and good order , and to see that the proper and legal Canvassing Board be unmolested in the performance of the duties. Should there be any ground of suspicion of fraudulent count on either side , '' the President add , `` it should be report and denounce at once. No man worthy of the office of President should be willing to hold it if count in or place there by fraud. Either party can afford to be disappoint in the result. The country can not afford to have the result taint by the suspicion of illegal or false returns. '' It be at the President 's request that a delegation of prominent Republicans from the North go to New-Orleans to supervise the canvas of votes. His subsequent course be limit to precaution against any breach of law. In sign the Electoral Commission bill , Jan. 29 , 1877 , President Grant submit a special message to the Senate approve the measure a `` calculate to meet the present condition of the question and of the country , '' but urge the necessity of `` permanent general legislation to meet case which have not be contemplate in the Constitution or law of the country. '' On motion of Mr. Conkling this `` important and wise message '' be order printed and to lie on the table. In the settlement of the pending controversy the President have no part to take , and on the 4th of March he retire from the White House after an occupancy of eight year , cover a period of great importance in the history of the Republic. XIII. The Trip Around the World On retire from office Gen. Grant determine to indulge his taste for foreign travel by make a trip around the world and visit place of interest on the way. After a hasty visit to his old home at Galena , stop at Cincinnati on his way , where a reception be tender him , he embark from Philadelphia May 17 on the steamer Indiana with his wife and old son. A distinguish party of friend accompany him down the river and bid him adieu amid an enthusiastic demonstration of the people on shore. He arrive at Liverpool May 28 , and be receive by the Mayor and member of the Council in State. His tour of two year be attend by such attention and mark of distinction a have rarely , if ever , be accord to any living man. After a public banquet at Liverpool he visit Manchester , and reach London on the 1st of June , where he be greet on his arrival with an address from the Lord Mayor and Corporation. His five week in the British metropolis be a round of festivity and compliments. He receive the freedom of the city in a gold box at a splendid banquet in Guildhall June 16 , visit the Queen , and din with the royal family at Windsor June 27 , receive the degree of D. C. L. from Oxford and make a visit to the ancient university , where he be enthusiastically received. At a grand entertainment get up in his honor by the authority of Liverpool he receive a congratulatory address from the United Associations of British Workingmen. He leave London for a quiet visit to the Continent July 6 , cross from Folkestone to Brussels. Though intend to travel quietly he could not avoid all the attention which the people desire to bestow upon him. The King of Belgium call upon him at Brussels , he have a public reception at Cologne , be entertain at a magnificent dinner at Frankfort , and be everywhere enthusiastically greeted. At Geneva he lay the cornerstone of the American Episcopal Church July 27 , and after be entertain at a banquet there cross through the Simplon Pass into Northern Italy. After a short tour amid the picturesque scenery there he return through Alsace-Lorraine to Great Britain , arrive Sept. 1. He now visit Scotland , receive the freedom of the city of Edinburgh and Glasgow , with other flatter attention , spend some time at the industrial centre in the North of England , where enthusiastic reception by the work people be a gratifying incident of his experience. He visit Stratford-on-Avon on his way to Birmingham , and there a holiday be make in his honor and an address be deliver to him inclose in a box of the wood of Shakespeare 's mulberry tree. He cross the Channel in the latter part of October and make his first visit to Paris , where he be receive with the same demonstration of admiration and respect that have attend him elsewhere. He be the frequent guest of President MacMahon , and attend numerous reception , dinner , and other complimentary ceremonies. He leave France for the Mediterranean in December , embark on the United States steamer Vandalia. He touch at Genoa Dec. 15 , visit Naples , Mount Vesuvius , and Pompeii a few day later , and reach Malta on the 28th , where he be receive with great distinction by the British authorities. There he din with the Duke of Edinburgh , and after a further cruise in the Mediterranean visit Egypt and the Holy Land. At Alexandria , in February , 1878 , he be receive a the guest of the Khedive. He go up the Nile , visit the Suez Canal , and din with de Lesseps , proceed to Jaffa , and make his journey thence to Jerusalem and other point of interest in Palestine. Returning through Syria he embark at Beyrout for Rome , where , on the 30th of March , he be present to the Pope by Cardinal McCloskey , who have be take part in the ceremony attend the elevation of Leo XIII to the Pontificate. After a short stay in Rome he be take by the Vandalia to Constantinople , where he be receive by the Sultan April 6 , and present with some Arabian horse from that ruler 's own stables. He next sail for Greece , and be the guest of the King at Athens , and by May 12 he be again in Paris to attend the Exposition. He next make a trip through Holland , Germany , Denmark , Norway , and Sweden to St. Petersburg , receive the most distinguished attention everywhere. After a short stay in Russia , visit point of interest , he reach Vienna Aug. 18 , and proceed thence through Switzerland and Southern France to Spain and Portugal. At Madrid he be the guest of Castelar and afterward of the King , attend a grand review and other entertainment in his honor , and at the end of the year return to Great Britain for the purpose of make a visit to Ireland. He be enthusiastically receive in Dublin , and at Cork encounter the only slight he be destine to suffer on his extended tour. In January , 1879 , he pass through France on his way to embark from Marseilles for India , stop on his way to dine with Marshal MacMahon in Paris. He leave Marseilles Jan. 23 , pass through the Suez Canal and the Red Sea , and take the steamer at Aden for Bombay Feb. 6 , arrive on the 12th. He visit all the famous place in India , be everywhere receive by native and English with the most flattering attentions. At Calcutta he be receive by a guard of honor and entertain at a state banquet by the Governor-General , Lord Lytton. In the latter part of March he proceed through Burmah and Siam to China. At Bangkok he be the recipient of special attention from the King. Passing through Cochin China , with the incident of a reception by the French authority at Saigon , he reach Hong Kong April 30. Thence he go to Canton and Shanghai , and later to Pekin and Northern China , many reception and entertainment be give in his honor by both native and foreign notabilities. On the 1st of July he reach Yokahama and have a special audience with the Emperor and Empress of Japan on the 4th , the Mikado deliver a eulogistic speech of welcome. On the 7th there be a brilliant review in honor of the great American General , and on the 8th a gorgeous festival in the great hall of the Kobu Dai Gaku. An incident of the visit to Japan be an invitation from Li Hung Chang , Viceroy of Tien-Tsia , by authority of Prince Kung , to act a mediator between that Government and Japan for the settlement of the Loo-Choo difficulty. Leaving Yokohama Sept. 3 , 1879 , Gen. Grant and his party arrive at San Francisco on the 26th , where a most enthusiastic reception of the authority and the people await them. After a short stay in San Francisco he visit other part of California and the adjoining States , include Oregon , and then make his way eastward in a leisurely manner. In November he be once more at his old home in Galena , and before the end of the year he be in New-York and Philadelphia among admire friends. But his travel be not yet ended. Early in January , 1880 , he set out for a Southern trip. Passing through Augusta , Ga. , Savannah , Charleston , and Jacksonville , he make a visit to Havana , sail thence to Vera Cruz , and spend some time in Mexico , where he be treat with great distinction. He return by way of Galveston , reach that city March 22 , visit New- Orleans , Mobile , and Memphis , and in the latter part of April be again at Galena. He visit Iowa and other States west of the Mississippi during the Summer , extend his journey to Santa Fe , New-Mexico , and return East in October. XIV. Again a Candidate During Gen. Grant 's absence from the country the question of his nomination for the Presidency for a third term be again agitate , and after his return the agitation take the form of serious effort on the part of his political admirer to bring the nomination about. The most prominent leader among these in their several States be Senators Conkling , Cameron , and Logan. The Pennsylvania and New-York convention of the Republican Party be hold early in 1880 and declare in favor of Grant 's candidacy. The example be follow in some other States , and many delegate be choose who be either pledge or know to be favorable to him. The party sentiment in the South be strongly in his favor , and if it have find free expression he would undoubtedly have receive the nomination , but there the Federal officeholder be wont to determine the selection of delegate , and they be largely control in the interest of the candidacy of Senator Sherman. The anti-third-term sentiment be still agitate and use to advance the ambition of Mr. Blaine , while certain Republicans of independent proclivity be for Edmunds or Washburne. Throughout the 36 ballot in the National Convention , with the exception of the one before the last , in which the Garfield movement fairly start , from 302 to 312 vote out of a total of 756 be cast for Gen. Grant. At that time he be on his way back from a visit to Mexico , and , on hearing of the nomination of Garfield , express his approval , which be afterward reiterate in letter to Secretary Dorsey , of the National Committee , and to Gen. Arthur. On the 28th of September , while on his way from the West , where he have spend the Summer , he make a speech at a public meeting at Warren , Ohio , where Senator Conkling be the principal speaker. In October he accompany Conkling on a campaign trip through this State , and give his influence and support unreservedly to the Republican ticket. During the same month he make a short trip through New-England , one incident of which be a visit to Plymouth Rock. He be entertain in Boston and Hartford at receptions. After the election he receive great attention in New-York and Brooklyn , visit Washington in December , where he be receive with special honor by Congress , and Albany in January , 1881 , where a reception be render him by the two house of the Legislature. XV. Last Years It be about this time that he determine to settle down and make his home in this city. When the World 's Fair enterprise be under consideration , at the beginning of 1881 , he consent to accept the Presidency of the commission , but find that , owe to division among the promoter of the undertaking and the difficulty of obtain a proper site , there be little prospect of it be successfully carry out , he resign on the 23d of March. He continue to take great interest in the question of an interoceanic canal at the isthmus , and publicly advocate the Nicaragua project. It be understand that if that plan be carry out by private capital he would accept the Presidency of the company. He also become interested in Mexican railroad scheme , and make a second visit to Mexico in the Spring of 1881 to obtain a concession for a company , of which he be to be the head. He also take great interest in the general question of establish closer commercial relation with Mexico , and be largely instrumental in secure the negotiation of the reciprocity treaty which be sign Jan. 20 , 1883. He be , in fact , with Mr. Trescot , a Commissioner on behalf of the United States in conduct the negotiation for that treaty , which take place the previous year. Gen. Grant 's name and influence be much seek after for association with financial scheme , and he accord a too ready assent. The banking firm of Grant & Ward , in which his son be interested , be form in the latter part of 1880 , and he appear a a special partner , and give it his confidence and support while take no active part in the business or , in fact , know much about it operation , which be conduct chiefly by Mr. Ward. The failure of the firm take place on the 6th of May , 1884 , and it circumstance be still familiar. Among the incident of Gen. Grant 's last year be his review of the case of Gen. Fitz John Porter , at the request of the latter 's friend , and his candid avowal that he find that he have previously be mistake in his judgment. He then , by correspondence and by a discussion of the case in a prominent review , do what he could to promote the restoration of Gen. Porter to the rank to which he would have be entitle on the retired list have the sentence of the court-martial not be pronounced. The proposition to place his own name on the retired list with the rank and pay of General , which he have give up to accept the office of President , be first make in Congress in 1881 , and the bill for that purpose pass the Senate in February , 1882. Owing to his suppose association with profitable financial operation and active participation in private business , it be not zealously support in the House. It pass the Senate again in 1884 , and be take up in the House at the follow session in 1885 , where it meet with little direct opposition , a it be then know that Gen. Grant be out of active business , without wealth , and in a bad state of health traceable in part to a serious accident which he incur by slip down on the icy pavement in front of his house in Sixty-sixth-street on Christmas Even , 1883 , and to his financial misfortunes. It be pass by the House , and be return to the Senate a few moment before the hour of adjournment on March 4 , it be enrol and immediately sign by President Arthur , who at once send to the Senate a message nominate Gen. Grant to the place upon the retired list provide in the bill , and the nomination be promptly confirmed. This act entitle Gen. Grant to the pay of a General , $ 13,500 a year , but only during his life. His Fatal Illness The Progress of the Malady to Which He Succumbed The first evidence of the disease which have terminate the life of Gen. Grant appear during his Summer residence in Long Branch in 1884. He have not be a well man since Christmas Eve , 1883 , when he slip and fell on the ice and receive a painful injury in the hip. Pleuro- pneumonia follow , which be aggravate by boil and bed sore , due to long confinement , and it be several week before he be able to leave his house and hobble about on crutches. During this time , however , his throat give him no trouble , and even his physician have no suspicion of the existence in his system of the germ of the terrible disease which have result in his death. On June 2 , 1884 , while eat his lunch at Long Branch , the General , a he taste some fruit , felt a lump in the roof of his mouth , and find that swallow be painful. The lump grow more troublesome day by day , and finally he consult Dr. De Costa , of Philadelphia , who be also pass the summer at the Branch. Dr. De Costa at once recognize the fact that the trouble be of a serious character , and advise Gen. Grant to consult his family physician , Dr. Fordyce Barker , of this city , immediately. The General unfortunately neglect to act on this advice until late in October last , when the trouble with his throat increase to such an extent that he find great difficulty in either eat or sleeping. Dr. Barker saw that the disease be liable , if not promptly arrest , to develop into cancer. He send the General to Dr. J. H. Douglas , a specialist in throat disease , who have formerly treat patient of Dr. Barker 's successfully , and he at once begin to treat the distinguish invalid. It be on Oct. 22 , 1884 , that Gen. Grant first come under Dr. Douglas 's charge a a patient , and he continue to treat him until his death. At the outset Gen. Grant be not confine to his house , and for four week he drive in his carriage to Dr. Douglas 's office nearly every day , submit to an examination of his throat , and receive treatment calculate to allay the pain. In addition to the trouble with his throat he have a very bad tooth on the left side , which be exceedingly painful and cause him much loss of sleep , which , of course , add to the irritation of the throat. Drs. Barker and Douglas advise him to have this troublesome tooth remove , which he do , and , act on the advice of the dentist , he also have three other decay teeth extract , which contribute greatly to his relief. His physician also believe that the irritation of his throat be greatly increase , if it have not be originally cause , by smoking. The General be an inveterate smoker , and his cigar on the battlefield have become a much a matter of history a the story of his life itself. To give up a life- long habit , which have be so confirm a this , be no easy task , and the physician , recognize this fact , confine their advice to request him to limit his indulgence in tobacco. They recommend him to confine his smoking to three cigar a day , smoke only the first half of each , which would be comparatively harmless , a the bulk of the nicotine in a cigar be concentrate in the last half smoked. After comply with this suggestion for a few day the General voluntarily abandon smoke altogether , and his abstinence , contrary to expectation , have no bad effect upon his nerves. Under the treatment of Dr. Barker , who attend to his general system , and Dr. Douglas , who devote himself specially to the throat trouble , Gen. Grant improve steadily , and at the end of four week he discontinue his visit to Dr. Douglas altogether. During the warm day of early December he felt so much relieve that he begin to take morning walk , and during one of these , which be the long he have take since the injury sustain by his hip the previous Winter , he catch a cold. This be follow by an aggravated return of his old trouble , which take the form of a severe attack of acute pain in the throat , and prevent him from eat , speaking , or sleeping. On Dec. 16 he again place himself under the charge of Dr. Douglas , and from that time on his treatment be continual. The difficulty , a it then exist , consist of an irritation of the epithelium extend to the gland in the throat on the right side at the angle of the jaw. The gland be enlarge very much and be very painful. There be a slight ulceration in the tonsil of the right side , and also a point of irritation in the roof of the mouth , where the soft palate join the hard palate. Here the epithelium be very much thicken in three patch look very much like wart , and each about a quarter of an inch in diameter. Muriate of cocaine be apply to relieve the General from the intense pain in the angle of the mouth where the membrane be deflect from the tongue up to the soft palate. This be apply twice a day at first and give almost instant relief from the pain. Then , a the patient sensibly improve , the cocaine be apply daily , and later on every other day. The ulceration in the tonsil be keep in a healthy condition by the application of iodoform. Under this treatment , combine with that of Dr. Barker , which be mainly constitutional , and intend to keep up the tone of the system , the trouble in the throat be relieve , so that by Jan. 13 last the congestion and inflammation have almost entirely subside , and the General be able to eat and sleep with comparatively little difficulty. The patch in the roof of the mouth , however , refuse to yield , but they be not painful , and the General be cheerful and able to work hard on his personal memoir , which he be engage in prepare when the disease first attack him. Everything indicate a continued improvement , and his physician , while they foresee that cancer must inevitably develop , have great hope at this time of prolong Gen. Grant 's life for a long time to come. On Feb. 17 , however , the General , while make his daily visit to Dr. Douglas , catch a severe cold , which again prostrate him. The physician be anxious to make a more satisfactory investigation of the nature of the disease than be possible by examine Gen. Grant 's mouth , and on Feb. 18 the throat be spray with a 41 per cent solution of the hydrochlorate of cocaine , which allay to a great extent the irritability of affected tissue. Then Dr. F. C. Riley remove from the ulcerated edge of the posterior pillar of the fauces a piece about as large a a small pea. This , after be harden by treatment with alcohol , be subject to a microscopical examination by Dr. George R. Elliott , who find that the tissue examine be compose largely of epithelial element , group frequently under the form of distinct lobules. The cell form these lobule lay in close contact , and show a marked tendency to be arrange in concentric globe or `` nests. '' This latter arrangement of epithelium be characteristic of that form of cancer know a epithelioma. The lobulated appearance of the epithelial mass indicate a tendency of the new cell formation to burrow into the deep part of the underlying tissue , and extravasation of blood be also find among the epithelia. This condition Dr. Elliott regard a point to a new develop growth , and cell dissolution , lead to rupture of the capillary blood channel , by which their content escape into the surround tissue. The conclusion reach by Dr. Elliott from his microscopical investigation be that the more or less lobulated appearance of the epithelial mass , the actual existence of some `` cell nest , '' the great diversity in the shape of the cell element , the marked evidence of epithelial proliferation , and the peculiar appearance of the stroma warrant the diagnosis of epithelioma of the squamous variety. On Feb. 19 a consultation be hold in Gen. Grant 's house by Drs. Fordyce Barker , the family physician ; John H. Douglas , who have special charge of the throat trouble ; Henry B. Sands , and T. M. Markoe. The General 's throat and mouth be thoroughly examine , and although the result of the microscopical examination by Dr. Elliott be not then know , the physician all agree that the trouble from which the General be suffer be cancer. The only difference of opinion express at this consultation be a to the probable rapidity of the fatal development of the disease. The cancer be decide to be epithelial and malignant. If it be in any other part of the body medical skill might hold it in abeyance , but all that could be do for the patient be to prevent him as far a possible from suffer pain , and thus lighten his steady journey to the grave. The consult physician agree that no possible good could result from an operation to remove the cancer. The ulceration have narrow down under Dr. Douglas 's treatment until it come out of the root of the tongue. There be also a perforation of the fold of the membrane which constitute the anterior border of the tonsular cavity. From the time of that consultation the certainty of Gen. Grant 's death from the cancer be accept by the doctor , and by such of the public a knew of it result. After that time Gen. Grant sink slowly but steadily. His face show little sign of the disease , but his limb fell away under the double effect of sleeplessness and a lack of appetite. The food which he take be a a general thing liquid , and he seem to have no relish for it , take it only because it be order by his doctor , a he take medicine. He find it almost impossible to sleep at night , and toss restlessly about until 3 or 4 o'clock in the morning , when he generally manage to get asleep , from which he arise refreshed toward noon. Occasionally he felt well enough to do some work on his book , and the one subject of his wake thought seem to be the completion of this work. He be always glad to see old friend , and would talk with them as long a they remain , but the doctor be oblige to limit these interview , a they result in increase the irritation in the patient 's throat. The General be confine after March 1 to his bedroom and library on the second floor of his house , and after that date he do not go down stair , except on such occasion a he felt well enough to take a short ride in Central Park , accompany by Dr. Douglas. His strength gradually waste away , and his sleeplessness increased. To overcome the insomnia anodyne and strong coffee be prescribe , but these fail to bring the desired relief , and finally , a a last resort , on March 17 , a hypodermic injection of morphia be given. The dose be a very small one , but it induce the sleep which the patient required. On March 8 a consultation of physician be hold , attend by Drs. Barker , Douglas , Sands , and George F. Shrady. Gen. Grant be quite feeble , although he be able to walk across his library and seat himself in his chair for the examination of his throat. It be find that the ulceration of the posterior pillar of the right fauces have extend , and that the perforation at the base of the anterior pillar have increase , so that it internal edge be convert into a small bridle of tissue. The entire soft palate be uniformly redden and swell , and the right posterior border of the tongue be indurate from a point just in front of the anterior pillar of the fauces a far back a could be reach by the finger. The most grateful local application to the throat , next to the spray of a 4 per cent solution of cocaine , be that of a hot solution of salt and water , in the proportion of five part to the thousand , which the General use occasionally a a gargle. After the consultation the ulcerative process in the anterior pillar extend to the adjoin side of the tongue , and the bridle of tissue bound the perforation of the anterior pillar internally give way on March 11. The General 's digestion be good at this time , and he suffer no pain , but the local malady have perceptibly increase , and the part in the vicinity of the ulceration be become more infiltrated. On March 13 Gen. Grant astonish his family by himself ask for food. He spend a short time in writing , and then still far surprise them by order a chop , which he eat with apparent relish , swallow the fibre as well a the juice. It be the first solid food he have eat in several week , and his indulgence enforce it own penalty in an increased soreness of the throat. The next day , however , he eat another chop for breakfast , and be drive in the Park for a half hour. On March 15 another consultation be hold by Drs. Barker , Douglas , Sands , and Shrady. The conclusion be that the local disease have show no marked tendency during the week toward progressive ulceration. A thorough examination of the General 's throat be make with a view of discuss the expediency of a radical surgical operation for the removal of the cancerous growth. Such a measure would involve the division of the low jaw in the median line , the extirpation of the entire tongue and the great part of the soft palate , together with the removal of the ulcerated and infiltrated fauces and the indurated glandular structure under the right angle of the low jaw. This be decide to be mechanically possible , but the surgeon do not feel inclined to recommend the operation , a there would be no guarantee that the limit of the disease could be reach without immediate risk to life by severe shock to a constitution already much enfeebled. Mrs. Sartoris , the General 's only daughter , Nellie , arrive from Europe on March 20 , and although the physician allow her to have but a short interview with her father for fear of unfavorable effect , her presence in the house seem to exert a beneficial influence on the sufferer , and that night he sleep remarkably well. During the week end March 28 Gen. Grant take several drive in the Park , the effect of which be apparently good , but he continue to suffer from insomnia , to relieve which morphine in small quantity be used. At the consultation hold on March 22 , which be attend by Drs. Douglas , Sands , and Shrady , it be decide that the local disease be still in abeyance , and that the area of ulceration have not perceptibly increased. The swell under the right angle of the low jaw be somewhat great , but the gland be not more indurated , nor have it become more firmly fixed. There be no pain in the act of swallowing , and from all the indication the doctor felt no fear of any sudden failure of the vital power , or of any encroachment of the ulcerative process on the neighboring blood vessels. The conclusion be that the death of the General might by proper treatment be postpone for some little time. On Thursday , March 26 , Gen. Grant , at his own request , be submit to a long examination in regard to his connection with the affair of Grant & Ward , take in the criminal trial against James D. Fish. In this examination he be oblige to do a great deal of talk , and he arose from it somewhat exhaust , but the doctor find no permanent bad effect from his exertions. The first alarm crisis in the General 's illness , which give rise to fear of his speedy death , occur in the early morning hour of Sunday , March 29. He have take a ride late on Saturday afternoon , from which he return apparently in good spirit , though somewhat fatigued. When Dr. Douglas leave him at 11 o'clock that night he be sleep easily , and it be think that he would pass a good night. At about 1 o'clock Sunday morning , however , he begin to toss uneasily in the bed , and awake suddenly with a choke sensation in the throat , which prevent him from breathe except with extreme difficulty. Drs. Douglas and Shrady be hastily summon and find the General suffering from a secretion in the throat which he could not eject. After work nearly an hour with their patient the doctor succeed in relieve him and he be place under the influence of chloroform. The danger be consider so great at this time that Drs. Douglas and Shrady remain at the General 's bedside until 4 o'clock in the afternoon , and Dr. Douglas return at 10 in the evening and pass the night watch with his patient. The result of this violent attack of choking be to leave Gen. Grant very weak , and a a consequence less able than before to struggle with the disease which have fasten upon him. For several day and night he be careful not to assume a recumbent position. He use his chair for sleep purpose as well a rest. He make no exertion of any kind , and be unusually silent. He eat liquid food impassively , and seemingly without inconvenience. Local application reduce the secretion in the throat , and no fear be entertain of a return of the suffocating feeling of Sunday. A fit of cough weaken him greatly and his prospect look cheerless , but on April 1 a change for the good occurred. On the following day his physician predict he would live to see Easter Sunday , and the General 's improvement become so mark a to be a subject of general comment. He grow bright and chatty , and ask if he might not take a drive. His family begin to think that the disease have take a permanently favorable turn. For three or four day after this , although Gen. Grant be weak and despondent , he do not become noticeably worse. Indeed , help by anodyne , he pass the much dread dawning hour without a recurrence of severe attack until April 5 , when he be seize with violent coughing , and the family be summon to what they fear would be the closing scene. On the night of April 7 a fit of cough bring on hemorrhage , from which grave result be again feared. But that occurrence turn out to be of real benefit , for it loosen the hardened secretion that coat the mucous membrane of the affected part , and in a few day they be dislodge , leave a clean surface of throat. From this time improvement continue steadily and with comparative rapidity for a week. On April 11 and 12 his physician leave him unattended during part of each day. The experiment be premature , for on the night of April 12 he have a relapse , which last for two days. Then his improvement gain something in permanency. He walk down stair on April 16. On April 20 he be permit to go to drive. He resume work on his book during the ensue week , during which also he celebrate his sixty-third birthday. From talk too much while engage in dictation he be prostrate two or three time , but his condition suffer no serious impairment until the week begin about May 13. Then the cancerous trouble , which have be quiescent since improvement begin , again asserted itself. On May 16 he seem unusually depressed. On the advice of Dr. Douglas he take a ride through a part of Madison-avenue in a street car instead of a carriage ride through Central Park. The change be consider advisable on account of the malarious condition of the Park. Upon his return from this trip his manner give his family much uneasiness. His physician decide that his depression of mind be due to the state of the weather. Mind and body , they maintain , need a change of scene and air. With occasional slight change for the good the patient remain in this condition for a couple of weeks. The swell in his throat become gradually enlarge , and on the beginning of June have assume painfully large proportions. His voice also grow weak , and at time become a mere whisper. The advisability of remove the General to the country have be thoroughly discuss by his physician , the latter conclude that to prolong his life a change of air have become absolutely necessary. On June 17 , accompany by the member of his family and Dr. Douglas , Gen. Grant be take to Mount McGregor , where the cottage of Mr. Joseph W. Drexel have be place at his disposal. He suffer much pain on the journey , and at it conclusion be greatly exhausted. He spend a wakeful night and on the succeeding day seem ready to give up the fight. He write a note to Col. Fred Grant and another to Dr. Douglas. Each contain a simple death message. The General felt his end approaching and confess his inability to continue the struggle for life. Dr. Douglas at once telegraph for Dr. Sands , and the latter reach Mount McGregor on June 18. He find Gen. Grant have improve during the night. Both doctor pronounce him not to be in immediate danger. On the following day he be weak than usual and pass a weary night. On the night of June 20 he sleep for five continuous hours. This be the first really good sleep he have enjoy since he have leave New-York. On June 28 he be able to do some work on his memoirs. For several day his condition be encouraging , but the case thereafter be one of increase exhaustion. The Patient in the Sick Room His Bravery While Suffering and His Thoughtfulness for Others The story of Gen. Grant 's patience under suffering , if it could be fully and faithfully tell , would be as pathetic a anything ever written. Fortitude in the face of linger death ; a calm exterior when the truth could no longer be conceal from his family and friend , and when all the manifestation of his companion be of solicitous fear ; a brave heart and placid face when hope be go ; an unceasing anxiety to do for himself while strength last and to save others trouble -- these be conspicuous feature in his demeanor. He have be a sufferer for 19 month , almost without interruption. From first to last he bore himself the same. The fall which make him take his bed happen a he be engage in an act of generosity. It have be his habit to make present of money or other gift to his servant at the holiday season. The accident happen in this way : On reach his carriage he draw from his pocket a twenty-dollar bill and offer it to his coachman a a Christmas gift. To hand it to the coachman he have to step round the carriage stone near the curb. As he extend his arm he slip on the icy pavement and fell heavily on his hip against the curb and step stone. He be carry into the house and keep his bed for several week , pleurisy in a severe form follow the accident. This be Gen. Grant 's first real sickness. It come upon him when he be nearly 62 year old. Accustomed to outdoor life , with a constitution that have withstand hardship without number , from the malarial attack of a Southern climate during four year of campaigning , in which he never spar himself , to the strain and harassment of two term in the White House of exceptional excitement and responsibility , it be not unnatural to expect that he would be impatient of sick room restraint. But his self-command never fail him. He could not hide wholly the physical sign of his malady , but neither his expression nor voice betray him. He be always kind , always undemonstrative of pain , never murmuring , and fully dispose to bear his affliction with the least possible annoyance to those about him. When at last he be able to leave the sick room he have to do it with the aid of crutches. No one know how much of a humiliation it be to the old soldier to go about in this way until after the crutch be lay aside. Even then he mention it in a bantering spirit. `` Two leg be always good enough for me , '' he say , `` and I sha n't want four again. '' By the time the General cease to be an acute sufferer from his injured hip and it attendant disease neuralgic pain come upon him. Sometimes they accompany the pleural fever , when it seem to him a though the vein of his head and body would burst. Breathing at such time be labor and painful. He would sit in his chair or lie on the bed with his hand clinch and his jaw compress , without a groan or syllable of complaint escape him. When the physician be near he would tell them simply how he felt , rather understate his sufferings. The habitual calmness and quiet manner in which he report his condition to those who be about him professionally be for a long time misleading. Indeed , it be not until his frame begin to waste and his voice to weaken that the physician fully understand his silent endurance. He never mean to mislead any one in regard to his condition. The habit of say little about it be due to his desire to avoid give trouble. No patient could be more considerate than he of the feeling and comfort of those who attend him. When ask if he be suffer severely -- and such be usually the case , of late month especially -- he would respond with a simple `` Yes , '' and then rouse himself to an effort to turn the conversation to another subject. And while scrupulous never willfully to misstate his suffering , although ever disincline to make show of them in any way , he expect , also , that no one would mislead him. The appearance of the cancer in June last year foreshadow the end to him long before any one else but the doctor apprehend fatal results. One of his first question when his throat be examine be , `` Is it cancer ? '' His suspicion amount almost to a conviction that it be , and when he be inform that it be epithelioma he be not long in ignorance of what be mean and imply by that term. So long a the physician be hopeful that the cancer might be of a benign nature , mean that there be a chance of keep it in check by tone up the system , Gen. Grant be hopefully disposed , but the rapid progress of the disease , the decay of his strength , and the attenuation of his frame soon convince him of what the end would be and about how long he could expect to live. He accept the logic of this discovery without a murmur. Visitors to the sick room , especially after it become definitely know that the cancer be of a malignant type , invariably come away impress by the cheerful demeanor of the General. Such concern a he show be only in regard to his memoirs. His only remain ambition be to finish them. The completion of the first volume , in December , be hasten by the General 's apprehension that he have no time to lose. Leaving the detail of revision to Col. Grant he go into the preparation of the second volume with as much vigor a he could command. His library and sleeping room adjoined. The library contain his note , and record of the war , handily arrange for reference. As soon a the General have breakfast -- his food have be almost entirely liquid since last Fall and his chief diet milk and egg -- Col. Fred Grant and Gen. Badeau be in the habit of join him for work on his book. This be usually do in the library. The General have not be able to do dictation for a long time. It be easier for him to write , the strain on his throat making extend speech painful. The physician have also interdict much talk , a it would aggravate the disease , and Gen. Grant be punctilious in obey them. Sometimes the General could not sit at the table. When that happen his portfolio be place on the arm of his chair , on which also he rest his elbow. Then in few word he would direct his assistant to read his note to him a he want them. This work be slow , but it do not tax him heavily , and although it take him a long time to write a page he could pile up a very good showing for a sick man by night. On day when the General felt unable to write he frequently indicate portion of his note from which he want abstract prepared. Thus frequently , when quite sick , he map out enough work to keep his helper busy for two or three days. At the end of the third week in March the book have be carry to the operation attend the crossing of the James , in the Summer of 1864 , about nine month before the surrender of Lee. The rapid progress make by the disease toward the close of March necessitate the discontinuance of work on his book. He lay down his pen without the expectation of write another line of his memoir , and give comparatively little thought to them for a month. Toward the end of April his thought turn once more to his memoir , and on the 1st day of May he surprise and delight his family and friend by resume work upon them. While the preparation of the book occupy the General 's mind more seriously than anything else , he be not unmindful of other demand upon him. The house naturally be overrun with caller almost daily since early in March. One of the few thing about which the General allow himself to express concern be that his friend should not be deny the privilege of see him. `` Any one that really want to see me , '' he often say , `` ought not to be send away. '' Despite his wish , it be at time consider best for him to be leave undisturbed , even by intimate friends. Col. Grant 's discretion be rely on to meet these difficulties. That be one of the few thing that be keep from the General. He never felt too sick to see his friend , even to the last. They relieve the tedium of his suffering , and brighten up his spirits. His welcome to visitor be always cordial. From the time he become a sufferer from neuralgia the General have to wear some indoor protection for his head. During the Fall and Winter it be a knit woolen cap. That lessen the frequency of the attack but do not prevent them. When they recur in conjunction with the soreness of his throat , his pain be agonizing. The most effectual and quick remedy for the neuralgia be an application of very hot cloths. Many time , the pain come suddenly , he excuse himself from visitor long enough to have the cloth apply and then resume his talk a though nothing have happened. It be the rule with him , whatever his pain , not to obtrude it further than be really necessary upon the attention of his visitor or his family. From Col. Grant he conceal nothing. The Colonel be his most constant attendant. He know of every change , every step in the progress of the disease , and on that account while the physician be give out hopeful report his utterance on the subject of the General 's condition be despondent. But no one else in the family know the whole truth about how the General suffer , and it seem at time a though the doctor hardly more than suspect it. Callers on the General be thus naturally mislead by his appearance and manner. The General be sadly reduce in flesh during the Winter. From probably 180 pound he waste to 125 or less. His frame and limb show emaciation. But his face hold it fullness and color quite well , and his voice be as good a could be expect in a sick man. It be the common remark of those who saw him before he leave the city , but when his death be consider a matter of day , that he do not look nearly as bad a they have expect to find him. So many of them say that to him that he practice the innocent deception on caller of receive them with a small robe throw over his limbs. As the emaciation be thus in some degree conceal , he have much less the appearance of a sick man. The General be incline , singularly , consider his habitual reticence , to talk much more than be good for him during his cancerous trouble. Whether it be a natural inclination to talk or a stubborn purpose to conquer the obstacle in his way can not be know , but he talk more in sickness than have be his habit in health , so his friend think , and sometimes he be so chatty that it be necessary to chide him. He be always good-tempered under correction of this kind , while evidently gratify that the disease be not powerful enough to prevent his talk if his will take a turn that way. When not in humor to try his strength of speech he be at all time a good listener. Occasionally during the last month of his residence in the city he walk about his room when visitor be there , or follow them into the hall with his woolen gown hang about him and help by his cane. At such time his attempt to conceal his infirmity be pitiful. `` He come to the head of the stair with me , '' one visitor say , `` with his gown and cane and electric skullcap , walk quite briskly for a sick man , but he be a very sick man. '' Until the last he take nourishment as generously a the doctor suggested. His throat be sore , and it be an effort for him to swallow. The ulceration at the root of the tongue be deaden by cocaine. To avoid irritation liquid food be prescribed. His diet rarely vary from beef soup , beef tea , and egg beat in milk. But at breakfast time his easy chair be wheel up to the grate fire and he sip his nourishment a daintily and cozily a though it be food of his choice , although he never have appetite for it. The only instance of his eat with genuine relish be when he be allow a little solid food. Dr. Douglas use to say of him that he be never hungry and never sleepy , but that he force himself to eat well , and , so far a will could control sleep , it be exercise in it full strength. Unfortunately it become powerless in this respect. Insomnia be the General 's bane all Winter. He have be trouble more or less with it since his first sickness a year ago , but it grow upon him most irksomely after his frame have waste , and when he need nothing so much a sleep to keep his vitality up to the point of resistance to dangerous encroachments. For hour at a time he would lie in bed with his eye close so that his attendant might get rest , think him asleep , but he be perfectly awake. The doctor , too , habitually credit him with more sleep than he get , because of his way of close his eye and lie quietly whenever they say they want him to sleep. The room in which the General spend a great part of his time from November last until the middle of June face the street on the second floor of his house at No. 3 East Sixty-sixth-street , extend across the front. The bow window , from which there be three angle of vision , light his sleeping room on the west side of the house. The library , into which the sleeping room open , be on the east side and be light by two flat windows. Mrs. Grant 's room be directly back of the General 's sleeping room , and be connect with it by fold doors. Both the General 's sleeping room and the library be plainly furnished. Two leather-covered easy chair , which the General usually occupy ; a lounge , a few plain chair , and a mahogany bedstead , with a soft modest carpet and plain window hanging , comprise nearly all the belonging of the room. A crayon picture of Judge Dent , Mrs. Grant 's father , hung over the bed , but the wall be otherwise almost without decoration. The library shelf be fill with record , memoranda , military book , and other aid to the General 's crown work. On the wall hang his commission a Lieutenant-General and certificate of membership in the Grand Army and various organization , mostly of a military character. The office , or work room , and the sick room adjoin also at Mount McGregor. Both be at the back of the cottage -- the office at the corner and the sick room inside. The latter be a medium size apartment with two window look out on a wooded slope. It be plainly but comfortably furnish by Mr. Drexel , the owner of the cottage. The General 's easy chair , which be send up from the city , be also put into it , a be a cot for the nurse , Harrison. A door open from it into the parlor , as well a one into the office. The sick room wall get their share of the many picture of the General that be send from various quarters. It have be propose that the cottage be deeded to the Government , that a fence be put around it , and that it be preserve about a the Grant family leave it. Mr. Drexel have consent to do this should it seem advisable. He have ornament the room with bric-a-brac take from his Saratoga home. These article he would remove , but he would leave the furniture , carpet , and other belonging a they be in the General 's lifetime. When abed the General have a fashion of curl up into the small possible space. He lay always on a small hair pillow , but take in his arm an immense feather pillow , which he hug close to his cheek , with his arm under it , a a child sleeps. His crouch position enable him easily to leave the bed in an instant. He seldom give notice of an intention to move , and surprise his attendant often by appear in the middle of the floor on his way to his favorite easy chair. This be a square , roomy chair , upholstered and trim with fine leather. The seat be long ago soften for him by a feather pillow. A table , with his medicine and whatever else he have use for , usually stand close to the arm of the chair. On seat himself he almost invariably rest his arm across the corner of the table. Another armchair or a large footstool , both of which be handy , be then roll up in front of him for his foot and legs. After he begin to use a robe to cover his limb the footstool be in demand oftener than the second easy chair. Although the patient rarely mention it it be long know to his attendant that whenever he leave his bed for the chair he be suffer , sometimes nervously , at time from soreness of the throat or base of the tongue , and sometimes from other pains. Such mental trouble a keep him awake bore on his book and on the future of his family All of his friend know how anxious he be to finish the book. Few hear anything of the other source of concern. When he buy the house in which he die a mortgage remain on it for $ 52,000. He mean to give the house to his wife , and worry that his affair deny him the comfort of provide a place for her that she might call home after his death. These be the only two source of worriment. He accept a inevitable his physical decay and say little about it. The cruel report at one time publish of his worrying over the course in Congress of the Retirement bill be utterly baseless. His mind do not descend to sordid or political considerations. When the General be in his easy chair he like to see his family and his friend about him , unless he felt very miserably. His daughter be his chief delight. He love the music of her voice , and her caresses. Scarcely a day pass when they be not leave for an hour or so together , that she might read to him the news and chat with him. At such time he lay back in his chair with closed eye , comment occasionally on what she read and enjoy every minute of her company. It be his usual custom of late to keep his eye close when sit up , though there be whole day at time when he be a wide awake a a person in health. His desire for the company of his daughter be strong also during his hour of suffering. He seem to want her always near him when the slight danger threatened. She could comfort and cheer him quick than any one else. This devotion be fully reciprocate , for her thought be all with him , and often when he sleep she glide into his room to see if anything could be do for him. His suffering be thus lighten by cheerful and love companionship. Some one of the family be always with him. His little grandchild open the day for him with sweet greeting , and through the daylight hour Mrs. Grant and the young lady of the household be never far from him. At even the entire family , with whoever else might be present , gather for prayer and quiet and affectionate intercourse , and then , after the doctor 's visit , the night watch begin with the Colonel and the General 's body servant a the regular sick room attendants. The General enjoy these evenings. No suggestion of gloom ever mar them , although he know that they would soon be impossible. Early in March Gen. Badeau show him paper which he think might be of use in the memoir after a while. The General look at them , pass his hand across his forehead , and return them , say : `` They be interest , but I sha n't have time to use them. I shall last only about 30 day longer. '' Yet to the end , the General follow the direction of his doctor with a soldier 's obedience. He know they could do little , but he mean to help them as much a lay in his power. An incident on Sunday afternoon , March 29 , show how Gen. Grant take his apprehension that the end be approaching. He have just fairly rouse from the effect of the powerful anodyne under which the physician have keep him during the morning. They have be with him for 12 or 13 hour , follow the alarm attack of the previous night. On awake Gen. Grant saw Dr. Shrady at his bedside. `` Well , '' he say , look quizzically at his physician , `` what do you think of me ? '' `` I think you have a good deal of backbone -- a good deal of it leave , General , '' be the cheery response. The General be silent a moment. Then look straight at the doctor he say , with no shade of feeling in his low voice , `` I think I be nearly use up. '' `` Oh , no , '' the doctor go on , `` there be a good deal to you yet. You have go through too much to give out easily. '' `` Yes , '' the General say , somewhat reassure , `` it have blow pretty hard my way sometimes. '' `` That be true , '' his companion continue , `` but an oak , with it root imbed in the rock and earth , ca n't be blow over even in it age. It take more than one hurricane to uproot it. '' The General smile at the simile , well pleased with it evidently , and close his eye pass into a peaceful slumber. `` His courage be yet unshaken , '' Dr. Shrady say afterward to Col. Grant , in relate this incident. `` I do n't expect him to be scared. Fright be n't in his nature. But I never saw such composure in a man who thoroughly comprehend his situation. Our hope and reliance be in his faith in u , which never wavers. '' On the following Tuesday morning , when the General awoke , relieve somewhat from the exceed weakness induce by Saturday night 's attack , Dr. Shrady say to him : `` Now , General , there be a fight on hand. We rely on you to help u out. You will have to fight for u again a you once did. '' `` When be that ? '' the patient asked. `` When you have the army behind you. '' `` Yes , '' be the grim response , `` but I have n't the army behind me now. '' A little later he clear all doubt a to the character of his thought , when he break the silence by say , `` What do you doctor know about me ? I may go off in an hour or last a month. Can you tell which any good than I can ? '' He look for death in that dreadful attack of Saturday night , March 28. Life have hardly any more attraction for him. He have felt the gland of his throat swelling and closing tighter over the air passage , until he have to catch at every breath and when the secretion gather in this little opening each moment be one of simple agony , a perpetual struggle for air. The terrible feeling of suffocation and pain find expression from his lip only once during that awful night , when in his torture , he exclaim , `` I can not stand this. I shall die. '' Yet no other word of complaint escape then or since. The weary , weakening day that follow , when he felt his vitality ebbing and his breath come with a rasp sound over a surface of throat advance to the last stage of his disease , he be unmurmuring. He saw the approach of the end and spoke of it sometimes , but without regret for himself. To the last he be kind , patient , and regardful of the comfort of those about him. Of death he speak in his last day , a he have ever speak , a though it be only a journey to be undertake without fear. The Devotion of the Family The General 's Suffering Relieved by the Tenderness of His Dear Ones The devotion of the family to the General in his sickness be not lose upon the most casual observer here. It be never ostentatious and differ in no degree from that which have make the charm of home life in New-York. But in this retreat , where the focus of outside gaze could more easily penetrate domestic relation ; where , indeed , conventional privacy be displace by rural freedom , and where the cottage and cottage life have be the chief attraction , the happiness of the family and the mutual love that bind them to each other and to the General have always be a subject of gratified comment. One do not need to be obtrusive to see what pleasure that household derive from itself , or how comforting be these relation to the General 's decline days. He be cheer to the last by the sympathy and love and hope of those dear to him. Days when even his strong will would have despair be brighten by these influence , and often because of his family , to spare them distress , he rouse to a semblance of activity and interest when he be ill able to do so , and find that the effort reward itself in renew vigor. Whatever his condition there be rarely a day when he fail to give some time to his family. They know that when he keep his sick room it be because he could not leave it , and they be careful at such time not to disturb him , and when , that they might be with him , he send for them their sympathy take the form of hope and cheer , call his mind away from pain and trouble as far a might be. His delight be to have them gather around him on the porch , or in the parlor at nightfall , and to listen to their conversation , though he could take little part in it. They rarely sit with him long at a time outdoors , for mindful of his enfeebled state they prefer to leave him to himself rather than risk weary him , but at evening , in the parlor , it be always he who decide how long the gathering should last , leave it a he felt the approach of fatigue. As he have be full of quiet humor when in health his inclination to the pleasantry remain with him into sickness , and many of his little write slip will be preserve a memento of this trait of his disposition , linger beyond his power of speech. He enter into family talk and gossip with much of his former interest , restrain , of course , by his infirmity , yet sometimes with an approach to real vivacity. He appreciate what others be do for him , and exert himself always to make full return , so far a he might. The devotion of Mrs. Grant be touching. As careful a any one not to tax him when he need only rest , she be never beyond easy call , and have no think apparently but for his comfort. Her greeting be the first to cheer him in the morning after the doctor 's treatment. It be her chair that be draw close to his on the porch. Whenever he want company she be part of it , and many hour in his last day be spent with her alone. Often they could be see together when not a word be speak , mere companionship satisfy them. Visitors see them thus be wont to remark that it be a though nothing so well suit them a that their last day should be a be their first , sufficient for each in the company of the other. So anxious be she to be at his side that she would not leave the cottage at any time for any purpose , even decline to go to the hotel with the family for meals. And when the General be confine to his sick room or need absolute rest and seclusion at any time , she would retire to privacy and comfort herself with prayer in his behalf. Her faith never waver that her intercession spar him so long. The devotion of Col. Grant be also most marked , a it have be at home. His service to the General be beyond value. A light burn late into the night be not specially conspicuous in New-York , for even on the quiet block on Sixty-sixth-street the sufferer 's home would not be single out on that account. But here , where early sleep be the custom , many an hour have the lamp in the office room at the cottage be the only one to be see , while over the table the Colonel lean , busy often past midnight with the General 's affairs. The family mail do not become less here than it be in the city. Letters to the General ran from 150 upward a day ; proof revision demand attention ; the thousand and one thing of domestic direction and for family comfort need an overseer. All this fell to the Colonel , assist by Mr. Dawson , the General 's secretary and stenographer. Work on the book , next to his anxiety for the happiness of the family , be the General 's chief concern. In this the Colonel be an efficient helper. The General take much pleasure also with the others of the family. The sunny , affectionate way of Mrs. Sartoris be ever a charm. He like the quick wit of his son Jesse and the sturdy love of the son who bear his name. The prattle and caress of his grandchild also please him. Affection lighten his sufferings. Dr. Douglas be almost like one of the family. In devotion to the General none could surpass him. For the best part of a year he give practically all of his time to the General , and from admire him he grow to love him. Scarcely a night for month do he get full rest , and by day he watch the General with loyalty and diligence that could have but the most commendable inspiration. Being nearly of the General 's age , the work be specially severe on him , and he show it in his appearance. Once he have to call Dr. Shrady to his relief , because he be so much worn that his family begin to fear for him rather than for the General. But even then his activity be hardly suspend , and it be soon renew at full pace again. The General be quick to appreciate what the doctor be do for him , and fully reciprocate the affection that prompt it. He have a way of report to the doctor his condition. One day , when he have write about the sort of night he have pass and how he felt the disease have progress , note in detail the change in his symptom , he write to the doctor a follow : `` I would not have you think that I be usurp your function , but I detail to you the phase of the disease , a they appear to me , for the benefit of medical men in deal with sufferer from the same affliction in the future. '' The General 's conversation , restrict a it be by his infirmity , be usually entertaining , and often instructive. One night , when the family be gather about him in the parlor , talk turn on the origin of famous epigrammatic sentences. Some think that such sentence be usually the result of long thought. The General 's `` Let u have peace '' be bring up. On be ask how it be write , whether at a moment 's thought , or after dwell long upon the subject of his letter , he write : `` The story that 'Let u have peace ' be an afterthought be not true , nor be the sentence spontaneous. It follow the rest of the letter of acceptance a a natural sequence. The first part lead up to it. '' It do not escape the General 's attention that everything he write be carefully preserve by those to whom he address his slips. One night he show that this amuse him by a pleasant allusion to it in a note to Dr. Douglas. `` I notice , '' he write , `` that when any one get a slip it be carefully fold up and saved. No one throw one away. I think I shall have to stop writing , or some day I will be haul over the coal for my English. '' `` Whatever may be the criticism on what you have write , General , '' Dr. Douglas promptly reply , `` no one can ever assail your English. '' The General smile , and his output of slip be not thereafter stinted. Every one , of course , want one. Dr. Douglas be the envy of people at the hotel , a he go about with a memorandum book thick with slip , and he be besiege with application by mail for specimen ; but he rarely part with one. How the Memoirs Were Written Dictating to a Stenographer and Personally Revising the Proofs Necessity prompt Gen. Grant to write his book. He might have turn to literary work late in life have not financial disaster overtaken him. He have a fine library , especially on military subjects. Mrs. Grant have urge him for a long time to utilize that and his personal record for a book of his own. Had he take her advice he would have go to work at a book instead of try to become a financier. With the crash , which come too late in his life for him to recover and start ahead again , his only solicitude be for his family and the others dependent upon him. `` I must provide for my family , '' be his frequent exclamation. `` What can I do to provide for my family ? '' Then recur the suggestion that he take up literary work and write his memoirs. He have little heart for it , but a it be a case of necessity he set about find what would be the best way of put his memoir into shape. The Rev. Dr. Newman suggest table talk a a way likely to be attractive and popular , and propose that the General should take subject singly , and after have prim himself with one should get a stenographer and talk it off to him at a sitting. Other plan be suggest , and when the General have consider all of them he make his decision. No time then be lose in begin work , and none be waste in prosecute it , a every one knows. The account of his manifestation of solicitude about his ability to finish it would in themselves make a volume. When his intention be know publisher besiege him. Their offer vary from 10 to 20 per cent net , all condition upon the completion and sale of the book. Then Samuel L. Clemens come forward. He know that the family need ready money. He offer 20 per cent on the gross receipt of the book , with $ 40,000 cash advance. The contract be make through him with C. L. Webster & Co. , the money to be pay to Mrs. Grant. That end all cavil , and the General go ahead with his immediate need supplied. How his will keep him up to fulfill his part of the contract in spite of an agonizing sickness that be always drain his strength and vitality , and that bring him four time so low that death seem imminent , have be many time told. In the compilation and arrangement of his record , the General be assist until along in the Spring by Gen. Adam Badeau , as well a by Col. Grant. Gen. Badeau , from have be the General 's military secretary , and have write his military life , besides have enjoy more substantial indication of the General 's high personal esteem , be commonly regard a the General 's mainstay in the preparation of the memoirs. Reports get out that Gen. Badeau 's pen have be employ in write up whole block of the book , imply that Gen. Grant , on account of his sickness and his desire to have the book finish , be let Gen. Badeau 's work go out a his own. Such report worry the General. There be no truth in them , and Gen. Badeau protest that he have nothing to do with start them. Matters go on , with Gen. Badeau still assist in hunt up and arrange records. One night early in April , when it be think that the General be die , a definite report come out that he have designate Gen. Badeau a his literary Executor. It be publish in all the paper and commonly believed. Not long after that Gen. Badeau stop go to Gen. Grant's. It be understood that a coolness have spring up between the Grant family and Gen. Badeau. Nothing be make of it at the time , for there be too many other thing to think of , and this apparently small matter do not stand beside them. The Grant family keep the matter secret , regard it a concern only themselves and Gen. Badeau. The latter never spoke of it , and so it drop quietly out of public notice. The first volume of the book be suppose to be complete before the estrangement occurred. Along in June and July evidence reach the General and his family that on or before the publication of the genuine book other book purport to be `` Memoirs of Gen. Grant '' would be issued. They get wind of prospectus so cleverly prepared a to deceive a person of average intelligence. They have reason to believe that the prospectus of Webster & Co. have be appropriate to the use of other publisher to help the sale of bogus memoirs. Suspicion be rouse that piracy have be practice , and that canvasser be out for not less than three distinct book , each claiming to be the General 's memoirs. On top of these discovery come the most painful rumor of all , which be that tempt offer have be make for Gen. Badeau 's service in connection with some such work a that indicated. The family be aghast , and the General felt keen disappointment and horror at such a possibility. He be chagrin to think that his last and only possible mean of provide for his family be likely to be hamper by piracy. He be shock that the name of his old friend , to whom he have be a benefactor , whom he have trust fully , should be connect with any such scheme. He could not believe it of him. At first he be so incredulous of that report that he would not address Gen. Badeau about it , think that it would be an insult to him. But with the idea of defeating , so far a might be , the end of piracy or perversion he remodel the first volume of the book after he come to Mount McGregor , drop the separate campaign in order to treat of the war a a whole , with the campaign a incident to it. Essential change be make pursuant to this new plan. Disquieting rumor continue to come in. Mr. Clemens visit the General for the purpose of dispose of certain business with the family. The rumor be casually communicate to him. He treat them lightly , say that the publisher could take care of the pirates. The matter then rest for a while. But the General grow restless. His mind have not be reassured. He do not believe in fight in the dark , and he grow impatient under the stricture on his old friend. On July 13 , he write a letter to Gen. Badeau. That be the day when the General have recover in great measure from the fatigue induce by his reception to the Mexican editors. Mrs. Grant sit in the room with him , but do not know what he be writing. None of the family know what it be until some time after he have finished. Then it lay in the house for several day before it be copy and send off , that it might be revise by him if any change occur to him. It be a kind but firm letter , recall what they have be to each other and detail what he have heard. He be still distrustful of rumor , although apparently well authenticate , and want to give his old friend a chance to justify himself and deny the rumor if it be not true. The tone of the letter partook of kindness , pain , disappointment , and paternal reproof. It must have occur to many , remember the announcement early in June of the completion of the book , that there be something incompatible in that announcement and frequent reference from here of continued work on the book. The book be carry to a point in June at which it might have be consider complete if the General have die then. But apart from the change make necessary a above , he felt and often say that he could work profitably on it every day up to the time of it publication , if he have strength enough. It be his ambition to make it complete and accurate. He foresee that it would be critically read and would be an authority on the subject treated. When he have cover everything that his original and amend plan contemplate , he have furnish enough manuscript to fill 200 page more than the contract demanded. That do not worry him , for , indeed , he go on writing a suggestion occur to him , add on an average a paragraph on his work days. That be a good day 's work for him. Once or twice he write considerably more. But the main work with which he occupy his mind , when the remodeling be do , be in elimination. The book be brighten by anecdotal reminiscences. Many of the best anecdote be eliminated. He be exceedingly anxious not to hurt the feeling of any one , and for fear that some of his anecdote , although relate in perfect good humor , might be misconstrue , he sacrifice them. He have an innocent but funny story about a General who be now in politics. It be cut out for fear that it might be perverted. There be a good story about Gen. Burnside , but l some of Burnside 's family or friend might feel sensitive about it he strike it out. There be many instance of that kind. Some of his record be exact in figure , show the force that he carry into various operations. He drop exactness several time for round number for the sake of avoid controversy with other authority on the same subjects. He do not fear criticism , but he want to steer clear of dispute over small matter and to keep his book above personal cavil and free from thing of a personal nature that might be torture into evil construction. Good thing that would have live in story and to which no one but himself could see objection be thus destroyed. To such correction and to other alteration in the proof the Colonel and Mr. Dawson attended. By their diligence all the revise proof for the first volume of the work be mail to the publisher on July 11. That be a great relief to all , for the General 's mind could not be quiet on that part of the book until it be beyond his reach. Faith in His Doctors ' Skill Gen. Grant 's Written Expression of His Satisfaction with Their Treatment Many of the slip on which the General write to Dr. Douglas will be of value in the history of the case should the treatment ever need vindication. The others the doctor choose to preserve a memento of the affection that increase between the two men during this long and try ordeal. The General have a keen appreciation of the jealousy and criticism to which the medical staff be subject , and he foresee that criticism would pick busily to find flaw after his death with the diagnosis , the treatment , and his apparent helplessness in the hand of his attendants. Outcroppings of kindly and well mean criticism which be prompt by friend reach him on the mountain. It be a common and favorite saying of one of his most devoted friend that the General never go into a battle merely to keep off the enemy but to win , and that it be out of all harmony with his life and habit that this last and most serious battle should have be undertake on the defensive. It be recall that the doctor from the beginning have never think of cure the General , but merely of ease and prolong his life. The man and the occasion , it be thus argue , demand vigorous treatment that would set out to cure , not to delay. It be urge also that this case ought to produce a degree of aggressive medical skill which would relieve the profession of the need of say long that this dread disease be incurable. It be love for the General that suggest such criticism. The General do not agree with it. As indicate in all part of the account of his sickness and at every stage to which it bring him , he believe in his physicians. They be do , he think , not only the best they could for him , but the best that could be done. His daily report be make in order to place the physician in full possession of all the fact of interest. He do not suppose them unobservant , but , know that the case would be study closely , he want to acquaint them with what might be beyond their observation , so that the case , when write , would leave nothing to be explained. Lest his motive in this should be misunderstood he write note every now and then indicate that he know what the disease be do and what the end must be , and that all that be possible be do for him. He want Dr. Douglas , his most constant attendant , to know that his care and watchfulness be not unappreciated by him ; that he realize that to such devote attendance his life be save in the Spring and into the Summer , and that , salubrious a be his surroundings on the mountain , he felt that the relapse he suffer even then could have be combat only by constant and affectionate attention , such a Dr. Douglas bestowed. He believe Dr. Douglas be just the man for the occasion , and often say so. His feel toward the others of the staff be also kind. Dr. Shrady come next to Dr. Douglas in the General 's affection , a he be next in his acquaintance. But all these incidental note , expressive of his satisfaction with his treatment , be naturally address to Dr. Douglas , and be give under circumstance that would be construe to apply to the attention and treatment of Dr. Douglas. On July 11 the General write a statement about this matter to stand a a defiance to criticism , after his death. He have be very weak and listless since the precede Wednesday , when he give a reception to the Mexican editors. Three day have pass since that reception. Dr. Douglas have be so assiduous in his care of the General in that interval that he exhaust himself , and have send for Dr. Shrady to relieve him of part of the sick room duty so that he might recuperate. He go into the sick room that morning. The General do not need attention , and the doctor turn to go out , when he be call back. `` I notice you come in here often , day and night , '' the General said. `` Why do you watch me so closely ? Do you do it with all your patient ? '' `` I know I come in often when you do n't need me ; often when you do n't know it , '' the doctor replied. `` The reason be that I know that the gaze of the country be turn on this cottage. In one sense I represent that gaze , and it be my duty not to leave you long out of my sight. So I come often when I do n't suppose you will need me , but to see , a the representative of the country , how you be get on. '' `` You be very faithful , '' the General reply , `` I be sorry you have overexert yourself for me. '' The General sat for a while reflectively. Mrs. Grant enter the sick room with a clipping from a Boston class journal which criticise the treatment. That fire the General. Taking up his pad , weak a he be , he begin to write. The task occupy him steadily for nearly two hours. He put away the sheet when he have finished. That even he hand them over to his stenographer. The transcription cover four sheet of commercial note paper. He sign and date the document and hand it over to Dr. Douglas. Nothing could illustrate more kindly his forethought. The paper have not be solicit , there be no previous intimation of it , and to a patient less mindful of others and less grateful than he such a thing probably would never have occurred. The document be as earnest a his indignation could make it. It speak of the disease and the treatment. He be satisfied , it say , that everything that could be do have be do for him. The care and watchfulness of his physician have ease him through his lingering and painful disease and have prolong his life. He be very grateful to them , and believe that good care and more conscientious attention than he be get have never be give a sick man. It could not be question , he think , that he might have command the most noted talent in the country. But he be satisfy that whatever others might have do for him it could not be more than he have received. He be perfectly content -- and have be from the beginning -- to leave the case to the care of the staff of physician who be engage upon it. He want no change make : no one send away and no one add to the staff , and his sanction might be consider a give to the resentment of criticism in regard to the treatment. He believe , he say , that he be well treat than Garfield have be , and that his staff be more competent than Garfield 's regular staff , leave Drs. Agnew and Hamilton , the consult physician , out of account. The General intend this document to stand against criticism , both a to the nature of the disease and the manner and skill with which it be treat , and should it appear in print before the official history of the case be write it will be provoke by seemingly earnest and well base criticism. To the last the General 's confidence in his physician be implicit , and no one grieve more deeply over his death than Dr. Douglas. The General 's Sturdy Piety His Whole Life Molded Upon Religious Principle Gen. Grant 's Christian faith be simple yet sturdy. It combine childlike trustfulness with the intellectual vigor of manhood 's conviction. While never make display of that side of his nature , it be the habit of his life to look to Divine guidance in all of his undertaking , and he attribute his success to the inspiration gather therefrom. Nor be his faith shake by revers , although often in the family circle and with his close friend he express the wish that he be strong in his reliance. `` Oh , if I could only have the faith that my sister , Mrs. Cramer , have , '' he sometimes say , when trial beset him. `` Her trusting nature would meet this trouble and see a bright outcome to it good than I can. '' His admiration be equally strong for the faith of Mrs. Newman , the wife of his friend and Pastor , the Rev. Dr. Newman. Her womanly sympathy be always cheer to him , and during the revers and harassment of the past year or two she lead him to see through the darkness a promise of good day , which strengthen his purpose to bear uncomplainingly and without discouragement what fell to his lot. Family prayer be usual in the household for many year , and some of the most touching scene of the sick room have be the gathering for prayer , to which the family and guest be invited. Scarcely a day have pass since Dr. Newman 's return from the South without one of these gathering , always at the General 's instance , the General sitting in his chair , the family and assembled friend kneel around him. The General 's religious experience date from childhood. He be rear at a reverential hearthstone ; and often in late year he have talk with Dr. Newman about his spiritual training and belief. On that subject he be never reluctant to speak , approach it as freely a any earthly topic. He speak of it to few person , regard it a a matter with which only those whom his heart love be concern ; but in such surroundings his nature be open and confiding. In recall recently the religious training and experience of Gen. Grant , Dr. Newman say : `` He be bring up in the Methodist Episcopal Church. His father 's house be the home of Methodist preacher for over 40 years. The General 's early recollection be associate with the clergy. He have to care for their horses. He remember that the horse be good one and that their owner always insist on their have plenty of oats. Many a time he be send out by his father to take off the saddlebag and put up the horses. Once a preacher be to move from the neighborhood in which the Grants lived. He be to take his family and furniture in a wagon for 200 mile , and want some one to drive for him. Applying to the General 's father for a driver , the old gentleman detail Ulysses , then a lad , for that work. Afterward the preacher report to the boy 's father that never in his life have he have such a good and silent driver. `` The General 's father be a farmer at that time. In late year he live at Covington , Ky. He be a churchgoer always , serve in the Methodist Church a Trustee , Steward , and class leader. Wherever he go he be a ruling spirit in church affairs. He be a man of sterling character , strong will , high purpose , and at time arbitrary. His mother be modest , intelligent , and sunny in spirit. The General inherit her nature. All of his sister be devout Methodists. One of them , Mrs. Cramer , marry a Methodist preacher , now the Minister of the Government at Berne , Switzerland. `` The General be thus indoctrinate in the faith of the church. He hold to those great principle of Christianity all his life. Accepting the Bible a the word of God to man , he regard Christianity a divine. But his mind tend to the sunny side of Christianity. The beneficent result of the Gospel promise to him the glory of the Messiah , the universal triumph of Christianity. `` I become his Pastor in 1869. I have be his guest many times. And at all time , in the White House at Washington or at his cottage in Long Branch , he always have family prayer , in which he usually request me to lead. I call at the White House on his last Sunday there -- his last night in office. Mr. Hayes be then have a reception at John Sherman's. I find the General and Mrs. Grant , with Mr. and Mrs. Sartoris , quietly sit in the Blue Room. We talk a while. Then at the General 's request we all kneel in prayer. `` I have be with him , '' Dr. Newman go on , `` in private and in public and with all class of people. Yet I never hear him , utter a profane word or indulge in an improper story , nor have I ever see him smile approvingly at an immodest story which some person present happen to have the audacity to relate. He be altogether the pure man in conversation of whom I ever have knowledge. During my pastorate of six year in Washington , which include the great part of his Presidency , he be a regular attendant at church. Storm of no kind ever keep him away. He be the most attentive and appreciative listener I ever had. To me he be an inspiration , because of his profound attention and the indirect influence I exert through him on others. He be President of our Board of Trustees and a liberal contributor to the church. His charity be many and unostentatious. One day I be preach on 'Lost Opportunities. ' I have occasion to say that whoever desire to find worthy object of charity could do so with little effort. I recall a visit I have make during the precede week to a soldier 's widow , who be die of consumption , and who , although destitute , be happy in the Christian faith. I mention also a man who have lose his sight at Government work , and who bore his affliction with a saintlike spirit , although he be in distress circumstances. After the service , as soon a the President reach the White House , he send me a twenty dollar bill pin to his card , on which be write , 'Please give $ 10 to that soldier 's widow and $ 10 to that poor blind man. ' I remember receive from him one Christmas Day the following letter : Executive Mansion , December 23 , 1869. Dear Doctor : Inclosed please find my check for $ 100 , for distribution among the poor. Do n't forget the ragged school over on the Island. Yours truly , U. S. Grant. `` His life be full of such deed of quiet charity. '' Recurring to his love of family prayer , the clergyman continue : `` I recall a visit to his Long Branch cottage , where daily we have prayer after breakfast. One morning an English gentleman call while we be at the table. He remain so long that there be no opportunity that day for morning devotions. The next morning the President bring the old family Bible into the breakfast room with him. Handing it over to me he say , 'Doctor , we be cheat out of our prayer yesterday , but to make sure that it shall not happen again we will have devotion after this before breakfast. ' `` After his term at the White House he go abroad. He be specially interested during his tour of the world in American mission , of which he visit a large number. The educational movement connect with these mission appeal strongly to his sympathy. I have a letter from him , write in Japan , in which he unfold the wonderful improvement in moral and educational mission work which have take place in that country under the management of American missions. That work make a deep and lasting impression on his mind. On his return to this country he attend my church in this city , manifest the same deep religious nature a formerly ; the same reverence for God and personal belief in Christianity. He have a wonderful faith in Divine Providence , and believe in special interposition of Providence in the affair of men and nations. I have hear him talk by the hour on that subject , give illustration draw from his own life. `` Once I ask him , I remember , what he consider his most providential experience. Without hesitation he say : 'My resignation from the army in 1854. I be then a Captain. If I have staid in the army I would have be still a Captain on frontier duty at the outbreak of the war and would thus have be deprive of the right to offer my service voluntarily to the country. That opportunity shape my future. ' `` In connection with the sick room I have speak of the prayerful spirit that pervade it , '' Dr. Newman resumed. `` I might add that the General never allow suggestion for the relief of his infirmity to interfere with his reverence for the Sabbath. One Saturday night lately , when he be nervous and weary and very restless , his son , the Colonel , hop to divert his mind , suggest some amusement. The General brighten at the idea of diversion , but presently , with a grave face , he inquire the hour. It be nearly midnight. 'Never mind , ' the General say , with perfect resignation. 'It be too close to the Sabbath to commence any diversion. ' '' A Talk with Sheridan Shiloh and the Valley Campaign -- No Smile at Appomattox Washington , July 23 -- From day to day , and almost hourly , during Gen. Grant 's illness , there have be one inquirer in this city whose concern have be manifest by the earnestness of his question about the brave patient in New-York. In his quiet , unobtrusive , undemonstrative way , Lieut.-Gen. Sheridan , Gen. Grant 's companion in arm , have show that he be pain at the thought of the struggle that be go on between the great soldier and a disease with which his sturdy courage could not hope to successfully contend. While the dispatch have be come in to the office of the General of the Army , and in such moment a he could spare , Gen. Sheridan have talk about his relation with Gen. Grant , their joint effort to overcome the rebellion , and have tell over again the story of some of the most memorable scene in which both of them participated. Gen. Sheridan do not readily take to story telling , particularly when the telling of a story involve reference to his own valorous deeds. His diffidence , great now a it be when he be a boy , be something remarkable in a man who show an absolute lack of diffidence in the face of an enemy. To get anything out of him in the way of incident one must lead him carefully to the point upon which information be desired. Then , in a low , simple , straightforward way he will tell his story. It will be unimaginative , without attempt at dramatic effect , and without a shade of boastfulness. Like Gen. Grant , Gen. Sheridan have sometimes be call reticent and taciturn. This be only true of him when he speak with stranger or with curious people whom he suspect of a desire to hear him blow his own trumpet. Grant 's Confidence In Sheridan The writer drop in to see him a few day before his departure for the West , and , after chat about Gen. Grant 's condition , express some curiosity to know when he have first come in contact with Gen. Grant. `` Well , '' say the General , `` you see , we be both attach to the same regiment in the army. He have go out of it after the Mexican war , and my service have be continuous from the time I leave West Point until I drift down the Tennessee River a an acting Quartermaster for Gen. Halleck. The battle of Shiloh have just be fought. Our army be rest , a sort of suspension follow the battle. Hearing that Grant and McPherson be both at the front , I take the first opportunity present of report to them. I find Gen. Grant with Gen. McPherson. He be sit in his tent smoke a cigar , and be in his shirt sleeves. Our greeting be pleasant , and he express his gratification that I have be send to the front. I have just go through with the Pea Ridge campaign , and he seem to have the notion that I could be useful to him in the advance through Kentucky and Tennessee. '' `` I be pretty near Grant from that time on until I be send East to take command of all the cavalry in Virginia. When I meet the General at Shiloh he be the same man in manner that he have always be to me. I do not find him reticent. On the contrary , he be a very free and frank talker. He do not need much explanation from me of anything I propose to do , but appear to have entire confidence that I would do the best I could at all times. '' The General refer most pleasantly to the influence exert by Gen. Grant in secure his transfer to the East after the brilliant service he have render at Perryville , Stone Ridge , and Chickamauga. `` Gen. Grant agree with me that whenever it be possible we should fight cavalry with cavalry , and infantry with infantry. He agree with me in my plan of the valley campaign of 1864. The cavalry be take off of guard duty about the army and put to good use. I saw Gen. Grant occasionally. He be always the same in manner. Never elate by victory , he be also never cast down by defeat. He meet all sort of fortune stolidly. His confidence in himself never failed. Under all circumstance he treat his associate with the same simple courtesy. Plainer in dress than most of his subordinate , he be so because he have no thought for dress , his mind be upon the great task he have set himself. He come to see me in September. Talked over the plan I have make for fight Early , and have faith in my confidence that I could whip his army. Saw that no other instruction be necessary than the injunction to 'go in.' He never visit me again for the purpose of give me order , and in that way testify his full faith in my desire and ability to comprehend and carry out his plans. His regard for me be show again after the valley campaign , and when I have be make a Brigadier-General in the regular army , by the order for a salute of 100 guns. '' Together at Appomattox With great interest Gen. Sheridan refer to the campaign event follow his bold push of March , 1865 , to the south of Richmond , precede the brilliant event in which he be to take so conspicuous a place and win such lasting renown. `` At Dinwiddie Court House , '' say he , `` come Grant 's order about end the battle before go back. We be in bivouac. The weather be rainy and the road muddy. Wagons be everywhere up to their hubs. The general movement forward appear to be ended. At daybreak on the 30th , I think , when everything be swamp , I ride back to see Gen. Grant. The infantry be huddle together , wet and cold. Gen. Grant 's tent be in a sand field , and be a cheerless a place a could be found. He meet me cordially , and suggest that if the cavalry could move up a little it would be good than an absolute standstill. I assent to the suggestion -- it be all that could be do , say 'good-bye ' to Gen. Grant , ride back to my command , and give the order to move on Five Forks. I do not see Gen. Grant again , except to get a glimpse of him at Jetersville , until ten day later , when I join him a he go to receive the surrender of Lee at Appomattox. `` The story of the surrender of Lee have be so often tell , '' say Gen. Sheridan , `` that nothing could be add to it by me. Gen. Grant , arrive at Appomattox Court House with Col. Newhall on the 9th of April after a long and hard ride , be spatter with mud from his soft hat to his boot , in which he wear his trousers. I have be rid hard , too , and have not have much sleep for several days. Neither of u look very nice. We greet each other briefly. The General know what be about to be do , and little be say about it. Gen. Grant show no exultation. I take him to the McLean House , where Gen. Lee await him. Gen. Grant and one or two of his staff go in ; the rest of u staid outside on the piazza until Col. Babcock come out and invite u in. Presently Gen. Lee go out to take his horse and drive away. He be dress in a new gray uniform. We have have no chance to get at our uniforms. All of u be rather silent and serious. Gen. Grant wear no smile of victory on his face. He know what the victory meant , but his face do not show it. '' Gen. Sheridan say he have meet Gen. Grant many time since then , and that their pleasant relation during the war have always be maintained. He go with him on a journey to Cuba and Mexico , and on that trip find him to be the same simple man he have know in the army. In other place he have occupy he have always be unchanged to his admired companion in arms. Soldier-like , Gen. Sheridan be not effusive in his language when express his affection for Gen. Grant ; but it be not difficult to see that there will be no heartstrings in the country more strain at the death of Grant than those of `` Gallant Phil Sheridan. '' Longstreet 's Reminiscences At West Point Together -- Grant 's Courtship -- The War and After GAINESVILLE , Ga. , July 23 -- '' He be the truest as well a the bravest man that ever live , '' be the remark make by Gen. James Longstreet , when he recover to-day from the emotion cause by the sad news of Gen. Grant 's death. Gen. Longstreet live in a two-story house of modern style about three mile from Gainesville , where , amid his vine and shrub , he be see by The Times 's correspondent. He be dress in a long and many color dress gown ; his white whisker be trim after the pattern of Burnside 's , and he look little like the stalwart figure which be ever in the thickest of the fight during the bloody battle of the late war. `` Ever since 1839 , '' say he , `` I have be on term of the close intimacy with Grant. I well remember the fragile form which answer to his name in that year. His distinguish trait a a cadet be a girlish modesty ; a hesitancy in present his own claim ; a taciturnity born of his modesty ; but a thoroughness in the accomplishment of whatever task be assign him. As I be of large and robust physique I be at the head of most lark and games. But in these young Grant never join because of his delicate frame. In horsemanship , however , he be note a the most proficient in the Academy. In fact , rider and horse hold together like the fabled centaur. Two Young Lieutenants `` In 1842 I be attach to the Fourth Infantry a Second Lieutenant. A year later Grant join the same regiment , station in that year at Fort Jefferson , 12 mile from St. Louis. The tie thus form have never be break ; but there be a charm which hold u together of which the world have never heard. My kinsman , Mr. Frederick Dent , be a substantial farmer living near Fort Jefferson. He have a liking for army officer , due to the fact that his son Fred be a pupil at West Point. One day I receive an invitation to visit his house in order to meet young Fred , who have just return , and I ask Grant to go with me. This he do , and of course be introduce to the family , the last one to come in be Miss Julia Dent , the charm daughter of our host. It be needless to say that we saw but little of Grant during the rest of the visit. He pay court in fact with such assiduity a to give rise to the hope that he have forever get over his diffidence. Five year later , in 1848 , after the usual uncertainty of a soldier 's courtship , Grant return and claim Miss Dent a his bride. I have be marry just six month at that time , and my wife and I be among the guest at the wedding. Only a few month ago Mrs. Grant recall to my memory an incident with Gen. Grant 's courtship. Miss Dent have be escort to the military ball so often by Lieut. Grant that , on one occasion , when she do not happen to go with him , Lieut. Hoskins go up to her and ask , with a pitiful expression on his face : 'Where be that small man with the large epaulet ? ' In the Field of Duty `` In 1844 the Fourth Regiment be order to Louisiana to form part of the army of observation. Still later we form part of the army of occupation in Corpus Christi , Texas , Here , remove from all society without book or paper , we have an excellent opportunity of study each other. I and every one else always find Grant resolute and do his duty in a simple manner. His honor be never suspect , his friendship be true , his hatred of guile be pronounce , and his detestation of tale bearer be , I may say , absolute. The soul of honor himself , he never even suspect others either then or year afterward. He could not bring himself to look upon the rascally side of human nature. `` While we remain in Corpus Christi an incident illustrate Grant 's skill and fearlessness a a horseman occurred. The Mexicans be in the habit of bring in wild horse , which they would sell for two or three dollars. These horse come near cost more than one officer his life. One day a particularly furious animal be bring in. Every officer in the camp have decline to purchase the animal except Grant , who declare that he would either break the horse 's neck or his own. He have the horse blindfold , bridle , and saddle , and when firmly in the saddle he throw off the blind , sink his spur into the horse 's flank , and be soon out of sight. For three hour he ride the animal over all kind of ground , through field and stream , and when horse and rider return to camp the horse be thoroughly tamed. For year afterward the story of Grant 's ride be relate at every camp fire in the country. During the Mexican war we be separate , Grant have be make Quartermaster of the Fourth Regiment , while I be assign to duty a Adjutant of the Eighth. At the Battle of Molino del Rey , however , I have occasion to notice his superb courage and coolness under fire. So noticeable be his bearing that his gallantry be allude to in the official reports. Payment of a Debt of Honor `` In the long day of our stay in Louisiana and Texas , '' continue Gen. Longstreet , `` we frequently engage in the game of brag and five-cent ante and similar diversions. We instruct Grant in the mystery of these game , but he make a poor player. The man who lose 75 cent in one day be esteem in those time a peculiarly unfortunate person. The game often last an entire day. Years later , in 1858 , I happen to be in St. Louis , and there meet Capt. Holloway and other army chums. We go into the Planters ' Hotel to talk over old time , and it be soon propose to have an old-time game of brag , but it be find that we be one short of make up a full hand. 'Wait a few minute , ' say Holloway , 'and I will find some one. ' In a few minute he return with a man poorly dress in citizen 's clothes and in whom we recognize our old friend Grant. Going into civil life Grant have be unfortunate , and he be really in needy circumstances. The next day I be walk in front of the Planters ' , when I find myself face to face again with Grant who , place in the palm of my hand a five-dollar gold piece , insist that I should take it in payment of a debt of honor over 15 year old. I peremptorily decline to take it , allege that he be out of the service and more in need of it than I. 'You must take it , ' say he , 'I can not live with anything in my possession which be not mine. ' Seeing the determination in the man 's face , and in order to save him mortification , I take the money , and shake hand we parted. The Meeting at Appomattox `` The next time we meet , '' say Gen. Longstreet , `` be at Appomattox , and the first thing that Gen. Grant say to me when we step inside , place his arm in mine , be : 'Pete ( a sobriquet of mine ) , let u have another game of brag , to recall the old day which be so pleasant to u all. ' Great God ! think I to myself , how my heart swell out to such a magnanimous touch of humanity ! Why do men fight who be bear to be brother ? `` During the war my immediate command have engage the troop of Grant but once -- at the battle of the Wilderness. We come into no sort of personal relation , however. In the Spring of 1865 , one day , while await a letter from Gen. Grant , Gen. Lee say to me , 'There be nothing ahead of u but to surrender. ' It be a one of the Commissioners appoint to arrange the term of peace that I meet Gen. Grant at Appomattox. His whole greeting and conduct toward u be a though nothing have ever happen to mar our pleasant relations. Friendship After the War `` In 1866 I have occasion to visit Washington on business , and while there make a call of courtesy on Gen. Grant at his office. As I arise to leave he follow me out into the hallway , and ask me to spend an evening with his family. I thank him , promise compliance , and pass a most enjoyable evening. When leave Grant again accompany me into the hallway and say : 'General , would you like to have an amnesty ? ' Wholly unprepared for this I reply that I would like to have it , but have no hope of get it. He tell me to write out my application and to call at his office at noon the next day , and in the meantime he would see President Johnson and Secretary of War Stanton on my behalf. When I call he have already see these men , and assure me that there be not an obstacle in the way. He indorse my application by ask that it be grant a a special personal favor to himself. `` In the January before he be inaugurate President for the first time I pay him a passing friendly visit. He then say to me : 'Longstreet , I want you to come and see me after I be inaugurate , and let me know what you want. ' After the inauguration I be walk up the avenue one day to see him when I meet a friend who inform me that the President have send in my name for confirmation a Surveyor of the Port of New-Orleans. For several week the nomination hung in the Senate , when I go to Grant and beg him to withdraw the nomination , a I do not want his personal friendship for me to embarrass his Administration. 'Give yourself no uneasiness about that , ' he say , 'the Senators have a many favor to ask of me a I have of them , and I will see that you be confirmed. ' `` From what I have already tell you , '' say Gen. Longstreet , in conclusion , `` it will be see that Grant be a modest man , a simple man , a man believing in the honesty of his fellow , true to his friend , faithful to tradition , and of great personal honor. When the United States District Court in Richmond be about to indict Gen. Lee and myself for treason , Gen. Grant interpose and say : 'I have pledge my word for their safety. ' This stop the wholesale indictment of ex-Confederate officer which would have followed. He be thoroughly magnanimous , be above all petty thing and small idea , and , after Washington , be the high type of manhood America have produced. '' Gen. Grant and the South His Desire When President to Befriend Its People SAVANNAH , Ga. , July 23 -- The Times 's correspondent call upon Gen. Lafayette McLaws recently. Gen. McLaws be one of the officer who resign his commission in the Federal Army for the purpose of follow his State into secession. During the four year ' war which follow he hold the rank of Major-General and participate in some of the hard fighting. In his early day he have be on term of the close intimacy with the young subaltern who be destine afterward to play so important a part in the history of his country. When the war be over McLaws retire to a farm in Effingham County , refuse all participation in politics. It be not until 1876 that he visit Washington , when he call at the White House. He have no sooner send in his card to Gen. Grant than he hear the President , who be at the time busily engage , call out to his secretary : `` Do n't let McLaws go ; I want to see him. '' `` All at once , '' say Gen. McLaws , `` I saw a change look on the face of my companion in wait when they find there be one among them whom the President be anxious to see. Meeting me on the doorstep Gen. Grant hold out his hand and say : 'I be delight to see my old army comrade. I want you to dine with me , when we can dream over the past. ' `` After dinner he lead me into his private room and direct the conversation so a to find out my personal condition. He listen to my narrative with interest , and turn to me he say : `` 'McLaws , would you take office under an old comrade ? ' `` Taken aback by the question , I at length reply that I be ready to perform all the duty of American citizenship. 'I be sorry you do not come to see me before , ' rejoin the President ; 'I would have take pleasure in confer office upon you. My second term of the Presidency be now nearly end , but there have not be an hour of that time in which I be not only willing but anxious to confer the office upon reputable citizens. In this , however , I be foil by the politicians. The prejudice of the Northern politician be at work , but the great hindrance be in the Southern Congressmen. They have always hold aloof , treat me a a stranger , and refuse to give me an opportunity to befriend them. For a Southern man to take office under me bring him under suspicion at home. ' `` In fact , '' continue Gen. McLaws , `` Gen. Grant speak with the air of a man who felt chagrin and disappoint at the manner in which the politician have use sectional difference to further their own purposes. Finally , Gen. Grant say to me , 'Go home and have nothing to do with the politician , and leave your case with me , and I will take care of you. ' I have not much more than reach home when I be nominate and confirm for the Savannah Post Office , which position I hold until a few month ago. `` This be not the only instance within my knowledge , '' say Gen. McLaws , '' of the interest take by Gen. Grant in the South. A story tell me by the Hon. William Dougherty , whose memory all Georgians revere , prove beyond question that there would have be no sectional bitterness if Grant have be listen to. When the policy of reconstruction have be resolve upon by Congress Gen. Pope be appoint to take control of the Third Military District , of which Georgia be a part. On assume control of the district Gen. Pope issue an order announce that fact , the tenor of which give great satisfaction to the people. Judge Dougherty be so well pleased with it that he felt call upon to make a visit to Gen. Pope and to express in person his sense of gratification. This do he arise to leave , when Gen. Pope say : `` 'Judge , I have know you by reputation a long time ; it be my purpose to have invite you to advise me on matter of state , but now that you be here we might as well get to the point. My appointment to the command of this district be make by Gen. Grant for a special purpose. I be from Illinois , a State well settle with the child of Southern people. This fact , in Gen. Grant 's opinion , would make me feel more kinship here than would some officer without these associations. Gen. Grant far instruct me to call into council in Georgia the best citizen , name Gov. Jenkins , Chief-Justice Warner , and yourself. The Constitutional Convention require under the Reconstruction act , if hold under these auspex , will perform it work quickly and intelligently. He understand the difficulty you will encounter in deal with the negro question , but to palliate it he suggest that you adopt either a property or an educational qualification , such a be to be find in some Northern States. Gen. Grant know that the requirement of the Reconstruction act be extreme , and do not expect that a convention of men like yourself would or could come up to them ; but what he ask of you be this : send your best men to the convention ; your refine , reputable citizen ; let them adopt a Constitution a far advanced a the prejudice of the people will admit ; let them give evidence of an honest purpose to reach an agreement with the North ; and Gen. Grant promise , in return , to use the whole weight of his influence to have Georgia readmitted into the Union under that Constitution. What he desire , above all thing , be a supreme effort on the part of your people to bring about that harmony which should exist between the States. He feel that Georgia be the pivotal State ; that if Georgia have the courage -- he know that she have the statesmanship -- to make a settlement of the question , her example will be follow by the entire South. I have offer the Presidency of the convention to Gov. Jenkins , but he have decline it on constitutional grounds. I have offer it to Chief-Justice Warner , but he decline it because the fight be too sharp and the prejudice too deep to be met. Now , Judge Dougherty , will you accept the Presidency ? ' '' Judge Dougherty decline the honor , state that it be too great a task to try to overcome the prejudice of a whole people. Contrary counsel from those of Gen. Grant lead the Southern people into a train of disaster which it have take nearly 20 year to overcome. `` An officer who once serve on Gen. Grant 's staff once tell me an incident which illustrate the quick decision of Gen. Grant. It be just after the battle of Shiloh. The officer be group around a camp fire , when Gen. John A. McClernand ride up to Gen. Grant , and hand him an autograph letter from President Lincoln direct Grant to turn his command over to Gen. McClernand , Gen. Grant read the letter carefully , and then , tear it up into small piece and throw them into the fire , say : `` 'I decline to receive or obey order which do not come through the proper channel. ' `` Pausing a moment , he turn to Gen. McClernand and say : `` 'Your division be under order to leave this department in the morning , and I advise you to go with it. ' McClernand go , and that be the last that be ever hear of the order , for the culmination of event show that Grant be right , and no President dare to remove him , for a change of commander just after the battle of Shiloh would have lead to very different result for the Federals. `` The dogged determination to do or die , which be so characteristic of Grant , be what give backbone to the Federal army. He would never acknowledge defeat. Gen. Zachary Taylor once tell me an anecdote of Grant , which occur during the Mexican war. Lieut. Grant be in charge of a party of men detail to clear the way for the advance of boat lade with troop from Aransas Bay to Corpus Christi by remove the oyster bed and other obstructions. Failing either by word or sign to make those under him understand him , Lieut. Grant jump into the water , which be up to his waist , and work with his men. Some dandy officer begin make fun of him for his zeal , when Gen. Taylor come upon the scene , and rebuke it by say : `` 'I wish I have more officer like Grant , who would stand ready to set a personal example when needed. ' '' Gen. Sherman The Veteran 's Recent Talk About the Administration , Grant , and Others From the Chicago Inter Ocean , July 18 `` I 'm a soldier , not a politician , '' say Gen. `` Tecumseh '' Sherman , a at the Grand Pacific yesterday the old warrior offer his good-natured apology for neither know nor care much about politics. Said the General : `` I be on my way to Lake Minnetonka , where my family now be , and I stop over to arrange some matter with Gen. Chetlain regard our reunion of the Society of the Army of the Tennessee that will be hold here Sept. 9 and 10. It be all arrange now , and I think we shall have a beautiful meeting. We shall not throw it open so much to the general public a heretofore. It be a reunion of soldier , you see , to talk over old war time and keep alive our old association , as well a the organization itself. Yes , I have be it President since it origin in 1868. How many shall we have here ? Oh , yes , over 200-250 , I think. The first day we shall transact our private business in some room Mr. Drake will give u here in the Grand Pacific , and in the evening in some public place , for everybody to hear , there will be a public address by Gen. Sanborn. The next evening we shall have a banquet of the society. '' The General get to talk about the civil service institution , and he seem cordially willing to give the system his approval. He declare he believe it in the interest of good government , and it seem to him to furnish a great relief to Senators and Congressmen , who have but to refer their petitioner for office to the Civil Service Commission for an answer. Said the reporter : `` General , do it strike you that a good many Republican soldier have be remove from office ? '' `` No , '' promptly reply the veteran , `` I do n't think there have been. They seem to have be very moderate in that , and not to have remove a man except for qualifications. '' The subject be introduce of Wade Hampton 's recent letter regard the particular service of his troop at Manassas , whereat Gen. Sherman speedily say : `` Gen. Hampton be undoubtedly a truthful man , and I do not question that Imboden be honest , but that battle be ten mile long , from Surrey Church to Manassas , and a man be liable to write from the position he occupied. My men be new and do not have sufficient tenacity ; but they be not drive by Jackson ; they withdraw , and his men be not a a 'stone wall , ' but they stand behind a stone wall in fact. '' `` Have you see Gen. Grant lately ? '' `` No , not since December , but I hear three day ago from Fred , and they feel very apprehensive about the General. Save the cancer in his throat he be sound in his lung , heart , and stomach , and I think he will live several month yet. '' `` He have write a valuable book , General ? '' `` Oh , yes , and he have write it mostly with his own hand , but still it come too late ; that be , I do not mean that it be really too late , but it would have be well if he could have write it 20 , 15 , or 10 year ago when he be fresh. A man command everything be well qualify than a colonel to write such a book , for he know all things. I feel even now , in view of all the material that I have , that I have little to add to my memoirs. '' `` Shall you ever publish again ? '' `` No , I think not , though I may add an appendix to my memoir , and perhaps insert something here and there. '' `` Shall you put in anything about Jeff Davis ? '' ask the reporter somewhat irrelevantly. And the General shot out his reply with a soldier 's sledge-hammer emphasis : `` If Jeff Davis be a patriot , I 'm a traitor , and I ain't. If Jeff Davis be a patriot , Abraham Lincoln be a traitor , and if God ever make a pure man Abraham Lincoln be he. Oh , no , I have nothing to do with Davis. He saw fit to take up something I say to a Grand Army post. No , I have never meet him. I believe Davis be honest , but his ambition lead him into treason to his country. '' `` You think Sheridan will have no trouble with the Indians ? '' `` Oh , no , I think not. You see the only way for an Indian to be honest be to kill a white man 's ox. There be no game leave ; the buffalo and the elk be gone. No , the Indian question will be settle when he be give for his occupation a section of land and the remainder invest for his benefit. '' Gen. Sherman get up to wish his visitor good day. The same plain , grizzly old fighter in fatigue dress he remains. He stand with his foot together like the soldier he be train , and his tall form appear perfectly at ease in black alpaca coat and low-cut white vest , whereon army button declare the trade in which `` Tecumseh '' Sherman make his everlasting mark. When he talk he talk with the utmost good humor and straightforward simplicity. He be speak of his home in St. Louis , his house building , and the provision he wish to make for those that remain when he be gone. When he mention his six child and seven grandchild he come to speak of the family of brother officer , men his peer in the service year ago , who pass away only to leave those dependent on them beggar for office at Washington , willing to work 10 hour a day for $ 40 a month , simply to get bread and meat. Forty such instance he say he could recall , and the thought seem to have it deep pathos a the General dwelt feelingly upon it .