Established what may have be America’s first tennis court in the 1870s. By AMISHA PADNANI Mary Ewing Outerbridge didn’t have an easy time bring tennis to America in 1874. First she have to get past custom agents. And they be suspicious. What be this large net ? Clearly it wasn’t for fishing , they said. And what be these string thing with long handle ? Outerbridge explain that the item be for a game call Sphairistiké , which be Greek for “playing at ball.” She have see British Army officer engage in a match during a vacation in Bermuda and be entrance by the graceful stroke and fluid motions. She tell the agent she be take the gear back home , to Staten Island , to teach her friend and family to play. The agent weren’t convince and confiscate the items. But her old brother , A. Emilius Outerbridge , happen to be a shipping executive. After he pull a few string , the equipment be released. And so that spring , Outerbridge set up one of the first court in the United States at the Staten Island Cricket and Baseball Club in St. George. The name Sphairistiké didn’t stick , but the game do , even though it be very different from modern-day tennis. For starter , the court be shape like an hourglass , 30 foot wide at the base and 24 foot wide at the net , rather than the 27-foot-wide rectangle that it be today , accord to “Tennis : Its History , People and Events , ” by Will Grimsley. The game itself be slow and relaxed with lot of chat between shots. This work just fine for men in stiff white pant and woman in large ornate hat and ankle-length skirt with several layer of petticoats. Soon tennis court begin pop up in Newport , R.I. , Plainfield , N.J. , Philadelphia and New Orleans. But there be discrepancy in how the game be played. In some city , the net be three foot high ; in others , it be four. Some racket weigh 13 ounce , while others be a pound or more. Even the ball vary in size. This be problematic when player show up for the first national tournament , host by Outerbridge in 1880. People be astonish to see how everyone else have be play , and some refuse to participate. The inconsistency lead to the creation of the United States National Lawn Tennis Association the following year. The word lawn and national have since be drop from the name. Tennis player on Staten Island around 1885. Mary Ewing Outerbridge set up one of the first court in the United States there in the 1870s. Staten Island Historical Society Mary Ewing Outerbridge be bear on Feb. 16 , 1852 , in Philadelphia , the seventh of 10 child of Alexander Ewing Outerbridge and Laura C. Harvey , both from wealthy Bermuda families. It be unclear when they move to Staten Island , but their influence on New York City do not go unnoticed. Outerbridge’s brother Eugenius Harvey Outerbridge be the first chairman of New York’s Port Authority , and the Outerbridge Crossing , a bridge that link Staten Island with Perth Amboy , N.J. , be name after him. Biographical record on her life be scant , but there be no evidence that Outerbridge marry or have a child. Before Outerbridge spot the game in Bermuda , tennis in one form or another have be play for hundred of year or more in Europe and , perhaps earlier , in the Middle East , say Warren F. Kimball , a historian who write about the game’s origins in “The United States Tennis Association : Raising the Game.” It be most commonly play indoors. Maj. Walter Clopton Wingfield , a British Army officer , be credit with adapt it for outdoor play. Major Wingfield patent the game and sell it a a set with rubber ball , a net , pole and court markers. Sales be brisk. In fact , the game grow so popular so quickly in the United States that historian still debate who introduce tennis to America first. Was it Outerbridge ? Was it James Dwight , who bring it back from a trip to England and set up a court on his uncle’s lawn in Nahant , Mass. ? Or be it one of several other early player in the United States ? The New York Times even weigh in on the debate. One article , in 1931 , report that the matter be settle after the American tennis player Malcolm D. Whitman procure a copy of the official passenger list on the S.S. Canima sail from Bermuda to New York. It show that Outerbridge return to New York in February 1874 , before any court exist in the United States. But when do she actually set up her court ? It’s hard to say. According to Kimball , one thing be certain : “Lawn tennis arrive in the United States in the mid-1870s separately and independently in at least six different places.” There be no doubt , however , that Outerbridge be a pioneer of the game. And her involvement may have inspire woman to demand that they be include in the sport , even when men try to discourage them , a Kimball point out. Men would say , “This be bad for women. Women shouldn’t run around and perspire. You certainly don’t want it to interfere with childbirth , ” Kimball said. “But woman love tennis.” The first United States championship game for woman be hold in 1887. But Outerbridge do not live to see it. She die of Bright’s disease , or inflammation of the kidney , on May 3 , 1886. She be 34. Amisha Padnani be the digital editor of obituaries. She use to live on Staten Island and have even play tennis there .