November 20 , 1887 OBITUARY Emma Lazarus By THE NEW YORK TIMES After a long and very painful illness of the same general nature a the disease which carry off Gen. Grant and now threaten the Crown Prince of Germany there die yesterday a young writer of New York. Emma Lazarus be the daughter of the late Moses Lazarus , a sugar refiner , belong to one of the best-known and old Hebrew family of the city , and niece to J. H. Lazarus , the artist. The instinct to express herself in verse appear very early. In 1866 , at the age of 17 , she publish a volume of poem which create great interest in the circle of her family 's friend and acquaintance , and lead to flatter notice from person eminent in fashionable society. She be , however , dissatisfy with so narrow a success and aim for the wide field of readers. Although she never become a popular writer of book , but find her wide audience in the magazine , the steady courage with which she pursue literature tell in the long run , notwithstanding the high ideal she hold before her , which make her dislike sensationalism and such appeal to the public a be not artistic. Feeling strongly the responsibility of a writer , and disdain the ordinary method of attract notice , she devote herself mainly to the cultivation of pure literature. Her reading be wide in German and French. The character of Goethe fascinate her , and she produce in 1874 `` Alide , '' a prose romance found on episode in the early life of the German poet. Henri Heine be naturally a favorite ; she enjoy his biting wit and keen literary sense. Many of her translation from the verse of Heine be first publish in The New York Times. In 1871 she publish `` Admetus and Other Poems , '' and find her work well appreciate in England than her native country. The Athenaeum and Westminster Review be very complimentary. The Illustrated London News prefer her conception of the old Greek tragedy of `` Alcestis and Admetus '' to the treatment of the same legend by Robert Browning , since she give a reason for the self-sacrifice of Alcestis which other version lack. Alcestis dy for her husband because she believe him necessary to the country -- not because she happen to be his wife. When Hercules overcome Death and save her `` thunder shake The air , and cloud of mighty darkness fell , And the earth tremble , and weird horrid sound Were heard of rush wing and fly foot And groan ; and all be silent , dumb with awe , Saving the king who pause not in his prayer , 'Have mercy , god ! ' and then again 'O god , Have mercy ! ' `` Through the open casement pour Bright flood of sunny air ; the light be soft , Clear , delicate , a though a summer storm Had pass away , and those there stand saw Afar upon the plain Death fleeing thence ; And at the doorway , weary , wellnigh spent , Alcides , flush with victory. '' In the same volume appear verse that show a patriotic American spirit , but few that refer to her own religion or the history of her race. It be not for some year thereafter that she lay aside her diffidence a a Jewess and begin to write poem directly for and about Jews and Jewish things. The delay may be undoubtedly refer to the narrow spirit of hostility which still pervade Christian community , for her circumstance be such that most of her acquaintance be Christian , not Hebrew. When she strike the Hebrew lyre , however , it be with no uncertainty , and she then produce her very best work. `` Spagnoletto , '' a drama found on the life of the Neapolitan painter who bore that nickname , be a masculine piece of work , not suit for the stage , but intend for reading. But the Jewish poem collect in the volume call `` Songs of a Semite '' be more to the point , and must have make her co-religionists proud. They ring with indignation against the belated prejudice that remain over from the past among our bad heritage of bigotry. Set on the right track by these outburst , she begin the study of Hebrew and be at work on a series of translation from the Jewish bard of medieval Spain , when the first blow of her illness fell. Though she rally and go abroad in apparent health and full of hope , her plan be destroy before she could settle down from the excitement which a first visit to Europe create in a sensitive soul. She linger and only come home to die. Devoted to study and by nature extremely fastidious and critical , Emma Lazarus have comparatively few intimate , but they be constant and warm. Those to whom she never give the pleasure of her wit , caustic retort , and clever repartee vie with her family in try to make the interval of suffer pleasant by all the device that could be suggested. As a woman she be endow with a personality no one could forget ; a a poet she often rise to passage of great beauty , and show conscience and skill in all she undertake .