March 7 , 1888 OBITUARY Louisa M. Alcott Dead By THE NEW YORK TIMES BOSTON , Mass. , March 6. -- Miss Louisa M. Alcott die this morning. Coming so soon after the death of her father the suddenly announced decease of Miss Alcott bring a double sorrow to the many friend of the family , while the loss of this talented writer will be felt far and wide among the many reader of her favorite books. For a long time Miss Alcott have be ill , suffer from nervous prostration. Last Autumn she appear to be improve and go to the Highlands to reside with Dr. Rhoda A. Lawrence. She drive from there into town to visit her father on Thursday last , and catch a cold , which on Saturday settle on the base of the brain and develop spinal meningitis. She die at the Highlands early this morning. Miss Alcott be bear on her father 's birthday , and it be singular that she should have follow him so soon to the grave. At the Alcott mansion this morning , within a few hour of the death of the daughter who have solace his decline , the remains of the venerable A. Bronson Alcott be place beneath her draped portrait , while word of sympathy be speak by those who have love him through half a century 's association. The casket be environ with smilax and wreath of ivy , violet , and white wild roses. There be present a company of notable men and woman who represent the philanthropic cause for which the decease have labor and through which they have be joined. There be the Rev. Dr. Cyrus A. Bartol , Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes , Mrs. Edna D. Cheney , Messrs. F. B. Sanborn , Samuel E. Sewell , Frederick May , George May , John May , Mrs. George B. Bradford , Walter Blanchard , Walton Richardson , Mrs. John May , Prof. Shackford , the Rev. J. S. Bush , the Rev. Dr. E. G. Porter , Maria Porter , Col. Henry Stone , Mrs. Julia Ward Howe , Dr. Emerson , Mrs. Allen Emerson , President Warren , Dr. H. I. Bowditch , Dr. M. Green , and others , represent both the early and later phase of Mr. Alcott 's career. The service be very simple. It be conduct by the Rev. Cyrus A. Bartol. The body be take to Concord by train this afternoon and bury in the family lot. Miss Alcott 's life be in it begin one of poverty , struggle , vicissitude , and discourage experiences. Fame , honor , and a comfortable fortune come in it late years. There be probably no writer among woman well love by the young than she. Her fame rest chiefly on her first successful story , `` Little Women , '' and it be that story that endear her to so many hundred thousand in this country and Europe alike. Its merit lay in it pretty picture of the simple home life of the author and her little sisters. `` An Old-Fashioned Girl '' and `` Little Men '' which follow be nearly equal success , and though she be the author of nearly a score of other book her fame will rest chiefly on the three named. She be bear at Germantown , Penn. , Nov. 29 , 1832 , two year after her father , A. Bronson Alcott , have marry Miss May , a descendant of the Quincy and Sewell family of Boston. It be a noteworthy fact in connection with her life and death that Miss Alcott and her father be bear on the same day of the month , and that they die within 24 hour of one another. The parent of the authoress remove to Boston when their daughter be 2 year old , and in Boston and it immediate vicinity she make her home ever after. She be educate a a school teacher under the tutelage of her father and Henry D. Thoreau. In early life , too , she have the advantage of an acquaintance with Emerson , Whittier , Garrison , Sumner , Theodore Parker , the Hawthornes , Phillips , Margaret Fuller , Julia Ward Howe , and others of that brilliant band of writer and thinker who reside near the Alcotts. These people have much to do with form her character and give the particular bent to her thought which be noticeable in the more serious of her writings. When about 16 year old Miss Alcott begin teach a private school in Boston. Though very successful in this field , she do not like the work , prefer authorship to it , so teach be abandon for sketch and short story writing. When the civil war break out she be one of the army of noble woman who go to the front to engage in service a a nurse in hospitals. She be assign to the Georgetown Hospital near Washington and serve until she break down under a severe attack of typhoid fever , from the result of which she never fully recovered. It be from her letter write to her mother and sister during her month of service that her book call `` Hospital Sketches '' be compiled. After be oblige to give up hospital work Miss Alcott make a trip to Europe in company with an invalid friend , be go about a year. This trip be make in 1865 , and give her an opportunity to form acquaintance with many of the literary worker of the Old World , with whom , a with those on this side of the ocean , she be always popular. `` Little Women '' be prepare after her return to Boston , and with it come fame and fortune. Secure in the constancy of a good income , she devote her life to the care of her father and mother , the latter dying in 1877. Mr. Alcott be stricken with paralysis in 1882 , and since that time and up to that of her own fatal illness , she be his constant and love nurse. Miss Alcott once aspire to be an actress and have perfect arrangement for her first appearance. Its untimely discovery by her friend prevent her appearance a a professional , and so save her to literature. Thereafter she be content to appear a an amateur in performance for the benefit of the Sanitary Commission. She be the author of a farce call `` Ned Batchelder 's Adventures '' which be produce at the then fashionable Howard Athenaeum. She also write a romantic drama , `` The Rival Prima Donnas , '' which be accept by Manager Barry of the Boston Theatre. There be a quarrel among the actress a to the distribution of the character , and Miss Alcott recall the manuscript and burn it up , much to Mr. Barry 's disgust. That be the story of her brief connection with the stage , but she be very fond of dramatic performance , and a constant theatre-goer all the late year of her life .