April 8 , 1891 OBITUARY The Great Showman Dead By THE NEW YORK TIMES BRIDGEPORT , Conn. , April 7. - At 6:22 o'clock tonight the long sickness of P. T. Barnum come to an end by his quietly pass away at Marina , his residence in this city. Shortly after midnight there come an alarming change for the worse. Drs. Hubbard and Godfrey , who be in attendance , saw at once that the change be such a to indicate that the patient could not long survive. The weakened pulse , more difficult respiration , and low temperature show that the action of the heart have become so feeble a to presage the collapse which be the beginning of the end. Mr. Barnum seem to realize that he could not live much long , and spoke of his approach end with calmness. Through the night he suffer much pain. Mrs. Barnum remain at the bedside during the night. One of the request make by Mr. Barnum be that , when all hope be go , sedative which would make his passage to the next world more peaceful be administered. About 4 o'clock this morning the veteran showman speak his last words. He be ask if he wish a drink of water , and answer , `` Yes. '' Soon after he sink into a lethargy. It be difficult to arouse him from this state , and on open his eye a faint gleam of recognition alone indicate that he have knowledge of his surroundings , or know those about him. All day long Mr. Barnum lay in a semi-unconscious state. About 10 o'clock the first sedative be administer , and repeat several time during the day. When it become certain that the end be but a few hour distant , telegram to relative be send out , and among the sorrow group in the sick room this evening when the final moment come be Mrs. Barnum , the Rev. L. B. Fisher , pastor of the Universalist church of this city , of which Mr. Barnum be a member ; Mrs. D. W. Thompson , Mr. Barnum 's daughter ; Mrs. W. H. Buchtelle of New York , another daughter ; C. Barnum Seeley , his grandson ; Drs. Hubbard and Godfrey , his physician ; C. B. Olcutt , a trained nurse from Bellevue Hospital , and W. D. Roberts , his faithful colored valet. The scene at the deathbed be deeply pathetic. All be in tears. Although Mrs. Barnum have stand up bravely under the strain , the closing moment be too much for her and she give way at times. For an hour or two before his death those at the bedside watch for some sign of recognition or a word from the die man , but in vain. His end be peaceful and apparently perfectly painless. Although no arrangement have a yet be perfect for the funeral , it be know that it will take place Friday. The Rev. Mr. Collyer of New-York , a lifelong friend of Mr. Barnum , will assist the Rev. Mr. Fisher in the service , which will be private. In accordance with the expressed wish of the decease he will be bury in Mountain Grove Cemetery , where he recently have erect a massive granite monument. As have be repeatedly publish , Mr. Barnum make provision in his will for the continuance a a permanent institution of the great show with which his name be associated. For his wife , his daughter , and other relative , he have make handsome provision , but the bulk of his property go to C. Barnum Seeley , his only grandson. Mr. Seeley live in New-York. He be a member of the Stock Exchange , Mr. Barnum have purchase a seat for him a short time ago. Mr. Barnum have be sick since Nov. 6. Several time he rally , but only twice during his illness have he leave the sick room. Death be due to degeneration of the muscle of the heart. Throughout the city to-night there be the deep sorrow. The Post Office , City Hall , business house , and many private residence be drape in mourning. Many telegram of condolence have already be receive at Marina. Day before yesterday Mr. Barnum be eighty year and nine month of age. None but the family and near relative will be allow to see the remains. It be a request of Mr. Barnum and will be carry out. Mr. Barnum 's Life Story The great American showman will never again plan or manage a museum , circus , or other exhibition. For more than forty year he toil to amuse the public. He have now go to his final rest. His life be fill with many noteworthy incident and remarkable adventure - so many , indeed , that to give but the head of each would occupy far more space than it be possible for a newspaper to devote to such a subject. For this reason it be obvious that the sketch which follow can only be regard a an outline of the principal event in his most eventful career. Phineas Taylor Barnum be bear in the town of Bethel , in Connecticut , on July 5 , 1810 , his name , Phineas Taylor , be derive from his maternal grandfather , one of the old settler of New England. His father , Philo Barnum , the son of Ephraim Barnum , who serve a a Captain in the Revolutionary war , be a tailor , a farmer , at time a tavern keeper , and ever on the lookout to turn a quick penny by any honorable means. Born of such ancestor and with such surroundings , it be hardly necessary to say that the boy be early taught that if he would succeed in the world he must work hard. That lesson he never forgot. When little more than a child he be oblige to do his share toward the support of himself and his family. So when he be only six year of age he drive cow to and from pasture , weed the kitchen garden at the back of the humble house in which he be bear , shell corn , and a he grow old rode the plow horse , and whenever he have an opportunity attend school. From the first he be a quick if not a very regular student. In arithmetic and every form of calculation he be particularly apt , and one of his early recollection , and one which he always mention with much pleasure , be that in his tenth year he be call out of bed by his teacher , who have wager with an acquaintance that in less than five minute he ( the boy ) could calculate the number of foot in a give load of wood. After obtain the dimension , half asleep a he be , Phineas , much to the delight of his teacher and the discomfiture of the doubting acquaintance , correctly figure out the result in less than two minutes. Nor be this knowledge of figure the only marked trait which be early develop by the boy. He be also at a remarkably early age fully aware of the value of money. He never be know to squander or foolishly spend a penny. When he be six year old he have save copper enough to exchange for a silver dollar. This he `` turned '' as rapidly a he could with safety , and by peddle home-made molasses candy , gingerbread , and at time a specie of liquor make by himself and call cherry rum , he have accumulate when he be not quite twelve year of age a sum sufficient to buy and pay for a sheep and a calf. Indeed , to use an expression subsequently employ by him when relate these early experience , he be rapidly become a small Croesus , when his father very kindly give him permission to buy his own clothing with his own money. Of course , this permission materially reduce his little store. So , live the life of a country boy , his career be diversify by one visit to New York a an assistant to a cattle drover , and numerous small business transaction , in which he nearly always display an ability to make a good bargain , the young Phineas continue in Bethel until he be far advanced in his teens. At this time he become a prominent member of the Bible class in the local Sunday school , and among other scholar be , upon certain occasion , require to answer question from the Bible. The follow answer to such a question which be write by him may well serve a an illustration of his bent of mind , as well a of the progress which he have make a a scholar. The text which he draw in accordance with the custom of the Sunday school be , `` But one thing be needful and Mary hath choose the good part , which shall not be take away from her. '' Based upon this be the question. `` What be the one thing needful ? '' This be young Barnum 's write answer : `` This question , 'What be the one thing needful ? ' be capable of receive various answer , depend much upon the person to whom it be addressed. The merchant might answer that the one thing needful be plenty of customer to buy liberally without beat down , and to pay cash for all their purchases. The farmer might reply that the one thing needful be large harvest and high prices. The physician might answer that it be plenty of patients. The lawyer might be of opinion that it be an unruly community always engage in bickering and litigations. The clergyman might reply , 'It be a fat salary , with multitude of sinner seek salvation and pay large pew rents. ' The sensible bachelor might exclaim , 'It be a pretty wife , who love her husband , and who know how to sew on buttons. ' The maiden might answer , 'It be a good husband who will love , cherish , and protect me while life shall last. ' But the proper answer and , doubtless , that which apply to the case of Mary , would be , 'The one thing needful be to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ , follow in His footstep , love God , and obey His commandment , love our fellow-men , and embrace every opportunity of administer to their necessities. ' In short , the one thing needful be to live a life that we can always look back upon with satisfaction and be enable ever to contemplate it termination with trust in Him who have so kindly vouchsafe it to u , surround u with innumerable blessing if we have but the heart and the wisdom to receive them in a proper manner. '' For many year after those quiet day in the Bethel Sunday school the life of young Barnum be one of hard and constant struggle. His father die when he be fifteen year of age , and he be leave almost penniless to make his own way in the world. To gain a respectable living he try all sort of trade , and it can with all truth be say that whatever he find to do he always do with all his might. He be by turn a peddler and trader in a small way , a clerk in Brooklyn and New York , the keeper of a small porter house , the proprietor of a village store , and editor of a country newspaper , for write alleged libel in which he be imprison only to be liberate with a grand flourish of trumpet and the congratulation of a crowd. After this he keep a boarding house , do more trading with vary success , be in the lottery business , make a trip to Philadelphia , then regard a a far distant city , and be marry to a young tailoress , whom he many year after describe a `` the best woman in the world , well suit to his disposition , admirable and valuable in every character a a wife , a mother , and a friend. '' For more than five year after take this most important and , a the result prove , satisfactory step , Mr. Barnum continue with vary success to struggle with the world until , in 1835 , he at last find the call for which he seem to have be born. In short , he go into `` the show business , '' in which he afterward become so famous. Regarding this period in his life he in after year write a follow : `` By this time it be clear to my mind that my proper position in this busy world be not yet reached.. The business for which I be destine and , I believe , make have not yet come to me. I have not find that I be to cater for that insatiate want of human nature - the love of amusement ; that I be to make a sensation in two continent , and that fame and fortune await me so soon a I should appear in the character of a showman. The show business have all phase and grade of dignity , from the exhibition of a monkey to the exposition of that high art in music or the drama which secure for the gifted artists a world-wide fame Princes well might envy. Men , woman , and child who can not live on gravity alone need something to satisfy their gayer , light mood and hour , and he who minister to this want be , in my opinion , in a business establish by the Creator of our nature. If he worthily fulfill his mission and amuses without corrupting , he need never feel that he have live in vain. As for myself , I can say that the least deserving of all my effort in the show line be the one which introduce me to the business , a scheme in no sense of my own devising , one which have be for some time before the public , and which have so many voucher for it genuineness that at the time of take possession of it I honestly believe it to be genuine. '' The first venture to which Mr. Barnum thus refers be a remarkable negro woman , who be say to have be 161 year old and a nurse of Gen. George Washington - the first of a long line. The wonder of this person be find fully set forth in the following notice , cut from the Pennsylvania Inquirer of July 15 , 1835 : `` CURIOSITY. - The citizen of Philadelphia and it vicinity have an opportunity of witness at Masonic Hall one of the great natural curiosity ever witness , viz. , Joice Heth , a negress , age 161 year , who formerly belong to the father of Gen. Washington. She have be a member of the Baptist Church 116 year , and can rehearse many hymn and sing them accord to former custom. She be bear near the old Potomac River , in Virginia , and have for 90 or 100 year live in Paris , Ky. , with the Bowling family. All who have see this extraordinary woman be satisfy of the truth of the account of her age. The evidence of the Bowling family , which be respectable , be strong that the original bill of sale of Augustine Washington , in his own handwriting , and other evidence which the proprietor have in his possession will satisfy even the most incredulous. '' For $ 1,000 , some of which be borrow and the rest raise by the sale of a grocery store in the possession of which he happen to be at the moment , Mr. Barnum buy the `` wonderful negress , '' and , make money by the venture , he ever afterward , with only short intermission , continue to follow the business of a showman. During the year which follow he travel all over this country and in many other part of the world , and be interest in some of the most important undertaking for the amusement of the public of which recent history furnishes any record. Of all his enterprise , however , he regard his connection with the American Museum and his management of Jenny Lind and Tom Thumb a the most important. It be on the 27th of December , 1841 , that by a shrewd stroke of business he obtain control of the American Museum , on the corner of Ann Street and Broadway in New York , and for year afterward he continue to conduct that establishment. Under his management it become one of the most famous place of amusement in the world. In it , a it be hardly necessary to state , be exhibit `` the Feejee Mermaid , '' `` the original bearded woman , '' `` the woolly horse , '' giant and dwarf almost without end , and , to use Mr. Barnum 's own expression , `` innumerable other attraction of a minor though nevertheless a most interesting , instructive , and moral character. '' In addition to these `` other attraction '' Mr. Barnum 's plan also embrace the performance in the museum of such moral drama , so call , a `` Uncle Tom 's Cabin , '' `` Moses in Egypt , '' `` The Drunkard , '' and `` Joseph and His Brethren. '' It be noticeable in this connection that Mr. Barney Williams and Miss Mary Gannon , afterward so famous , commence their career under his management at very small salaries. E. A. Sothern and many other actor who subsequently become celebrate be also from time to time member of the museum dramatic company. It be in November , 1842 , that Mr. Barnum engage Charles S. Stratton , whom he christen Tom Thumb. With him he travel and make large sum of money in different part of the world. Later in life he saw him marry to a dwarf like himself. Regarding a visit which he make with Tom Thumb to the Queen of England , Mr. Barnum in after year write : `` We be conduct through a long corridor to a broad flight of marble step , which lead to the Queen 's magnificent picture gallery , where her Majesty and Prince Albert , the Duchess of Kent , and twenty or thirty of the nobility be await our arrival. They be stand at the further end of the room when the door be throw open , and the General walk in look like a wax doll gift with the power of locomotion. Surprise and pleasure be depict on the countenance of the royal circle on behold this remarkable specimen of humanity so much small than they have evidently expect to find him. The General advance with a firm step , and a he come within hail distance make a very graceful bow and exclaim , 'Good evening , lady and gentlemen. ' A burst of laughter follow this salutation. The Queen then take him by the hand , lead him about the gallery , and ask him many question , the answer to which keep the party in an uninterrupted strain of merriment. The General familiarly inform the Queen that her picture be 'first-rate , ' and tell her he should like to see the Prince of Wales. The Queen reply that the Prince have retire to rest , but that he should see him on some future occasion. The General then give his song , dance , and imitation , and after a conversation with Prince Albert and all present , which continue for more than an hour , we be permit to depart. '' After this visit the General and his manager visit the ruler of France and Belgium and many other notable person in Europe , and be everywhere well receive and entertained. As have already be state , Mr. Barnum very justly regard his engagement of Jenny Lind a one of the great event in his career. That engagement be enter into in 1850. It result in a fortune for Mr. Barnum , and in the payment to Jenny Lind for ninety-five concert of the sum of $ 176,675.09. Besides this sum all the expense of herself and suite be pay by the manager. As high a $ 650 be pay at auction for a single ticket of admission to one of her concerts. During the tour which result so profitably , Miss Lind stop for a day at Iranistan , Mr. Barnum 's beautiful country seat near Bridgeport , which be afterward burned. While there she say to her manager : `` Do you know , Mr. Barnum , that if you have not build Iranistan I should never have come to America for you ? '' `` Pray explain , '' say Mr. Barnum , much surprise , and she go on : `` Well , I have receive several application to visit the United States , but I do not much like the appearance of the applicant , nor do I relish the idea of cross 3,000 mile of water , so I decline them all. But the first letter which your agent , Mr. Wilton , address to me be write upon a sheet head with a beautiful engraving of Iranistan. It attract my attention. I say to myself a gentleman who have be so successful in his business a to be able to build and reside in such a palace can not be a mere adventurer. So I write to your agent and consent to an interview , which I should have decline if I have not see the picture of Iranistan. '' To which the manager gallantly reply : `` Then I be fully repay for building it. '' After his successful engagement with Jenny Lind Mr. Barnum be everywhere regard a be `` a make man '' and at the head of his business. So he continue for a time , engage in many new enterprises. But , a the year go on , trouble fell upon him , and by unwise speculation with what be know a the Jerome Clock Company of East Bridgeport he lose every penny he have in the world. Still he do not give up the fight , but by the help of friend , the increase in value of certain real estate own by him , and the great energy which be ever one of his chief trait , he again commence in a small way ; subsequently take Tom Thumb to Europe for a second visit , and by degree repair his broken fortunes. Later on he again undertake the management of the museum in New York , and upon it destruction by fire establish `` the new museum '' further up Broadway. It be also burn , and he lose much money. So also be his great world 's fair building , build in Fourteenth Street in 1873. But after a time fortune again smile upon him , and a a manager of monster circus and travel show and a a public lecturer he meet with much success in all part of the country. During all his life Mr. Barnum be a great believer in the power of advertising. Indeed , to such an extent do he carry this belief that he spend the entire receipt of his first year in the old museum in make the attraction of that place know to the public. The result prove the wisdom of his course. Still , much a he covet the good office of the newspaper , he be bold enough to stand out against them when he believe that the occasion require it. This fact be fully prove by his quarrel with the New York Herald and the elder Bennett , a quarrel which grow out of difference regard the lease of the museum site , and which result , first , in Mr. Bennett 's refusal to take Barnum 's advertisement , and subsequently in the refusal of the Theatrical Managers' Association , head by Mr. Barnum , to advertise in the Herald. The war be continue for two years. Mr. Barnum have natural genius a an advertiser. No man know good than he the value of printer 's ink. He make it part of his business to be talk about. The more attention he get in that way the good he like it. He have learn the advertising art when a New-York showman , for that be practically what he be until his Fourteenth Street Museum burn down. Jerry Lind and Tom Thumb be card too great to be keep within one city , however large. Excepting the year when they be his attraction he confine his effort principally to please the New-York public. His show in it present extent and character be put in operation within twenty years. When he branch out on this grand scale his idea keep pace with his opportunities. Nothing be too ambitious for him to undertake. One of the great chance of his life come with Jumbo. He have often gaze on that monster with a showman 's eye in the Zoological Gardens at London , but it have never occur to him a possible to possess the English pet. It be reserve for one of his agent to induce the manager of the garden to offer the animal for $ 2,000. Mr. Barnum snap up the offer at once. There be a cry of protest from all England. The newspaper , royalty , the clergy , statesman , and men high in the art and profession lead the outcry. It be take up by the masses. The lady and child become hysterical over the prospective loss. England run mad over Jumbo. Pictures of Jumbo , Jumbo 's life , Jumbo story and poetry , Jumbo collar , necktie , cigar , fan , polka , and hat be put on the market and worn , sung , smoke , and dance by the entire English nation. The funny paper take up the cry and publish coats-of-arms with Jumbo in the lion 's place and label `` Dieu et mon Jumbo. '' Jumbo become nearly an international question. Mr. Barnum be importune to name the price at which he would relinquish his contract and permit Jumbo to remain in London. People crowd the Zoo day after day to see Jumbo. Between November , 1881 , and March , 1882 - the date of purchase and removal - the receipt at the Zoo , because of this craze , increase about $ 15,000 , a sum that might justly be add to the purchase price of $ 10,000 a the total revenue to the seller from this transaction. Mr. Barnum remind the English people of this when they want him to let Jumbo alone. He say he have promise to show the animal in America and have advertise him extensively. Therefore , $ 100,000 would not induce him to cancel the purchase. An animal so herald be bind to make a sensation here. The English craze have be so much advertising for Barnum. When Jumbo and his movement become a matter of deep public interest the newspaper print all they could get about him a a matter of news. As an advertising attraction alone Jumbo be worth to Barnum more than his price. He also become a favorite here , and his untimely death be mourn practically by two nations. Jumbo 's mate , Alice , never awake anything like the popular enthusiasm or affection that Jumbo enjoyed. The bone of Jumbo go to the Smithsonian Institution , and his stuffed hide to the Barnum Museum of Natural History at Tufts College. When Jumbo become an old story , Mr. Barnum secure a his next startling novelty the white elephant. If this animal be not white and if people have their opinion about the search for such an exhibit have involve an outlay of $ 250,000 , this acquisition prove another great advertisement for the show. Mr. Barnum spar no effort to let every one understand that this be one of the world 's wonders. He get up a prize poem competition over the animal , to which Joaquin Miller be a contributor. Mr. Barnum 's gift of a museum to Tufts College be announce at Commencement in June , 1884. A handsome and well-appointed stone building be the result , which cost him $ 55,000. Afterward he contribute largely of exhibit for the museum. A gift equally notable be that which he make in June , 1888 , to the Fairfield Historical Society and Bridgeport Scientific Society of Bridgeport. The land be a corner plot 100 foot square , and he contribute also $ 200,000 for a ten-story building to be erect upon it. Although this gift have be contemplate by him for some time , he have think of make it on his birthday in July , 1888 , when he would be seventy-eight year old. It be make a month in advance. This be the way he explain the change of date : `` I awake about 5 o'clock that morning , and when I look over at Nancy , still sleep , I say to myself : 'I be get old. At my age a man may drop off any moment. Nancy , poor girl , will have enough to bother her when I go without look after the business of the estate. I have well attend to this thing myself. ' I rise and send word to the Trustees to come to my house after breakfast. Before 9 o'clock the whole thing be done. '' Mr. Barnum 's solicitude that no business care should devolve upon his wife at his death have lead him to make and publish his will in 1883. He have three physician with him at the time , who subscribe to affidavit that he be of sound and dispose mind and memory. His estate be then value at $ 10,000,000. The will name twenty-seven heir and be generous in charitable bequests. He value his share in the show at $ 3,500,000. His executor be empower to renew contract to carry on the show for the estate at the expiration of the present contract in 1899. The Children 's Aid Society be specifically name a a beneficiary of a certain percentage of each season 's profits. `` I do n't know anybody connect with that society , '' the great showman explain , `` but I believe in the society. To me there be no picture so beautiful a smile , bright-eyed , happy child ; no music so sweet a their clear and ring laughter. That I have have power to provide innocent amusement for the little one , to create such picture , to evoke such music , be my proud reflection. I believe this society to be the most practical Christian institution in America. I have cater to four generation of children. I want child to remember me. '' Other codicil be afterward add to the will to include the Tufts and Bridgeport institution within it provisions. In April , 1889 , he arrange that the management of his interest in the show after his death should devolve upon his grandson , Clinton Barnum Seeley. Mr. Barnum 's late great personal triumph be win during his visit to England in the Fall of 1889 and Winter of 1890. The feat of carry across the ocean his enormous show compel the admiration of the English people. They forget the Jumbo incident and receive him with popular enthusiasm. All class extend to him every possible honor , and his London season be a most wonderful and satisfy success. No notice of Mr. Barnum would be complete without at least a passing reference to his service in the field of politics. He be originally a Democrat , but when the war break out be one of the most outspoken defender of the Union , and subsequently act enthusiastically with the Republicans. He be four time elect to the General Assembly of Connecticut , and make his mark by advocate the right of individual a against railway monopolies. He also serve with credit a Mayor of Bridgeport , a city in the improvement and beautifying of which he spend much time and money. Such in brief have be the career of one of the remarkable men of this country. Phineas Taylor Barnum be a good father , a faithful husband , a true friend , and an honest public servant. He be a shrewd manager , and in his business make money when he could. From the small of beginning he win notoriety , if not fame , in two continents. His life be fill with the most striking example of what may be accomplish by that peculiar quality know a `` Yankee push. '' His name will long be remember in his native land. He be twice marry , his second wife be an English lady. He engage in live stock enterprise with Vanderbilt , the Eastmans , and others. Bridgeport 's Great Benefactor Mr. Barnum 's Home Life and His Many Philanthropic Works BRIDGEPORT , Conn. , April 7. - From the time Mr. Barnum decide upon Bridgeport a his home his interest be center in what would best benefit the city. He invest largely in real estate , induce manufacturing concern to locate here , and do much to beautify the city. He give part of the land comprise Seaside Park , one of the most beautiful spot in the country. No charitable object be ever refuse assistance by Mr. Barnum , and his name can be find a a Director and stockholder in many of the enterprise that come to this city struggle concern and be now rich and prosperous. When he have , by the accumulation of wealth , pass all question of financial trouble , he use what his foresight have secure to him for the benefit of the poor people. He establish the system of building house and sell them to the work people on long payment and low rate of interest , and hundred of pretty residence now own by the work class here be secure through Mr. Barnum 's generosity. For the past few year Mr. Barnum 's home life be pass quietly at Marina. His household consist of his wife and servant , include W. D. Roberts , for many year his faithful color valet. He be always very happy to see his fellow-townsmen , and to call and chat a few minute with Mr. Barnum be a pleasure many avail themselves of. Marina , his residence , although small compare to Iranistan and Waldemere , the two mammoth structure he have occupy in this city , be most pleasantly situate at Seaside Park , overlook the Sound , and be perfect from an architectural point of view. His reason for tear down the stately Waldemere and build the small residence at the park be , accord to Mr. Barnum 's own statement , to have his wife in a house before he die where he think she would be content to live the rest of her days. Up to the time he be take sick , with the exception of the time occupy in his trip to Denver a few month ago that he might see the Rocky Mountains once more before he die , he have be a familiar figure on the street of this city. He always have a pleasant nod for his acquaintance , and oftentimes stop them to relate some pleasing story. Mr. Barnum be very liberal-minded. When the question of give the Sunday sacred concert at the park for the benefit of the work people be advance last Summer , there be a great howl of indignation on the part of many of the resident at the park. Mr. Barnum , however , take a different view of the matter. He be in favor of it. He advocate it through the local paper , and Sunday afternoon , when the first concert be in progress , drive through the park in his carriage , and be cheer by thousands. There be talk of police interference , and Mr. Barnum tell the leader of the band to come up to Marina and play all day , and the ground would be free to all who wish to hear the music. The Barnum prize medal in the public school of this city and the many prize offer to the scholar come from Mr. Barnum. He invariably attend the prize speaking of the scholar , and take great pleasure in the contests. When in his eightieth year he contract for the filling in of a portion of his land near Seaside Park. The work cost $ 100,000 , and be finish but a short time ago. It be his intention to erect a large Summer hotel on the land , call it Ozone Hotel. Next to Brighton , England , and some other resort in Europe , he consider Bridgeport the most healthy place in the world , and the atmosphere a have the most ozone , and the building of the great Summer hotel be what he most wish to do before he died. He make statement that he have make arrangement to have his wish carry out in this respect. His most recent gift to Bridgeport be that of $ 150,000 for a new building for the historical and scientific society of this city , a description of which have already be print in The Times. He express a wish a few day ago that he might live to see the dedication of the building that be now in process of construction. Mr. Barnum at the time of his death be pay tax on about $ 1,000,000 worth of real estate in this city , and some volume of the record of the city be almost completely fill with his real estate transactions. Appreciated Abroad LONDON , April 8. - The Times , in speaking of the death of P. T. Barnum , say : `` The octogenarian showman be unique. The death of Mr. Barnum remove a noteworthy and almost classical figure , typical of the age of transparent puffing through which the modern democracy be passing. His name be a proverb already , and will continue to be a proverb until mankind have cease to find pleasure in the comedy of a harmless deceiver and the willingly deceived. '' All the newspaper contain long obituary and eulogy of Mr. Barnum. The Show Went On As Usual But It Will Be Closed on the Day of the Funeral The show at the Madison Square Garden go on just the same last night , although the news of the old showman 's death reach his partner at 6:30 o'clock , and be be hawk about by even newspaper vender a the audience arrived. Mr. Fish , one of Mr. Barnum 's secretary , come down from Bridgeport in the afternoon , when the physician decide that death be but a few hour off , and say that Mr. Barnum and all the member of his family wish the show to continue in any event and to be close only on the day of the funeral. Mr. Bailey say last night that it would have be almost impossible to do anything else. He could not turn away an audience of 10,000 people last night and could not get word out in time to stop hundred of people come in from out of town for to-day 's performances. He will announce , however , as soon a the day of the funeral be decide upon , that the show will be close for both performance that day , and all ticket for these performance will either be exchange or the money therefor refunded. Everybody in the company , down to the ring attendant , seem to be greatly affect at the death of Mr. Barnum and every one have his bit to add to the story of the dead man 's kindliness and worth. Mr. Bailey say that his partner 's death would make no difference in the show , a by article of agreement enter into several year ago the company will be hold together for many years. The heir and assigns of both men be direct by the agreement to keep the $ 3,500,000 capital intact and to continue the present aim and policy of the organization .