December 18 , 1894 OBITUARY Death of R. L. Stevenson By THE NEW YORK TIMES LONDON , Dec. 17. -- A dispatch to The Star , date Apia , Samoa , Dec. 8 , confirm the report that Robert Louis Stevenson , the novelist , die suddenly a few day ago from apoplexy. His body be bury on the summit of Paa Mountain , 1,300 foot high. The Westminster Gazette , in an article on the death of Robert Louis Stevenson , say that , although Mr. Stevenson be anything but apoplectic , there be little doubt that his untimely end be due to apoplexy , induce by the heat of the climate. He leave a new novel half completed. The Gazette say the be among the most lovable of modern writer , and the news of his death will be hear with the keen regret. Perhaps no author of recent year have enlist so much personal interest on the part of his readers. The Pall Mall Gazette say that in letter recently write Mr. Stevenson say he have two novel practically complete , but could not be induce to part with them until they have receive finishing touches. One be entitle `` The Chief Justice's Clerk , '' the plot of which be foreshadow in `` Catriona. '' Those who have read portion of this work regard it a his masterpiece. The other book , entitle `` St. Ives , '' be the story of a French prisoner who make his escape from Edinburgh Castle and have stir adventure in a romantic district of Scotland. Mr. Stevenson have many short tale sketch out. He love Samoa well than any other place , except Scotland. His wife , interview recently , say : `` We mean to live in Samoa always and leave our bone there. '' Stevenson 's Forty-three Years Robert Louis Stevenson 's full name be Robert Louis Balfour Stevenson , but the Balfour he have cease to use. He be a native of Edinburgh , Scotland , and the date of his birth be Nov. 13 , 1850. His father , Thomas Stevenson , have eminence in connection with lighthouses. For many year Thomas Stevenson be an Inspector of Lighthouses , and retain his activity in that office until near the time of his death , in 1888. On the English coast he be connect with the building of several house ; in the arrangement of reflector he make important improvement , and some of his knowledge on the subject go into a book which he publish on lighthouse optics. When he die his son write a sketch of his life , and one of his son 's book be dedicate to him , `` by whose device the great sea light in every quarter of the globe shine out more brightly. '' Thomas Stevenson , like most Scotchmen , have dabble in theology. In 1877 he bring out `` Christianity Confirmed by Jewish and Heathen Testimony , and the Deductions from Physical Science. '' The work go into a second edition in the following year. Thomas Stevenson 's devotion to lighthouse come to him by inheritance. His father be that Robert Stevenson who , between 1795 and 1840 , design no few than eighteen lighthouse for the Scotch coast , the chief of which be the famous one on Bell Rock , in which he improve on the one Smeaton have build at Edystone. Of his Scotch origin Louis Stevenson be always proud. He have say in one of his book that to be bear a Scotchman be `` the happy lot on earth. '' But it be a privilege one must pay for. `` You have to learn , '' he say , `` the paraphrase and the Shorter Catechism ; you generally take to drink ; your youth , so far a I can find out , be a time of loud war against society , of more outcry and tear and turmoil than if you be bear , for instance , in England. But , somehow , life be warm and closer , the hearth burn more redly , the light of home shine softer on the rainy street , the very names endear in verse and music cling nearer round our hearts. '' Stevenson 's father intend him for a lawyer , and with that end in view carefully educate him at private school and at the University of Edinburgh. He go far enough with his legal study to be enter at the Scottish bar , and then change the whole course of his life. He begin to travel for his health , and in this found such enjoyment that he take to writing of the thing he saw. Then it be that he enter upon the literary career which have give him fame and honor wherever contemporary literature be read. Before his travel begin he have probably make some attempt at authorship , for to an early period belong these contribution which Mr. P. G. Hamerton obtain from him for his Portfolio and Leslie Stephen for The Cornhill Magazine. His first publish book have date of 1878 , when his `` Inland Voyage '' and `` Edinburgh : Picturesque Notes '' make their appearance. The first of these at once seize public attention. It be an account of travel in canoe by two friend , who take to Belgian and French waters. It be the author 's style which captivate his readers. Some one describe it a a compound of Sir Philip Sidney , Lord Bacon , George Herbert , Stern , and Blackmore. He be see to have rare humor , great insight , refine feeling , and splendid power of fresh description. Mr. Hamerton declare that he be `` one of the most perfect writer live , one of the very few who may yet do something that will become classical. '' The book on Edinburgh naturally appeal to a narrow audience , but it be greatly like wherever it be read. He be not wholly complimentary , have the ability to see thing a they be , but this style and his effective description charm all. Already have Mr. Stevenson begin to show his fondness for France. This be in part due to his uncertain health , but in part also to a genuine liking for the land and people. As early a 1876 he have spend a whole Summer there , and at Barbizon , Grez , and Fontainebleau American artist first make acquaintance with the brilliancy of his mind and the charm of his personality. Out of this Summer come part of the experience record in `` An Inland Voyage , '' and two year later French travel -- the region of the Covennes -- yield up his `` Travels with a Donkey , '' through which , in this country , his rise to fame really began. Of actual scene of travel and adventure the book contain a small amount. Not the occurrence of the journey so much a the way thing be tell make the value of this new piece of composition. Critics saw an improvement on former writings. As he be more natural , so be there a corresponding absence of premeditated art. His sympathy with men and woman be as generous a ever , but his humanity be more health , and his fun sweeter and stronger. Stevenson 's next volume be his `` Virginibus Puerisque and Other Papers , '' which appear in 1881 , and in the following year come his `` Familiar Studies of Men and Books. '' Both contain matter that be repeat from the periodical for which he have write -- The Portfolio , The Cornhill , The New Quarterly , and Macmillan's. In 1882 he publish his `` New Arabian Nights , '' with which be include some short store that originally be publish in The Cornhill and Temple Bar. Of this volume , The Saturday Review remark that there be little be get from the story but pleasure. It praise `` their striking fertility of invention , their charming touch of chivalry , which be by no mean too common , either in real life or in fiction , and that other quality of the author 's also by no mean too common , of make his reader ' cup full of horror , and yet put no offense in it. '' When `` Treasure Island '' come out , in 1883 , fame for Stevenson have already be achieve ; but this work be to widen and deepen it everywhere. The book be say to have have it origin in a suggestion make to the author by a small boy , in whom he be interested , who repeatedly have ask him why he do not write something interesting , like `` Robinson Crusoe. '' Although especially a book for boy , this work give quite as much pleasure to folks grown to man 's estate , and to whom tale of prowess and daring in the Spanish Main have always be captivating. What The Saturday Review admire most in it be , a usual , the style. It say the book be `` write in that crisp , choice , nervous English , of which he have the secret , with such a union of measure and farce a to be in it way a masterpiece of narrative. '' Mr. Stevenson 's first visit to America have be make before `` Treasure Island '' appeared. In the Summer of 1879 he determine to make a voyage from Liverpool to New York in the steerage , and on arrival here he conclude to continue the journey on land in an immigrant car as far a San Francisco. It be an odd mode of travel for one with Stevenson 's refinement and sensitive spirit , but with him love of adventure have ever be one of the strong passions. We may , perhaps , call it an inherited taste -- a survival in the taste of the man of letter of what have be the daily habit and environment of his ancestor for two or more generations. Out of the American trip Mr. Stevenson get a series of magazine paper , and some year later a further fruit be see in his book , `` The Silverado Squatters ; a Sketch from a California Mountain , '' which have to do with a deserted mining camp in the southern part of the State. Originally , the story be print in The Century Magazine. Mr. Stevenson 's charm collection of verse relate to the inner life of childhood follow next. It be appropriately call `` A Child 's Garland of Verse , '' and only two year ago an illustrated reprint of it awaken new praises. Next , in 1885 , come `` Prince Otto : A Romance , '' in which he deal with the moral of marriage , and in 1886 his `` Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde , '' which have enjoy the double reputation of great success on the stage as well a in book and story form. Mr. Stevenson have declare that the principal incident be dream by him many year before he write the story. In his dream he saw Hyde rush into a mysterious recess , take a drug , and then , by the terror that follow , be awakened. Such be the impression the dream make on him that it haunt him for year before he make a story out of it. In the same year be publish `` Kidnapped , '' which be describe a the `` Memoirs of the Adventures of David Balfour in the year 1751. '' It tell of his be kidnap and cast away on a desert island , where he have many suffering , and from which he escape to the west highland of Scotland , there to meet Alan Breck Stewart `` and other notorious highland Jacobites. '' Balfour suffer much at the hand of his `` Uncle Ebenezer Balfour of Shawes , falsely so called. '' Balfour be declare to have write these memoir himself , and the adventure end when the hero be scarcely more than a boy. Most reader be remind of it by `` Treasure Island. '' The workmanship be admire and the horror be relate with such charm and freshness , join to refinement , that reader of fine taste find the work a source of genuine pleasure. Books which now follow be `` The Merry Men and Other Tales and Fables , '' `` Underwoods , '' a volume of verse ; a `` Memoir of Fleming Jenkins , '' and `` Memories and Portraits , '' all in 1887 ; `` The Black Arrow : A Tale of the Two Roses , '' in 1888 ; `` The Master of Ballantrae , '' 1889 ; `` Ballads , '' include two long romance of South Sea life , and `` The Wrong Box , '' ( in which he have the assistance of Lloyd Osbourne , ) in 1890 ; and since 1890 , `` The Wrecker , '' ( also with the help of Mr. Osbourne. ) `` Across the Plains , with Other Memories and Essays , '' and then his book on Samoa , which he call `` A Footnote to History. Eight Years of Trouble in Samoa. '' More recently have appear `` David Balfour , '' ( 1893 , ) and `` Island Nights ' Entertainments '' ( 1893. ) The long story `` David Balfour , '' be widely read in the year of it appearance , and have be greatly admired. Mr. Stevenson , after the year spend in France for his health , seek elsewhere for a good climate than Scotland afforded. At one time he fix his abode at Bournemouth , in the south of England , at a country home , which he call Skerryvore. Again he come to New -York and spend a Winter and some additional month in the Adirondacks , and finally he pitch his tent in Samoa. Great be the surprise of the public when it learn that to this remote Pacific isle the brilliant author have go for a stay that would be prolong , and might be permanent. He be dwell in Samoa when the quarrel among the European power occur , with the awful disaster by which such wreck be do to the war ship of three nations. In his `` Footnote to History , '' these Samoan event find extended narration in which be mingled account of beggar and planter , the strife of consul , the awful hurricane , the scene on the shore and in the harbor when the hurricane have pass , and the making and unmaking of Kings , with the sorrow of one of them name Laupepa. Stevenson 's marriage be as romantic a any tale he ever told. Lloyd Osbourne , who assist him in write two of his story , be the son of his wife by a former marriage , and when Mrs. Osbourne become Mrs. Stevenson she be recently divorce from her husband , Samuel C. Osbourne. She and Osbourne have be marry in Indiana in 1858. Her maiden name be Vandergrift , and in 1861 the couple , with a son and daughter , start for Arizona with a few thousand dollar they have saved. Mr. Osbourne put his money in a mine , for which a few month later $ 100,000 be offered. Osbourne wish to sell , but his partner do not. They hold on , and six month later the mine would not fetch a dollar. Osbourne , with his family , then go to San Francisco , and he so prosper a a court reporter that he send his wife to Europe to educate the children. In Paris Mrs. Osbourne , in 1883 , meet Stevenson , and fell in love with him. Returning to San Francisco she obtain a divorce , and arrangement be at once make for her marriage with Stevenson. Osbourne be invite to the wedding and accepted. On the appoint day he present himself in faultless attire with a lady on his arm , whom he introduce a Mrs. Osbourne. To this lady Osbourne have be quietly marry as soon a the divorce be granted. Some newspaper story have declare that the divorce break Osbourne 's heart , but his prompt second marriage hardly bear out the story. In any event , it be know that a Mr. and Mrs. Stevenson take up their abode in Samoa , so Mr. and Mrs. Osbourne take up theirs in Australia. Each couple go to a land where all the old tie might be forget .