February 21 , 1895 OBITUARY Death Of Fred Douglass By THE NEW YORK TIMES WASHINGTON , Feb. 20 -- Frederick Douglass drop dead in the hallway of his residence on Anacostia Heights this evening at 7 o'clock. He have be in the high spirit , and apparently in the best of health , despite his seventy-eight year , when death overtook him. This morning he be drive to Washington , accompany by his wife. She leave him at the Congressional Library , and he continue to Metzerott Hall , where he attend the session of the Women 's Council in the forenoon and the afternoon , return to Cedar Hill , his residence , between 5 and 6 o'clock. After din , he have a chat in the hallway with his wife about the doings of the council. He grow very enthusiastic in his explanation of one of the event of the day , when he fell upon his knee , with hand clasped. Mrs. Douglass , think this be part of his description , be not alarmed , but a she look he sink low and low , and finally lay stretch upon the floor , breathe his last. Realizing that he be ill , she raise his head , and then understand that he be dying. She be alone in the house , and rush to the front door with cry for help. Some men who be near by quickly respond , and attempt to reassure the die man. One of them call Dr. J. Stewart Harrison , and while he be inject a restorative into the patient 's arm , Mr. Douglass pass away , seemingly without pain. Mr. Douglass have live for some time at Cedar Hill with his wife and one servant. He have two son and a daughter , the child of his first wife , live here. They be Louis H. and Charles Douglass and Mrs. Sprague. Mr. Douglass be to deliver a lecture tonight at Hillside African Church , near his home , and be wait for a carriage when talk to his wife. The carriage arrive just a he died. Mrs. Douglass say to-night that her husband have apparently be in the best of health lately , and have show unusual vigor for one of his years. No arrangement , she say , would be make for his funeral until his child could be consulted. It be a singular fact , in connection with the death of Mr. Douglass , that the very last hour of his life be give in attention to one of the principle to which he have devote his energy since his escape from slavery. This morning he drive into Washington from his residence , about a mile out from Anacostia , a suburb just across the eastern branch of the Potomac , and at 10 o'clock appear at Metzerott Hall , where the Women 's National Council be hold it triennial. Mr. Douglass be a regularly-enrolled member of the National Women 's Suffrage Association , and have always attend it conventions. It be probably with a view to consistency in this respect that he appear at Metzerott Hall. Although it be a secret business session of the Council , Mr. Douglass be allow to remain , and when the meeting have be call to order by Mrs. May Wright Sewall , the President of the Council , she appoint Miss Susan B. Anthony and the Rev. Anna H. Shaw a committee to escort him to the platform , where most of the delegate , not more than fifty in number , be sitting. Mrs. Sewall present Mr. Douglass to the Council , and content himself with a bow in response to the applause that greet the announcement , he take a seat beside Miss Anthony , his lifelong friend. Nothing to indicate that he be not in his usual good health be remark at the time , and to-night , after his death be make know , nobody could recall anything in his appearance or action out of the ordinary , except , accord to the statement of a lady present , that he rub his left hand constantly with his right , a though it be benumbed. The morning session last until after 12 o'clock , and just before that hour an informal discussion be start on the proposition that have be moot for some time , to divide the National Council into an upper and a low house. Mr. Douglass become much interested in this discussion , so much so , in fact , that , when the Council reconvene at 4 o'clock to give further consideration to the matter , he be again present , although it have be his intention to return to his home earlier in the day. He leave the hall on the adjournment of the session , about 5 o'clock , and have be at his home but a short time when his death occurred. When Miss Susan B. Anthony heard of Mr. Douglass 's death , at the even session of the council , she be very much affected. Miss Anthony have a wonderful control over her feeling , but to-night she could not conceal her emotion. Despite her seventy-five year , she immediately announce her intention of go to the Douglass homestead , near Anacostia , and have actually start , when some of her friend , fearful that the journey , with it quota of bad road , and the excitement of a visit to the presence of death would have a bad effect on her , use persuasion to such an extent that she finally consent to defer the trip until to-morrow. She be very much averse to return to the stage in Metzerott Hall , contend that it would appear unfeeling for her to do so , but a a number of the more distinguished member of the council be absent , she agree to take her accustomed place to the right of the preside officer. Miss Anthony and Mr. Douglass form an intimate friendship when both reside in Rochester , N.Y. , and that friendship have continue for many decades. One incident in connection with her relation with Mr. Douglass be recall by Miss Anthony. During the early day of the anti- slavery agitation Miss Anthony and her venerable associate , Elizabeth Cady Stanton , appear at an anti-slavery meeting in which Frederick Douglass be take a prominent part. Women be not welcome a public speaker in those day , and Mr. Douglass have agree to read an address prepare by Mrs. Stanton. His rendition of her write remark do not suit that lady , and , step forward , she take the paper from his hand with the remark , `` Here , Frederick , let me read it. '' And she do so , thus mark the initiative in the appearance of woman a actor in public gatherings. At to-night 's meeting of the Women 's Council Mrs. May Wright Sewall announce the death of Mr. Douglass. There be a murmur express surprise and sympathy , and then the council settle down to the business of the evening. The Slave Who Ran Away Career of the Most Representative African America Has Produced Frederick Douglass have be often speak of a the foremost man of the African race in America. Though born and rear in slavery , he manage , through his own perseverance and energy , to win for himself a place that not only make him beloved by all member of his own race in America , but also win for himself the esteem and reverence of all fair-minded person , both in this country and in Europe. Mr. Douglass have be for many year a prominent figure in public life. He be of inestimable service to the member of his own race , and render distinguish service to his country from time to time in various important office that he hold under the Government. He become well know , early in his career , a an orator upon subject relate to slavery. He win renown by his oratorical power both in the northern part of the United States and in England. He have become know before the civil war also a a journalist. So highly be his opinion value that he be often consult by President Lincoln , after the civil war begin , upon question relate to the colored race. He hold important office almost constantly from 1871 until 1891. Mr. Douglass , perhaps more than any other man of his race , be instrumental in advance the work of banish the color line. Mr. Douglass 's life from first to last be fill with incident that give to it a keen flavor of romance. The exact date of his birth be unknown. It be about the year 1817. His mother be a negro slave and his father be a white man. Mr. Douglass 's birthplace be on the Eastern Shore of Maryland , in the Tuckahoe district. He be rear a a slave on the plantation of Col. Edward Lloyd. He be send , when ten year old , to one of Col. Lloyd 's relative in Baltimore. Here he be employ in a shipyard. Douglass , accord to his own story , suffer deeply while under the bond of slavery. His superior intelligence make him conscious of his wrong and render him keenly sensitive to his condition. The manner in which he acquire the rudiment of his education have become a familiar story. He learn his letter , it be say , from the carpenter ' mark on plank and timber in the shipyard. He use to listen while his mistress read the Bible , and at length ask her to teach him to read it for himself. All the while he be in the shipyard he continue to pick up secretly all the information he could. It be while here , too , that he hear of the abolitionist , and begin to formulate plan for escape to the North. He make his escape from slavery Sept. 3 , 1838 , and come to New-York. Thence he go to New-Bedford , where he married. He support himself for two or three year by day labor on the wharf and in the workshops. He make a speech in 1841 at an anti-slavery convention , hold at Nantucket , that make a favorable impression , and he become the agent of the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society. He then travel four year through New-England , lecture against slavery. He go to England in 1845 , where his lecture in behalf of the slave win a great deal of attention. He also visit Scotland , Ireland , and Wales. Mr. Douglass 's friend in England fear that he might be capture and force back into slavery , and so they raise 150 , by mean of which he be afterwards formally manumitted. Mr. Douglass often meet with many unpleasant experience while travel about , owe to the prejudice that be felt against his race. On one occasion , when the passenger on a boat would not allow him to enter the cabin , his friend Wendell Phillips , refuse to leave him , and the two men spend the night together on deck. William Lloyd Garrison have also become interested in young Douglass , and before Douglass go to England have do all he could to assist him in gain an education. Throughout the anti-slavery agitation , Mr. Douglass 's effort in behalf of the slave be unflagging. On return from England Mr. Douglass found Frederick Douglass 's Paper , a weekly journal , at Rochester , N.Y. The title be change to The North Star. He continue it publication for several years. Mr. Douglass and John Brown be friend , and have the same object in view. Douglass , however , do not approve of Brown 's plan for attack Harper 's Ferry , and the men part some two week before the attack be made. Douglass be in Philadelphia the night the Harper 's Ferry episode occurred. It become plain to him immediately afterward that he could scarcely hope to escape be implicate in the trouble , and at the earnest solicitation of his friend he make his escape to Canada. United States Marshals appear in Rochester to apprehend him a few hour after his flight. He discover , many year later , that a requisition for his arrest have be make by the Governor of Virginia. He go to Quebec , and thence to England , where he remain six or eight months. He afterward return to Rochester , and again take charge of his paper. Mr. Douglass urge upon President Lincoln , when the civil war begin , the employment of colored troop and the proclamation of emancipation. Permission for organize such troop be grant in 1863 , and Mr. Douglass become active in enlist men to fill the colored regiment , notably the Fifty-fourth and the Fifty-fifth Massachusetts. Mr. Douglass return to the lecture field after slavery have be abolished. He attract great crowd wherever he went. His appearance on the platform be imposing. His height be over 6 foot and his weight be fully 200 pounds. His complexion be swarthy rather than black. His head be cover with a great shock of white hair. A large head , low forehead , high cheekbone , and large mouth , with gleam white teeth , be some of the noticeable characteristic of his appearance. As a speaker he be characterize by his earnestness. He make but few gesture and used simple language. He become the editor in 1870 of The New National Era , in Washington , which be afterward publish by his son , Lewis and Frederick. He receive the appointment in 1871 a Assistant Secretary to the commission to San Domingo , and on his return from that mission President Grant appoint him one of the Territorial Council of the District of Columbia. He be elect Presidential Elector at Large for the State of New York in 1872 , and be appoint to carry the electoral vote of the State to Washington. Mr. Douglass be appoint United States Marshal for the District of Columbia in 1876 , and retain that office till 1881 , when he become Recorder of Deeds in the District of Columbia. President Cleveland remove him from that office in 1886. In the Autumn of that year he make a third visit to England. President Harrison make Mr. Douglass Minister to Haiti in 1889. He resign this office in August , 1891. Mr. Douglass 's administration in Haiti be not entirely satisfactory , and for some time previous to his resignation unfavorable repots of the affair of his office have reach Washington. Mr. Douglass go to Haiti just after the revolution that put Hippolyte in power , and that country be still in an unsettled condition. The Haitians do not take kindly to Mr. Douglass , because of his race , and fail to give him the respect to which his office should have entitle him. It be recognize when President Harrison appoint him that it be an experiment , the outcome of which be very uncertain. Some one in comment on Mr. Douglass 's action in Haiti say that he seem to consider himself rather the representative of the negro race than the representative of the United States Government. Admiral Gheradi , who visit Haiti while Mr. Douglass be there , bring back to Washington very unfavorable report of the condition of affair there. There be a great deal of comment in one way and another , and Mr. Douglass think best to resign. He say , however , that the report about his have be snub by Haitian official have be grossly exaggerated. Mr. Douglass write several book that have meet with considerable sale. Among them be `` Narrative of My Experience in Slavery , '' 1844 ; `` My Bondage and My Freedom , '' 1855 ; `` Life and Times of Frederick Douglass , '' 1881. Of recent year he have always be prominent in all movement have in view the social and political advancement of woman , and no later than yesterday afternoon be a welcome attendant at the session of the Women 's National Council , where he be honor with a seat on the platform. Fred Douglass be marry twice , his second wife be Miss Pitts , a white woman from New- York State , who be a clerk in the Recorder 's office while he hold that position. For a time this lose him some case among the people of his own race , but his personal standing and over- powering intellectuality quickly dissipate the sentiment that some seek to disseminate to his discredit. He be one of the most distinguished-looking men that appear on the thoroughfare of the capital. He be kindly dispose to all , courteous , and of gentle bearing , and by all alike , white and black , or of whatever creed , religion , or race , the news of his death will meet only with genuine regret. There be no end of story about Mr. Douglass. One of his most marked characteristic be his intense dislike to be address or speak of as Fred Douglass. It be tell of him that one day , when in the East Room of the White House , on overhear a woman say , `` There 's Fred Douglass , '' he turn to her , make a courtly bow , and say , `` Frederick Douglass , if you please. '' In address a colored school , March 24 , 1893 , at Easton , Md. , near his birthplace , Mr. Douglass say : `` I once know a little colored boy whose mother and father die when he be but six year old. He be a slave and have no one to care for him. He sleep on a dirt floor in a hovel , and in cold weather would crawl into a mealbag head foremost and leave his foot in the ash to keep them warm. Often he would roast an ear of corn and eat it to satisfy his hunger , and many time have he crawl under the barn or stable and secured egg , which he would roast in the fire and eat. `` That boy do not wear pantaloon , a you do , but a tow linen shirt. Schools be unknown to him , and he learn to spell from an old Webster 's spell book and to read and write from poster on cellar and barn door , while boy and men would help him. He would then preach and speak , and soon become well known. He become Presidential Elector , United States Marshal , United States Recorder , United States diplomat , and accumulate some wealth. He wear broadcloth and do n't have to divide crumb with the dog under the table. That boy be Frederick Douglass. `` What be possible for me be possible for you. Do n't think because you be color you ca n't accomplish anything. Strive earnestly to add to your knowledge. So long a you remain in ignorance so long will you fail to command the respect of your fellowmen . ''