July 2 , 1896 OBITUARY Harriet Beecher Stowe By THE NEW YORK TIMES HARTFORD , July 1. -- Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe , the authoress of `` Uncle Tom 's Cabin , '' `` Dred , '' and other work of worldwide reputation , die at her home , 73 Forest Street , at noon today without regain consciousness. She pass peacefully away , a though into a deep sleep. By her bedside at the time be her son , the Rev. Charles Edward Stowe of Simsbury , her two daughter , Eliza and Harriet ; her sister , Mrs. Isabella Beecher Hooker , and her husband , the Hon. John Hooker ; Dr. Edward B. Hooker , her nephew , who be also her medical attendant , and other relatives. Mrs. Stowe 's malady of many year ' continuance , a mental trouble , take an acute form on Friday , when congestion of the brain , with partial paralysis , appeared. During Friday , Saturday , and Sunday Mrs. Stowe be about the house , but suffer very much. Since Monday she have be confine to her bed , and yesterday afternoon become unconscious. Mrs. Stowe , until about seven year ago , be in good health , although she be frail bodily. She be about the city and attend church regularly at the Winsor Avenue Congregational Church , of which her son , the Rev. Charles E. Stowe , be then the pastor. Her health for some time , however , have be precarious , and she have need the constant attention of a nurse , who accompany her about her walk in the vicinity of her home. She always have pleasant word for the child of the neighborhood , with whom she talk in her ramble , and seem to be at her bright when thinking of and talk with them. Her condition have be such that her death at almost any time during the last three or four year could hardly have be unexpected. She first come to Hartford in 1824 , a a schoolgirl , and have live here permanently , with a Winter residence in Florida , since 1865. Mrs. Stowe 's funeral will be attend at her home at 5 o'clock tomorrow afternoon. Relatives , friends , and neighbor be invited. Her body will be take to Andover , Mass. , Friday , on the train leave here at 2 A.M. , on the New-England Road. The burial will be in the cemetery connect with the Andover Theological Seminary , where Mrs. Stowe 's husband , Prof. Calvin E. Stowe , and her son Henry , be buried. Career of the Famous Authoress How the Story of `` Uncle Tom 's Cabin '' Came to be Written The death of Harriet Beecher Stowe be more than the end of a woman 's life of whatever degree of fame. It mark the extinction of genius in a family , and be one of the closing leave in an era of our century. The more famous child of a famous father leave worthy descendant but none of their own mental gift or rank. Rarely , indeed , be there so much in a single life so memorable or so interesting a in that of the writer of probably the most widely read work of fiction ever penned. `` Beecher on Intemperance '' be a famous book in it day. Its author be the Rev. Lyman Beecher , father of Henry Ward and Harriet and the rest , who almost constitute a genus by themselves , so mark be they in their talents. The stern and eloquent old Calvinist parson be settle in Litchfield , Conn. , and there the daughter , who be to surpass her father , marked man a he be in his time , be bear on June 14 , 1812. In those early day of hers perhaps nothing be more remarkable than that simplicity of training which be still characteristic of New-England life in region not yet modernized. They be the affectionate child of love parent , and become such master of laughter and tear a men and woman seldom are. Yet they grow up in a home atmosphere where feeling be repressed. Birthdays and family festival and such little loving gift and word a now pass between brother and sister be infrequent , if not actually discourage in that family. Of her mental trait none be earlier or more fully developed than her memory. The bulk of the Bible and extend passage from most of the English classic be at her tongue 's end and instantly upon demand. But it can not be say that her literary gift be precocious. Last year she herself recall , in an article publish for a charitable purpose , her first attempt at authorship. It be an epitaph compose at the age of eight apropos of the death of a kitten. It be decently bury beneath such an inscription a any bright little girl might write about a loved and dead Tabby : Here lie poor Kit , Who have a fit And act queer , Killed with a gun , Her race be run , And she lie here. Her fifteen year of childhood be uneventful , but spend in an exceptional environment of cultured society with lawyer , minister , and professor , who be frequenter of her father 's circle. Her mother die in her early youth , and she be still a slip of a girl when she go to help her sister Catharine , who be the head of a successful girls school at Hartford. Thus , prosily her life pass until in her twenty-first year , on Jan. [ text unclear ] , 1828 , she marry Calvin E. Stowe , Professor of Languages and Biblical Literature at Lane Seminary , Cincinnati. That be the turn point of her career. Nowhere be the `` underground railway '' and pathetic incident under the fugitive slave law more familiar than on the border of Ohio. Nowhere be there a strong anti-slavery agitation or more flourishing hotbed of abolition than at Lane Seminary. That this remark be not make at random appear from the record that a majority of the student leave the seminary because the Trustees insist upon their disband an anti-slavery debating society. Perhaps the seminary owe it escape from such scene a attend the mobbing of the Colored Orphan Asylum in this city solely to the difficulty of reach it from Cincinnati. In anticipation of violence , the Stowe residence be arm and equip with a large bell to summon help. In her husband 's house many a fugitive be shelter and many a thrilling tale rehearsed. Thus , in a sense , `` Uncle Tom 's Cabin '' be not a freak of fancy. Its inspiration and it incident come from actual life. But the story of that book -- a historical event and influence second only to some of the Bibles of the world -- must be reserve while it author 's life be follow hastily to it close. After leave Cincinnati the Stowes live for a time in Brunswick , Me. , her husband be a professor at Bowdoin College. In 1852 they settle in Andover , in the famous theological seminary of which village he also hold a chair. Thus it be not leave to inference that he be a man of character and part , and in no danger of be submerge even in his wife 's more famous personality. He be an ideal old-time New-Englander , about ten year old than his wife. His flow white beard and silvery hair , fall from a fine head bald on top , suggest the reference to the `` dear old rabbi '' contain in a personal letter to his wife from George Eliot. His death precede his wife 's about ten years. Mrs. Stowe have leave this picture of herself at the age when she write her most famous book : `` A little bit of a woman , rather more than forty , a withered and dry a a pinch of snuff , never very well worth look at in my best day , and now a decidedly used-up article. '' But she hold her own very well , and in another personal letter , in firm and regular writing , she say of herself : `` I be seventy-six on my last birthday , and have all my bodily power perfect ; can walk from three to seven mile per day without fatigue ; have a healthy appetite , and quiet sleep every night. '' She be one of the young friend of the professor 's first wife. Accordingly their first child , twin daughter , be name Harriet Beecher and Eliza Stowe. A young daughter be the wife of the Ritualistic pastor of the Church of the Messiah , Boston. A son , the Rev. Charles E. Stowe , be ordain in 1878 a the pastor of the Windsor Avenue Congregational Church , Hartford. Between that city in the Summer , and in the Winter at their orange plantation , at Mandarin , Fla. , on the St. John 's River , the family divide it late years. In Hartford they be member of a delightful coterie , include Charles Dudley Warner and Mark Twain a near neighbors. Their plain brick residence on Forest Street be remarkable chiefly for the portrait , souvenir , and tribute which have come unsought from famous people all over the world , but the wall be also adorn with many painting by Mrs. Stowe. She be an artist only in the second place , and if she have not become famous by her writing her transcript of natural scene in color would have win her credit enough to satisfy most women. In her library be 26 volume of a somewhat unusual character. They be folios sumptuously bound in morocco , and all case in rare old oak. On the first page be an address illuminate on vellum , and adopt at a meeting at Stafford House , London , Lord Shaftesbury presiding. Following the address come the signature of 562,448 woman , from her who rank next to the Queen to the humblest mill operator in Manchester. But this be properly part of the history of a book more fully to be described. Mrs. Stowe 's literary life begin shortly after marriage , and be long confine to fugitive tale and sketch , afterward assemble and print under the title of `` The Mayflower. '' She do nothing memorable until her maturity , and then leap full-fledged into the company of the illustrious woman of the century. Besides `` Uncle Tom 's Cabin , '' of which the narrative be give below , she do nothing well than `` The Minister 's Wooing , '' ( 1859 , ) which please the critic at least as well a it do the public. Possibly her least happy venture be `` Lady Byron Vindicated. '' In 1853 she have visit England and form the acquaintance of the unhappy wife of the poet , and upon what she then learn be base an unmentionable charge against him. Upon this tour be base `` Sunny Memories of Foreign Lands. '' In 1856 appear her second anti-slavery novel , `` Dred. '' It be a powerful work , but mar by the sentiment inspire by the attack upon Sumner in the Senate Chamber. It be thus that the bitter , avenge spirit be give to Dred at the expense of the art of the story. She have write other work creditable enough , but they will not live. She wisely stay her pen while still it command readers. She have make no sustained effort since the garden party in 1882 , the third in the series give by her publisher to distinguish American author who have attain threescore and ten. The galaxy assemble at Gov. Claflin 's seat , The Old Elms , at Newtonville , go far to answer the taunting query , `` Who read an American book ? '' Surely no history of the Nation and generation be complete without take account of those then assemble in tribute to her genius. The half of them can not be mention here , but there be Holmes and Whittier and Howells and a score of others , not to mention the Beechers , and the authoress of `` Uncle Tom 's Cabin , '' of which some tardy and insufficient account may now be given. America 's great orator have say that true eloquence be very rare , because there go to make it up three thing almost never find together -- the man , the subject , and the occasion. Never be there a ripe occasion than when the country be writhe in it death grip with slavery. Never be there a subject appeal more deeply to the tender sentiment of every human being. And if it be add with appearance of extravagance that never be there an uninspired intellect well adapt to strike the glowing iron , the record be confidently appeal to for the prototype. In the English language the Bible and Shakespeare 's work be it only rivals. Within five year a half-million copy be sell in the United States alone , a degree of success phenomenal , but far inferior to that record in England. In 1855 The Edinburgh Review declare that no record be possible after 1852 , but in that year a million copy be sell in England , probably ten time as many a of any other volume except the Bible and Prayer Book. In each year of the generation since go by the sale have steadily continue , and every year the book in it dramatic form be see upon the stage by many audiences. There could not be a great error than to limit the vogue of the book to the comparatively few million who speak English. Here be a stanza by Holmes , read at the garden party above mention : Briton and Frenchman , Swede and Dane , Turk , Spaniard , Tartar of Ukraine , Hidalgo , Cossack , Cadi , High Dutchman and Low Dutchman , too , The Russian serf , the Polish Jew , Arab , Armenian , and Mantchoo , Would shout , `` We know the lady. '' Lest this should be think poetic license it will be well to give what the lawyer call a `` bill of particular '' in the shape of a few of the title under which this lady have carry her fame to the end of the earth. Here they be , select incompletely and at random , from a compilation by one of her publisher : `` Oncle Tom 's Hutte , '' `` Onkel Tomas , '' `` De Negerut , '' `` De Hut van Onkel Tom , '' `` Tama 's Bataya , '' `` La Capanna dello Zio Tommaso , '' `` Chata Wuja Tomasza , '' `` A Cabana do Pai Thomaz , '' `` La Cabana del Tio Tomas , '' `` Khizhina dyadi Tomaj , '' `` Onkel Tom 's Stuga , '' & c. Who read an American book , indeed ? In one of the above language there be twelve version , and no one know how many editions. It have already be hint how the book come to be written. Escaping slave be familiar to her. She hear their story , she saw their wound , she help their flight. Uncle Tom be the husband of a domestic in her family , and his death be the chapter first written. Topsy be a pickaninny name Celeste who live on Walnut Hills , Cincinnati. Eliza 's escape across the ice float in the Ohio be an incident record in the press of that period by a witness of it , and so the story come to her eyes. Thus she be brim over with her topic when she be ask to write a story for The National Era. It be begin in the expectation that it would run through a month or so , but it be scarcely finish within a year. Week by week , the installment be produce and read aloud to the family before be dispatch to the narrow circle of reader who saw it first. To say that it be not appreciate in serial form be to state the case mildly. Her publisher be anxious for her to stop. Her brother , Henry Ward , warn her to cut it short , l it length should prevent print it a a book. She answer them never a word. Her genius be in travail , and , whatever others might think , she could not stop or turn. The death of Uncle Tom be conceive at the communion table , and when her little son hear it they declare slavery be the wicked thing in the world. After the chapter of Eva 's death , the author be prostrate three day in bed. In one sense , a wholly reverent one , it may be say that she be inspired. She be wholly beside herself and in the control of her idea. She do not consider the book hers. She belong to the book. In her own phrase : `` That be n't mine ; that be give to me. '' Possibly from this accustomed expression of hers come the preposterous story that the wonder- working volume be not hers , but her brother Henry's. In his jesting way he say that he write `` Norwood , '' just to show what he really could do in the way of fiction , and the result `` kill dead '' the theory that he write `` Uncle Tom 's Cabin . ''