June 6 , 1900 OBITUARY Stephen Crane Dead By THE NEW YORK TIMES BADENWEILER , Baden , June 5. -- Stephen Crane , the American author and war correspondent , die here to-day , age thirty years. Stephen Crane step early into literary notice because of his power in word painting. `` The Red Badge of Courage , '' his first publish novel , draw approve comment from various quarter , and some speculation regard the author. In England the opinion be advanced that he must be a veteran soldier , since no one who have not be under fire could so well describe a battle. Mr. Crane dismiss this theory by say that he get his idea from the football field. After this introduction , in 1895 , to book reader , Mr. Crane issue a book call `` Maggie : A Girl of the Streets , '' which have be write by him when he be about sixteen year old and printed privately. In the five year between these book he occupy himself with miscellaneous newspaper and sketch work in this city , printing among other thing verse entitle `` The Black Riders , and Other Lines. '' He print `` George's Mother '' in 1896 , and `` The Little Regiment , '' a war story , and `` The Third Violet , '' in 1897 , his book by that time have vogue both here and abroad. `` The Red Badge of Courage '' be write while he be in New York writing sketch for the various newspaper and in very indifferent financial circumstances. His inspiration for it come from an artist friend whose studio he be visiting. Crane have be read a war story in a current magazine , which he finally toss aside in disgust , say that he could write a good story himself. `` Why do n't you do it , then ? '' say his friend. `` I will , '' say Crane , snatch up his hat and leave the room. The next three day he secure all the book he could find on the civil war in the various public library and read carefully the account of several battles. He know little or nothing about the civil war when he start , but when he have finish his study he be thoroughly imbue with local color. The story which he produce be refuse by all the publisher , but be afterward accept in a condensed form for $ 90 by a newspaper syndicate. When the Graeco-Turkish war break out he be in London. He go into the field a correspondent for The Westminster Gazette and The New York Journal. After that he start for Cuba with a filibustering expedition , which be wreck off the American coast. He then go to Cuba a The Journal 's correspondent and witness the operation at Santiago and Havana and afterward in Porto Rico. After this experience he come to this city , intend to engage here and in London in book writing. While look in the Tenderloin for `` color '' for a story of the seamy side of life he be arrest and have an experience with the police. In court the following day he plead his case so well that the Magistrate release him , and also the young woman arrest with him. He write in 1898 'The Open Boat '' and `` The Eternal Patience. '' For the last eighteen month Mr. Crane live in England , have make his home on an estate in Essex since last Fall. He write , after leave here , two novel and a volume of verse call `` War Is Kind , '' all three book inspire by the Turkish war , and a volume of short story entitle `` The Monster. '' His last work , `` Whilomville Stores , '' a series of tale of child life , be now in course of publication in American magazines. Mr. Crane be bear in Newark , N. J. , in 1871 , and be the son of the Rev. Dr. J. I. Crane. He attend Lafayette College and Syracuse University , but be not graduate from either .