August 26 , 1900 OBITUARY Prof. Nietzsche Dead By THE NEW YORK TIMES Weimar , Aug. 25. -- Prof. Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche , the philosopher , die here today of apoplexy. Prof. Nietzsche be one of the most prominent of modern German philosopher , and he be consider the apostle of extreme modern rationalism and one of the founder of the socialistic school , whose idea have have such a profound influence on the growth of political and social life throughout the civilized world. Nietzsche be largely influence by the pessimism of Schopenhauer and his writing , full of revolutionary opinion , be fire with a fearless iconoclasm which surpass the wild dream of contemporary free thought. His doctrine however , be inspire by lofty aspiration , while the brilliancy of his thought and diction and the epigrammatic force of his writing command even the admiration of his most pronounced enemy , of which he have many. Of Slavonic ancestry Nietzsche be bear in 1844 in the village of Rocken , on the historic battlefield of Lutzen. He lose his parent early in life , but receive a fine education at the Latin School at Pforta , conclude his study at Bonn and Leipsic. Although educate for the ministry , Nietzsche soon renounce all faith and Christianity on the ground that it impede the free expansion of life. He then devote his attention to the study of Oriental language and accept in 1869 a professorship at the University of Basel , Switzerland. This position he hold until 1876 , when overwork induce an affection of the brain and eye , and he have to travel for his health. During these year of suffering and while in distressed circumstance he write most of his works. Since 1889 Nietzsche have be hopelessly insane , live in Weimar , at the home of his sister , Elizabeth Forster-Nietzsche , who have edit his works. For many year he be a close friend of Richard Wagner , the composer. His principal publication be `` The Old Faith and the New , '' `` The Overman , '' `` The Dawn of Day , '' `` Twilight of the Gods , '' and `` So Spake Zrathustra , '' which be perhaps the most remarkable of his work .