September 7 , 1901 OBITUARY President M'Kinley 's Illustrious Career By THE NEW YORK TIMES William McKinley , the twenty-fifth President of the United States , be bear in Niles , Trumbull Country , Ohio , on Jan. 29 , 1843. His father , William McKinley , Sr. , come to Ohio from Pennsylvania. The family be Scotch-Irish , and the President 's forefather come to America 150 year ago. Authentic record trace the McKinlays in Scotland back to 1547 , and it have be claim by those who have make a study of the President 's lineage that James McKinlay , `` the trooper , '' be one of his ancestors. Major McKinley , at a gathering of the McKinlay Clan , an association embrace fully 300 people , at the Columbian World 's Fair in Chicago in 1893 , explain to one who claim a common lineage with him , despite the difference in the spelling of their name , how the `` a '' in the name of his ancestor become an `` e '' in his. `` Your ancestor of the McKinlay Clan , '' say he , `` come to this country directly from Scotland , while mine come from the North of Ireland ; but we be probably of the same original Covenanter stock. '' The crest of the McKinlay Clan be a mailed hand hold an olive branch , and it motto `` Not too much. '' The President 's career seem to have be model on this motto. A gallant soldier himself , his disposition have always be toward peace. He be the last man to hold out against the war with Spain , yet , when it be force against him , he quickly demonstrate , a Senator Foraker once remark in a public speech , that `` he understand the business. '' Youth And War William be the seventh child in the family of nine. His first education be receive in the public school of Niles , but when he be nine year of age his parent remove to Poland , Mahoning County , Ohio , a town which be at that time well know for it educational facilities. There he be admit into Union Seminary and pursue his study until he be seventeen. Excelling in most of his study , he be especially note for his brilliancy in debate. He evince a lively interest in all the great public question of the day , and his speech upon them be worthy of a much more matured mind. His application be intense , and soon his health be so undermined that he be oblige to return home for rest and recuperation , but even then he do not escape a severe illness. When his health be restore he do not return to school , but seek and obtain a place a a teacher in the public school of the Kerr district , near Poland. It be at this period that he join the Methodist Episcopal Church. He become a diligent student of the Bible and be a frequent participant in the discussion in the Bible class of the Poland Methodist Church , to which he belonged. His career really begin at the outbreak of the Civil War. At that time he be a clerk in the Poland Post Office. A war meeting be hold in the Sparrow tavern. At the close of a patriotic speech by an eloquent speaker a call be make for volunteers. Young McKinley be among those who step forward. He go with the recruit to Columbus and be there enlist a a private in Company E of the Twenty-third Ohio Volunteer Infantry. This regiment number among it field and staff officer William S. Rosecrans , after Major General , and Rutherford B. Hayes , nineteenth President of the United States. The life of a soldier be beneficial to young McKinley 's health. During the fourteen month he serve a a private he develop from a slip of a boy to a robust young man. He participate in all the early engagement in West Virginia , the first of these be at Carnifex Ferry. In the winter 's camp at Fayetteville he earn and receive his first promotion -- Commissary Sergeant. It be while he be act in this capacity that the `` coffee incident , '' of which an attempt be make to create ridicule in his first campaign for the Presidency , occurred. Far from be a subject of ridicule , it be an incident which reflect the high credit upon the young officer. The `` Coffee Incident '' At the battle of Antietam , while his regiment be in the thick of the fray , Sergt. McKinley be in charge of the commissary department of his brigade , and , necessarily , his post of duty be with the supply , about two mile from where his famished comrade be battle with the enemy. Enlisting straggler to help him , Sergt. McKinley fill two wagon with can contain hot coffee and other supply , and hurry them to the front. The mule of one wagon become disabled under the terrific fire , but the plucky young officer , undaunted , continue his effort , and finally reach his regiment with the supply , be receive with tremendous cheers. Col. Hayes be badly wound at South Mountain , and when he go home he tell the story to Gov. Tod. The Governor be so impressed with it that he at once request that a Lieutenant 's commission be make out for McKinley. This be do , the commission date from Sept. 24 , 1862. Gen. Hayes in describe this incident in a speech at the Lakeside , Chautauqua , in 1891 , say : `` From Sergt. McKinley 's hand every man in the regiment be serve with hot coffee and warm meat , a thing which have never occur under similar circumstance in any other army in the world. He pass under fire and deliver with his own hand those thing so essential to the men for whom he be laboring. '' While he be a Second Lieutenant McKinley 's regiment participate in a number of minor engagement , in all of which he show great gallantry. On Feb. 7 , 1863 , he receive his commission a First Lieutenant. It be under his leadership that his company be the first to scramble over the fortification at Camp Platt and silence the enemy 's guns. It be at the battle of Kernstown , near Winchester , that he gain his great military distinction. Crook 's army be attack by Early's. crook have but 6,000 men , while Early have 20,000. Gen. Hayes have charge of the first brigade. He be on the extreme right , and be soon attack with such fury that he be oblige to fall back toward Winchester. The movement be successfully execute , except that the Thirteenth West Virginia Regiment fail to retire , and be in imminent danger of capture. Lieut. McKinley be order to go and bring the regiment away , if it have not already fall into the hand of the enemy. It be a mission fraught with the grave peril. As he urge his horse through the open field , over fence and across ditch , the fire of the enemy be pour out upon him. Once he be completely envelop in the smoke of an exploding shell and his comrade , who be watch his gallant ride with the grave anxiety , think he have surely go down. But when the smoke have clear away they saw him sit erect in his saddle and press on. He deliver his order , and the regiment be rescue after a desperate conflict with overwhelmingly superior forces. As McKinley come back with the regiment he be cheer by the whole brigade. Col. Hayes be fill with emotion on see him. He love McKinley a a father , and when he send him on his perilous mission he truly believe , a he say to the Lieutenant on greet him , and a he afterward say in many public address , that he would never see him alive again. That very same night Lieut. McKinley lead a party of volunteer to rescue four gun and some caisson , which be in imminent danger of fall into the hand of the enemy. It be a most dangerous piece of work , gallantly accomplished. The next day , July 25 , 1864 at the age of twenty-one , McKinley be promote to be a Captain. In a fierce engagement at Berryville on Sept. 3 , 1864 , Capt. McKinley 's horse be shoot under him. At Opequan and Fisher 's Hill he again distinguish himself. Soon after the battle of Fisher 's Hill his regiment be detail a a train guard to Martinsburg. On the march the men voted. Capt. McKinley 's first ballot be cast for Lincoln , whose career his own be to parallel so closely , even to assassination. McKinley be with Sheridan at the battle of Winchester. For a time he be on the staff of Gen. Hancock. Later he be assign a Acting Assistant Adjutant General on the staff of Gen. Samuel S. Carroll , command the veteran reserve corp at Washington , where he remain through that exciting period which include the surrender of Lee to Grant at Appamattox and the assassination of President Lincoln. It be just a month before Mr. Lincoln fell a victim to an assassin 's bullet that McKinley receive from him a document which he have always consider one of his most precious possessions. It be a commission a a Major by brevet in the volunteer army of the United States , `` for gallant and meritorious service at the battle of Opequan , Cedar Creek , and Fisher 's Hill , '' sign , `` A Lincoln. '' Major McKinley participate in the final act of the great war drama , the Grand Review in Washington. At the close of the war , although a military career be open to him , he decide to leave the army. On his return to Poland a complimentary dinner be tender to him by the citizen , who take a pride in his military achievements. He at once begin the stud of the law , enter the office of Judge Charles E. Glidden , at Youngstown , Ohio. After one year 's study under the preceptorship of Judge Glidden , he go to law school in Albany , N.Y. , and in March , 1867 , be admit to the bar at Warren , Ohio. Practice of Law Begun On the advice of his sister Anna he decide to settle at Canton , which have since be his home. He always manifest a keen interest in politics , and in the same year that he locate in Canton his first political speech be made. He be elect Prosecuting Attorney of Stark County in 1869 , overcome a large Democratic majority. He be renominated , but miss re-election by 45 votes. Resuming his private practice , he soon build up a profitable business. But in all campaign he be in constant demand a a speaker. Mr. McKinley be marry to Miss Ida Saxton on Jan. 25 , 1871. Miss Saxton 's grandparent be among the founder of Canton nearly a century ago. Her father be one of the prominent banker of the city. Her father 's mean enable her to have every advantage of education and travel , and she have grow into a young woman of many accomplishments. Mr. Saxton be a man of practical ideas. While educate his daughter for the social position which his wealth and standing in the community open up to her , he at the same time desire to guard her against possible adversity by give her a business training. Accordingly he take her into the bank a cashier , a position which she fill for some year with ability. It be while she be cashier in her father 's bank that William McKinley make her acquaintance. Her beauty and her position in society naturally attract many admirer , but her preference for the rise young lawyer be soon marked. She be a teacher in the Presbyterian Sunday school , while young McKinley be teach in the Methodist Sunday school. During their courtship he always accompany her to her church before go to his own. Miss Saxton 's parent make no objection to the man of her choice , and after a brief courtship they be married. Through all their marry life they have remain happy , and their devotion to each other have prove an example to the whole American people. Two child be bear to them -- Katie , on Christmas Day , 1871 , and Ida , in 1873. Both die in early childhood. Since their death Mrs. McKinley have be an invalid. Her dependence upon her husband have be a matter of tender pathos to all who know them , and his tenderness and devotion to her have greatly add to the admiration of the American people for him. It be in 1876 that Mr. McKinley be first nominate for Congress. He be elect by 3,300 majority. During the progress of this canvas he visit the Cy over Gov. Campbell , the Democractic candidate for re-election , be decisive , and he poll the large vote so far cast for Governor in the history of Ohio. Campbell have be elect in 1889 by 11,000 plurality ; McKinley defeat him by 21,500. Soon after his election a Governor the Presidential campaign began. Gov. McKinley be elect a delegate at large to the convention. When the delegate gather at Minneapolis the contest be apparently between Harrison and Blaine. McKinley come out for Harrison. The opponent of the President , when they find Blaine 's chance be not all they have hop , start a boom for McKinley , whose position be then one unexampled in the history of politics in this country. He be the preside officer of the convention when the attempt be make to stampede the delegate for him. It be a most try situation , but he bore himself with coolness and decision. When Ohio record two vote for him he challenge the vote so a to put himself on record for Harrison. When the roll call be complete , Harrison receive 535 vote , Blaine 182 , McKinley 182 , and Reed 4. Leaving the chair , Mr. McKinley mount a seat in the Ohio delegation and move to make the nomination of Harrison unanimous. Gov. McKinley 's campaign tour through the West for Harrison be one of the marvel of the time. He make 325 speech in 300 different towns. For over eight week he average more than seven speech a day. He travel over 16,000 mile and address more than 2,000,000 people. On the expiration of his term a Governor he return to his old home in Canton , where he live quietly for six months. Then the campaign for the Presidency be begin , and all over the country Republican enthusiasm spring up for McKinley. It be soon evident that the honor which twice before might have be his but for his high sense of loyalty , be now to be thrust upon him. In the Republican National convention , hold in St. Louis in 1896 , he be nominate on the first ballot ; and in the ensue election he receive a popular vote of 7,104,770 , a plurality of 601,854 over his principal opponent , William Jennings Bryan. In the Electoral College he receive 271 vote against 176 for Bryan. The First Administration Two fact of high historical importance mark Mr. McKinley 's first four year a President. Spain withdraw it flag from this hemisphere , and gold be declare by statute to be the sole legal standard of value. The acquisition of Hawaii a a territory and of the transpacific island a possession , almost deserve to be bracket , and would have distinguish other administration , but in his case they be logical and subsidiary. Upon both of the important development he take his position by a process of growth. In June , 1897 , he be subject to Democratic criticism for the slowness of his action regard Cuba. In December come his proclamation , through Secretary Sherman , regard the distress and destitution prevail under the Spanish administration , with the appeal for charitable relief. This be do only after consultation with the Spanish Minister Dupuy de Lome. It be not until after the Maine be sink that a hostile tone mark his official utterance. On March 28 he transmit to Congress the report of the court of inquiry , concluding : `` I do not permit myself to doubt that the sense of justice of the Spanish Nation will dictate a course of action suggest by honor and the friendly relation of the two Governments. '' On April 7 he receive the joint representation of the diplomat of Europe , appeal to the `` humanity and moderation '' of the United States in it dealing with Spain. If England have not participate in the representation harm might have be do , but the participation of England rob the innovation of all hostile significance , and a most tactful reply be made. He `` appreciate the disinterested character '' of the communication and rely upon a similar appreciation of the motif of the United States. On April 11 follow his message to Congress advise arm intervention , after a description of Weyler 's policy of extermination , for the reason of general humanity , protection for American citizen , and property , and the general National welfare. Congress promptly respond , give the authority requested. By a unanimous vote $ 50,000,000 be place in his sole control for purpose of National defense. This be do quite casually. Sundry appropriation be make for printing and binding in amount of five figure , then follow three line provide for the beginning of the war from fund in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated. Events march rapidly. On April 22 the blockade of Cuba be proclaim by him , and on June 27 he send his message , advise the reward of Hobson and his almost forgotten companion , Newcomb , Powell , and Hodgson , for their bravery at Santiago. The first week of the following January come his message communicate the Treaty of Paris and peace. His hastily sketch official connection with the Cuban war may be say to end with his order for the burial of the soldier dead on April 4. His Currency Record Only July 24 , 1897 , President McKinley send to Congress a message recommend the appointment of a non-partisan Monetary Commission. He repeat the word of his inaugural , and in due course follow the appointment of the resultless Wolcott commission. He be far from escape reproach for his sincerity and consistency , but look backward in perspective it seem a though his influence upon those more heretical and weak-hearted than himself be quite as great a though he have be so far in advance of them a to have lose his influence through lack of touch with those whose support be essential to action. He recur to the subject with renew vigor in his message to the first session of the Fifty-sixth Congress , make it the lead topic , and the bill which become law be introduce in the House on Dec. 4 , 1890. The Senate propose a substitute , and there be a legislative wrangle , which be no part of his personal record. He cast his unofficial as well a his official influence into the scale , a , for example , by his interview with Senator Chandler and H. H. Hanna , who give publicity to his word in an influential manner. Mr. McKinley 's utterance upon the attitude of the United States toward it dependency , or `` territorial possession , '' be scatter all through his public document since the peace with Spain , and also in a notable series of address at Boston , Ocean Grove , Chicago , and Minneapolis. Here , also , a in financial question , he felt his take no step unnecessarily , and each in logical succession to it predecessor. Upon tariff matter it be almost unnecessary to indicate -- so fresh be the memory of his speech the day before he be shoot -- how he change with the times. McKinleyism and a high tariff be familiar synonyms. He be say to have wear a suit of American weave upon inauguration day be way of proof how the tariff develop home industries. Yet under him no less than ten reciprocity treaty have be negotiate and unanimously check in the Senate. The contrast be eloquent. Mr. McKinley 's speech which be not of public record be among the most notable of Presidential utterances. Upon a Southern tour in 1897 there a comment and controversy over his alleged wearing of a Confederate badge. This spirit of tolerance be further displayed in his speech at Atlanta in December , 1897 , when he pronounce the very last word over the grave of sectionalism .