January 23 , 1901 OBITUARY Longest Reign In English History By THE NEW YORK TIMES The reign of Queen Victoria , who come to the throne of her ancestor in 1837 , be the long in English history ; indeed , it be one of the long in the history of Europe , whether the ancient nation or the modern be considered. English reign remarkable for length be those of Henry VI. , 39 year ; Henry VIII. , 38 ; Elizabeth , 45 ; Edward III. , 50 ; Henry III. , 56 , and George III. , 60. It thus appear that the only reign besides Victoria 's that exceed fifty year be those of Henry III. and George III. In the case of Henry , however , it be to be bear in mind that he ascend the throne when only a boy of ten , with Pembroke and others a Regents , while George III. during the last ten year of his life be a hopeless lunatic , and his son serve a Regent until his death. Victoria 's more than half century of reign begin when she be a grown-up woman and legally of age. No Regent be necessary. At the time of her death also she be the old monarch that ever rule Great Britain. French history , however , supply u with a reign considerably longer than hers , that of Louis XIV. , who sit on the throne of France from 1643 until 1715 , a period of seventy-two year , of which only nine belong to the Regency of Anne of Austria. But German history yield u no parallel. Neither the Carlovingian , the Hohenstaufen , the Hapsburg , nor the Austrian line affords a single reign that exceed fifty year in length. Nor do the long line of Roman Emperors who rule in Rome supply an instance of such length of regal day in power. The long reign be that of Constantine the Great , 31 year ; the next longest that of Valentinian III. , 30 year , while reign so celebrate in Roman annals a those of Tiberius , Claudius , Domitian , Trajan , and Diocletian extend over only 23 , 13 , 15 , 19 , and 21 year , respectively. If we include the late Eastern Empire , one reign of 56 year ( Basil II. , who have a colleague for seven year ) be find and one of 48 ( Constantine VII. , who have several colleague ) . But this be the best Rome can show. In another and great sense , however , be this reign a memorable one in English history. Literary endeavor and the search for knowledge in no other single reign , save that of Elizabeth , make such splendid contribution to the stock of new fact and write word that men will not willingly let die. Science in this reign make such extraordinary addition to almost every department of knowledge and industry that there be no other reign to be mention in the same sentence. The scientific result achieve by the mind of man in the age of Victoria stand alone as at once the wonder and the blessing of mankind. Many former reign contribute their share to the dominion over which Victoria rule , but no former sovereign actually reign over anything like so extensive an area a she. In her time vast area be add to the British Empire in Africa , India , and the Pacific , so that it be never quite so true a in her time that the British Empire be one on which the sun never set. Never before could it have be say by Webster with the same truth , in that fine and famous sentence of his , that the British Empire be one `` whose morning drum beat , follow the sun and keep company with the hour , circle the earth with one continuous and unbroken strain of the martial air of England. '' Parentage and Childhood Though the family name of Queen Victoria be Guelph , and though the royal house to which she belong be that of Hanover , the blood that course through her vein be a mixture of blood that have furnish England with sovereign before the time of the Norman William down through the eight hundred and more year that have elapse with the death of George III. When the Saxon Matilda become the Queen of Henry I. , the Saxon and Norman line be unite on the English throne , and it be a daughter of Matilda , marry in France , who bring in the Plantagenet line. Through a marriage with Elizabeth of York the Tudor family gain the Plantagenet blood , and by a marriage with the Princess Margaret , sister of Henry VIII. and daughter of Henry VII. , the Scotch house of Stuart gain the blood of the Tudors. From this house of Stuart , Victoria claim her crown. Elizabeth , Queen of Bohemia , eldest daughter of James I. , first of the Stuart Kings of England , have a daughter , Sophia , who become the wife of Ernest August of Hanover , and thus the mother of that son who become King George I. of England. Elizabeth of Bohemia be a devoted Protestant , though a a child she have be rear in Catholic surroundings. Her life a a Queen be a stormy and eventful one , for those be day when religion and war be natural associates. Her steadfast devotion to Protestantism cost her much. Her faith be sorely put to the test throughout many year , but Protestants in England get to regard her a a kind of martyr. She could little have believe , however , that such momentous result to her family be to ensue from this devotion. It be that vital point in England 's Constitution which secure crown to `` heir of the body , be Protestant , '' which make a descendant of hers two generation later King of England , and thus set up the Hanoverian line. George III. be the father of a numerous family. Nine be son , of whom two die young , and six be daughters. The eldest son , afterward George IV. , have only one child by his Queen , and this a daughter who die childless soon after marriage. Frederick , the second son , have no child , die before his elder brother , thus make William , the third son , the successor after George IV. William be the father of two daughter , but both die in their infancy. Other child he have have , but they be illegitimate. Owing to the long Continental war of the period and the Royal Marriage act , this son , William , and the next , Edward , Duke of Kent , have remain unmarried until they be middle-aged men. The death of George IV. 's daughter and only child have now make the question of succession very serious. These two son and the seventh son , Adolphus , Duke of Cambridge , be accordingly instruct with their duty to find wife of princely birth , and all three in the same year espouse each a Princess. Two of them , William and Edward , be marry on the same day. It be William 's fortune , a already say , to lose the two daughter that come to his marriage with the Princess , but Edward , who be bless with only one daughter , like Viola , she be `` all the daughter of her father 's house , ( and all the brother , too '' ) not only do not lose the child , she live to become the illustrious Victoria , Queen and Empress. The bride whom the Duke of Kent have choose be already a widow. Her first husband have be the Prince of Leiningen. She be a daughter of the house of Saxe-Coburg , have have two child by her first marriage , and be now a little over thirty year of age and beautiful. The Duke of Kent , when he marry her , be a tall and rather stoutish man of fifty-eight. For various reason , one of them the want of mean to live becomingly in England , they make their home in the Castle of Amorbach , in Bavaria , which be part of the inheritance of the Duchess 's young son by her first husband. In a short time there be promise of a child , and the Duke , anxious that the possible heir to the British throne should be bear in England , conclude to go with his wife to London. They obtain apartment within the plain brick wall of Kensington Palace. So poor be he that the help of friend be require to make the change ; none of these friend , however , be his brother ; the brother be unfriendly to the Duke. In Kensington Palace the apartment assign to them be those which have be add to the old palace by Sir Christopher Wren. Here , on the 24th of May , 1819 , be bear the future Queen of England. From her mother the infant receive the name of Victoria , and from the Emperor of Russia that of Alexandrina. For some year she be commonly know a the Princess Drina , the name Victoria be substitute later on in her girlhood. Considerable pomp attend the infant 's baptism. The gold font which have long be in a state of disuse be bring from the Tower , and the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of London be in attendance to perform the ceremony. Among those present be Prince Leopold , brother of the child 's mother , afterward King of the Belgians , and then the childless widower of that Princess Charlotta , who have be the only heir of George IV. Prince Leopold be a devoted brother and uncle. The future of the Duchess be not bright , and to this brother she become deeply indebted for practical assistance through many years. When the child be six month old she be take by her parent to Sidmouth , on the Devonshire coast , and here in a cottage the Duke soon afterward meet his death. He have come home one day with his foot wet , after a long walk , and have stop to play with his daughter before change his boots. A chill be the result , and a fatal attack of inflammation of the lung ensued. Extremely odd be it that the father of Victoria should be a man who do not marry until he be fifty-eight , who should then have a child in a year , and should die seven month after the child be born. This misfortune to the Duchess be attend by others. George III. die soon afterward , and a his successor have have an unfriendly feeling for his brother Edward , little help be to be expect now for Edward 's widow and daughter , who have be deprive by Edward 's death of all mean of subsistence. It be in this emergency that Prince Leopold 's brotherly generosity become of such value to the stricken family. Back to Kensington they go , and thence to Claremont , the house which belong to Leopold , and where his short married life have be spent. Here he often receive his sister and niece for long period , and saw that their want be supplied. Years afterward Victoria say the day she spend at Claremont be the happiest of her childhood. All the more creditable be the devotion of Prince Leopold when it be recall that the child bear to him , dead a few year before Victoria 's birth , have it live , would have be the direct heiress to the throne. For many year after her birth , Victoria 's position a heir apparent be doubtful. George IV. be still alive , hat his Queen , and might live to have another wife , and by her have children. Even so late a 1830 , when that grossly-dissolute King end his life , the life of William IV. stand between her and the throne. William , however , have no legitimate heir ; he be nearly sixty-five and in rather poor health , and the likelihood that he would now have issue be extremely small. Victoria have not be bring up with any assurance that she be heir to the throne. Strict order be in force that no one should speak to her on the subject. Economy in expenditure be find necessary by her mother. For a Princess , the life of the child be one of very straiten circumstances. Even when her income be only a child 's pocket money , she be teach to limit her expenditure by the amount of money she possessed. Stories tell to show the enforcement of this rule of her mother 's easily explain those habit of economy and saving for which , a Queen , Victoria become a subject of captious criticism from English Radicals. When William IV. become King , Victoria be twelve year old. Statesmen then saw a all but inevitable that this little girl be to be the future Queen , and a bill be bring into Parliament make the Duchess of Kent Regent in case her daughter , by the death of William ere she come of age , should be call upon to take the crown. Matters have go this far , it be think time for her to know her position a a Princess. The story tell be that her governess contrive to convey the information by place in one of her book a genealogical table show the fact. Finding this table and examine it , the Princess one day say to the governess , `` I never saw that before , '' to which answer be make : `` It be not think necessary you should , Princess. '' `` I see I be nearer the throne than I think , '' say she. `` So it be , Madam. '' After a pause the Princess , lift up the forefinger of her extended right hand , remark : `` How many a child would boast , but they do n't know the difficulty. There be much splendor and there be much responsibility. '' At the coronation of William she have not be allow to appear ; nor be she bring forward into prominence in the Court circle. For this her mother be upbraid on one occasion by the King at his own table , and a scene of distress ensue , in which Queen Adelaide be put to confusion and the Princess bring to tears. From the atmosphere of the Court she be withhold so far a possible , and travel in England be make a leading feature in her education. Cities and town , cathedral and historic house be visit and careful knowledge of them obtained. On the Throne In England eighteen be the age at which a royal Princess reach her majority. Victoria pass this period on May 24 , 1837 , on the morning of which day she be awaken by a serenade. Among her many present be a piano send by the King , who lay then on a bed from which he do not rise. Less than a month afterward , on June 20 , at 2:20 A.M. , the King breathe his last , at Windsor. Immediately after this a carriage draw by four horse and contain the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord Chamberlain depart for Kensington Palace , and at 5 o'clock dash up the central avenue that lead to the door. What follow have be describe in the `` Diary '' of Miss Wynn : `` They knock , they ring , they thump for a considerable time before they could arouse a porter at the gate ; they be again kept wait in the courtyard ; then turn into one of the low room , where they seem to be forget by everybody. They ring the bell and desire that the attendant of the Princess Victoria might be send to inform her royal Highness that they request an audience on business of importance. After another delay and another ringing to inquire the cause , the attendant be summon , who state that the Princess be in such a sweet sleep that she could not venture to disturb her. They then say : 'We be come on business of State to the Queen , and even her sleep must give way to that. ' It do , and to prove that she do not keep them wait , in a few moment she come into the room in a loose white nightgown and shawl , her nightcap throw off and her hair fall upon her shoulder , her foot in slipper , tear in her eye , but perfectly collect and dignified. '' About the first word the young Queen speak when she be tell the news be to request the Archbishop to pray for the widowed Queen Adelaide. When they have depart she go to her mother and inform her of the mighty change in her fortunes. Then she address a letter of condolence to her aunt Adelaide , ask her to remain at Windsor as long a she pleased. The letter be address `` To her Majesty the Queen. '' She be remind that she ought to write instead , `` To her Majesty the Queen Dowager , '' but her answer be : `` I be aware of that , but I will not be the first to remind her of her altered position. '' It be arrange that a Council should be hold that day at Kensington. The hour fix be 11 A.M. In Greville 's `` Diary '' the following account of this Council , which a familiar picture by Sir David Wilkie have make well know , be give , and Greville be not a man give to emotion : `` Never be anything like the first impression she produce , or the chorus of praise and admiration which it raise about her manner and behavior , and certainly not without justice. It be very extraordinary , and something far beyond what be looked for. Her extreme youth and inexperience , and the ignorance of the world concern her , naturally excite intense curiosity to see how she would act on this try occasion , and there be a considerable assemblage at the palace , notwithstanding the short notice that have be given. She be plainly dressed and in mourning. After she have read her speech and take and sign the oath for the security of the Church of Scotland , administer by the Archbishop of Canterbury , the Privy Councilors be swear ; the two royal Dukes first by themselves , and , a these old men , her uncle , kneel before her swearing allegiance and , kiss her hand , I saw her blush up to the eye , a if she felt the contrast between their civil and their natural relation , and this be the only sign of emotion that she evinced. Her manner to them be very graceful and engaging ; she kiss them both and rise from her chair and move toward the Duke of Sussex , who be furthest from her and too inform to reach her. She seem rather bewilder at the multitude of men who be swear and who come one after the other to kiss her hand ; but she do not speak to anybody , nor do she make the slight difference in her manner , or show any in her countenance to any individual of any rank , station or party. I particularly watch her when Melbourne and the Ministers , and the Duke of Wellington , and Peel approach her. She go through the whole ceremony , occasionally look at Melbourne for instruction when she have any doubt what to do , which hardly ever occur , with perfect calmness and self-possession , but at the same time with a graceful modesty and propriety particularly interesting and ingratiating. On the following day occur the ceremony of the proclamation , when , accord to custom , the Queen make her appearance at the open window in St. James 's Palace , surround by the great noble of the realm in their robe of state. At Kensington a range of apartment separate from her mother 's be at once set apart for her use , and there she live until July 13 , when she leave the home of her childhood for Buckingham Palace. She do not go to Windsor until the September of that year , and she then review her troop from on horseback. She open the first Parliament of her reign in November , and in the following June she be formally crown in Westminster Abbey. Harriet Martineau , an eye-witness , have describe that scene with much felicity. `` The throne , '' say she , `` cover , a be it footstool , with cloth of gold , stand on an elevation of four step in the centre of the area. The first peeress take her seat in the north transept opposite at 6:45 , and three of the Bishops come next. From that time the peer and their lady arrive faster and faster. Each peeress be conduct by Goldsticks , one of whom hand her to her seat and the other bore and arrange her train on her lap and saw that her coronet , footstool , and book be comfortably placed. About 9 the first gleam of the sun start into the Abbey , and presently travel down to the peeresses. I have never before see the full effect of diamonds. As the light travel , each lady shone out a a rainbow. The brightness , vastness , and dreamy magnificence of the scene produce a strange effect of exhaustion and sleepiness. '' Wife and Mother Albert , Prince Consort of England , be the second son of Ernest , Duke of Saxe-Coburg- Gotha , and be bear Aug. 26 , 1819 , so that he be three month young than Victoria. Five year after his birth his father and mother have separate , two year later the mother be divorce , and in 1831 she die , have never see her son since the separation. Prince Albert first saw the Princess Victoria in the Spring of 1836 , when he make a visit to England with his father and his elder brother. The visit last a month , and the cousin be believe to have part very reluctantly. Victoria , in a letter to her uncle , beg him to `` take care of the health of one now so dear to me , and to take him under your special protection. '' From a much early time the idea of a union between these two have be entertain at Saxe-Coburg , and a Victoria 's accession become more and more a certainty it take firm hold. Meanwhile , great care be take with the education of the Prince. For one thing , it be necessary that he should know English. The position he be likely to fill be keep clearly in view. When Victoria have become Queen , Albert write that he have hear with great satisfaction of the `` astonishing self-possession '' she have shown. `` You be Queen , '' say he , `` of the mighty land of Europe. In your hand lie the happiness of millions. '' Albert be not Victoria 's only suitor. She be indeed a great catch ; there be none like her in Europe. There have scarcely be one like her in England since Elizabeth. She be seek by Prince Alexander of the Netherlands , by Prince Adalbert of Prussia , by Duke Ernest of Wurtemberg , and even , it be say , by Prince George of Cambridge , her cousin , afterward the Duke of Cambridge , and whose morganatic wife , Mrs. Fitz-George , die early in 1890 , the only wife he ever choose to have. Albert well understand how the strict etiquette of the Court oblige the Queen to take the initiative , and hence , on his second visit , in October , 1839 , when the purpose of his visit be clearly understood , he wait anxiously for some sign of the Queen 's decision in his favor. This he have the happiness to obtain on the second evening of his visit , at a ball , when she give him her bouquet , and he receive a message from her that she desire to speak with him on the following day. Victoria up to this time have be somewhat reluctant to consider an immediate marriage , a she think both herself and Albert too young , but State reason and the wise influence of Prince Leopold , who be uncle to both , prevail to change her inclinations. In the following year occur the wedding. Albert land at Dover and go thence to Canterbury and London , be receive at Buckingham Palace at the hall door by the Queen and her mother , attend by the whole household. In order that the people might be good please the Queen decide upon noon a the hour for the wedding , instead of the evening hour common with royal persons. The wedding take place in the Chapel of St. James 's Palace , and thence Queen and Prince be drive to Windsor , the road be line with rejoice crowds. Three day be pass at Windsor and then they return to London to receive the congratulation of the people. One of the most charming and wholesome domestic picture that royal life have afford be furnish in the married life of Albert and Victoria. Its influence on English domestic life in general must have be far-reaching. Prince Albert be a man of honest purpose and devoted affection ; he be endow with noble ambition guide by intelligence. Painting , etch , and music be accomplishment that afford amusement to both , and the Prince be a man of taste and skill in landscape gardening. He love a country life and early hours. To these taste the Queen learn to conform , though she have formerly prefer town life ; in fact , she become eventually a fond of the country a be he. Many glimpse of their domestic occupation and manner be afford in the biography of the Prince and the journal keep by the Queen , which be make public several year ago. Elsewhere interest glimpse have also be given. One of the most interesting be contain in a letter from Mendelssohn to his mother. He have be ask by the Prince to play on the organ at Buckingham Palace and call by appointment. `` I find him alone , '' say Mendelssohn , `` and a we be talk the Queen come in also , alone , in a simple morning dress. She say she be oblige to leave for Claremont in an hour , and then , suddenly interrupt herself exclaim : 'But , goodness , what a confusion ! ' for the wind have litter the whole room and even the pedal of the organ ( which , by the way , make a very pretty figure in the room ) with leaf of music from a large portfolio which lay open. As she speak she kneel down and begin pick up the music. Prince Albert help , and I , too , be not idle. '' The difficulty encounter at the outset of this union be incident to the peculiar relation of the Queen and Prince. Head of the family though the Prince be in his position a husband , his place in public affair be necessarily subordinate. Great tact and a large amount of genuine sense and right feeling be necessary on his part to make the path a smooth one. Undoubtedly the common judgment now be that he bore himself with conspicuous good sense and dignity in this try situation. His character be naturally strong. His disposition be essentially resolute , and a proper degree of independence be essential to his happiness. In the royal household many be reluctant to surrender the power they have formerly exercise , and others be disappoint that the husband of the Queen be a foreigner. To a friend the Prince write , in the May follow his marriage , that his difficulty be to fill his place `` with proper dignity , '' because he `` be only the husband and not the master of the house. '' The Queen , however , soon show her determination that in all matter not affair of State the Prince be to exercise paramount authority. Sir Theodore Martin , the biographer of the Prince , say the example of the Queen be itself `` enough to quell resistance , '' while the Prince 's own `` tact , forbearance , and superior grasp of mind be not long in remove every obstacle to his legitimate authority. `` In find his right position in regard to public affair , the Prince have to feel his way cautiously and to inspire confidence in his ability and tact no less than in his freedom from personal ambition. '' A large degree of credit for his success belongs to Baron Stockmar , who , along with Prince Leopold , have be and still continue to be an efficient and successful guide and adviser to the Prince. No act of the Prince 's life at this time show his sense of his position with good effect on the English people than his letter to the Duke of Wellington decline to become Field Marshal Commander in Chief of the English Army. In this letter he say he have resolve `` to sink his own individual existence in that of his wife ; to aim at no power by himself or for himself ; to shun all ostentation ; to assume no separate responsibility before the public ; to make his position entirely a part of hers. '' The Queen become the mother of nine children. The first be bear in November , 1840. This be the Princess Royal , ( Victoria by name , ) who afterward ( 1858 ) be marry to the Crown Prince of Prussia , and have since become know a the Empress Frederick of Germany. On Nov. 9 , 1841 , be bear Albert Edward , the Prince of Wales , who marry the Princess Alexandra of Denmark in 1863. The third child be Princess Alice , bear in 1843 , marry to Prince Louis of Hesse-Darmstadt in 1862 , and who die in 1878. The fourth be Alfred , Duke of Edinburgh , bear in 1844 , marry to the Grand Duchess Marie Alexandrovna of Russia in 1874 , assume the title of Duke of Saxe-Coburg Gotha , and die July 30 , 1900 ; the fifth be Princess Helena , bear in 1846 , and marry in 1866 to Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein ; the sixth , Princess Louise , bear in 1848 , and marry to the Marquis of Lorne in 1871 ; the seventh , Arthur , Duke of Connaught , bear in 1850 , and marry to the Princess Louise of Hohenzollern in 1879 ; the eighth , Leopold , Duke of Albany , bear in 1853 , marry to the Princess Helene of Waldeck-Pyrmont in 1882 , and die in 1884 , and the ninth and last , Beatrice , bear in 1857 , marry to Prince Henry of Battenberg in 1885 , and widow , Jan. 20 , 1890. These child of the Queen , with one exception , have each have child of their own. A few year ago the record stand : The Princess Royal , six , of whom the present Emperor of Germany be the old ; the Prince of Wales , six , of whom one die in infancy , and the eldest of whom , Albert Victor , bear in 1864 , die in July , 1892 , leave his brother , the Duke of York , heir to the throne after his father ; Princess Alice , one ; the Duke of Edinburgh , five ; Princess Helena , ( sometimes call Princess Christian , ) four ; Princess Louise , none ; the Duke of Connaught , three ; the Duke of Albany , one , and Princess Beatrice , two. Several of the Queen 's grandchild be already marry , and she have be for some year a great- grandmother. First among them be the present Emperor of Germany , whose first child be bear in 1882 ; another be his sister Sophia , marry to the Crown Prince of Greece , and another , the daughter of the Prince of Wales , marry in 1889 to the Duke of Fife , a marriage which give satisfaction in England for the negative reason that it be not contract with a prince of German blood. Antipathy to German Princes be now an instinctive feeling to a large class of the English people. It date back to the beginning of the Hanoverian line , early in the eighteenth century. A saying of Lord Chesterfield 's illustrate how deep this feeling be in his time. There have be discussion of the Stuart Pretender. Chesterfield say England ought to contrive to make him Elector of Hanover , for this would make it certain he could never mount the throne of England. At the time of her first jubilee , which be celebrate with extraordinary splendor on a perfect June day in 1887 , the Queen have thirty-one grandchild live and six great- grandchildren. The second or diamond jubilee , ten year later , celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of her succession , be equally impressive in it pageantry. Until Her Widowhood The domestic life of the Queen for the twenty year her husband live be singularly happy. Fate seem to shower upon her every blessing to which a woman could aspire. It be not an eventful twenty year ; eventful year be seldom year of happiness. The record of this period , besides the birth of child , embrace travel to various part of her dominion and the Continent , return visit from European sovereign , the purchase and enlargement of country home , and the education of her children. Following the christening of the Prince of Wales with much state and splendor in 1842 come the visit of the King of Prussia , against which various Courts have intrigue in vain ; then the first visit to Scotland , which she be subsequently to love so well , and then her visit to King Louis Philippe of France. The year 1844 be mark by several royal visit to London. First come the King of Saxony , then the Emperor of Russia , and then the King of the French. In 1845 the Queen go to Germany with the Prince , and be entertain by the King of Prussia. A few year of married life have inspire a wish for home remote from London. In September , 1846 , possession be take of the house at Osborne , on the Isle of Wight. It be private property , and the Prince enlarge and beautify it , bestow upon it the best product of his taste in landscape gardening. The pride of the Prince in this place be that he make his farming pay. The place be really create by him. Even the tree in most case owe their existence to him. By his will the Prince make Osborne the personal property of the Queen. In 1846 the royal family sail around the west coast of Scotland , visit the Duke of Argyll , and explore Fingal 's Cave. `` It be the first time , '' write the Queen , `` that the British standard with the Queen of Great Britain and her child have ever enter Fingal 's Cave , and the men give three cheer , which sound very impressive there. '' This visit renew the Queen 's liking for the Scotch Highland country , and desire for a home there take definite form when her physician recommend the air and climate. The Balmoral property be then acquired. It be only a small castle , with a picturesque tower and a garden in front. Improvements on a vast scale be necessary ere it should take on it present fine proportions. It be build of red granite , in baronial style , with gable and turret and a square clock tower. Like Osborne , Balmoral be private property. In the Autumn of 1855 , when the Queen first occupy Balmoral , news reach her by telegraph of the fall of Sebastopol. Bonfires be light on the hill to commemorate the event. Here come in that Autumn the Crown Prince of Prussia to woo and win the eldest daughter of the Queen , who be now the Empress Frederick. One of the royal visit that belong to those happy twenty year be a visit to Ireland , one of three or four make by the Queen. It occur in 1849 , and be the first royal visit to Ireland since 1821. She land in the Cove of Cork , on a spot to which be give the name of Queenstown. She go on to Dublin , and express much delight at the enthusiasm with which she be received. Waving her handkerchief from the paddlebox a the royal yacht be about to sail away , an old woman in the crowd below call out to her : `` Och , Queen darlint , make one of the childer Prince Patrick and ould Oireland will die for ye ! '' Ten month later the Queen 's fourth son be born. She name him Arthur , after Ireland 's great soldier , the Duke of Wellington , and Patrick , after Ireland 's patron saint. Early in the sixty , sorrow thick and first come upon the Queen. Her mother , after a surgical operation upon her arm , be take with a chill , and when the Queen arrive be unconscious. She die without recognition. Relatives of Queen and Prince by marriage , the King of Portugal and his brother , Prince Ferdinand , die of typhoid fever. Then come the unlooked-for illness of the Prince Consort. `` Am full of rheumatic pain , '' write the Prince in his diary , `` and thoroughly unwell. Have scarcely close my eye at night for the past fortnight. '' He have grow gradually bad , when news come of the seizure of Mason and Slidell from the British steamer Trent. Lord John Russell advise the Queen to demand reparation and forward a dispatch for her approval. The term of this dispatch seem to the Prince too harsh. He write out his objection , tell the Queen he could scarcely hold his pen while do so. These suggestion be adopted. Late in December the Prince Consort breathe his last. The body be deposit in the royal vault in St. George 's Chapel , and subsequently remove to the splendid mausoleum erect to hold it. Victoria 's life after her husband die continue for many year to be one of quiet seclusion. Her people saw little or nothing of her , and the project with which she be occupy for do honor in public to his memory be , for the most part , the only one in which she manifest particular interest. So prolong be this devotion of hers that many criticism be at length make on the seclusion of the Queen. Radical leader be not slow to make use of these circumstance and to point out her obligation to the country a thing to which private sorrow should give way. One would search long to find a record of such absorbed devotion on the part of a reign monarch. The memorial erect in Albert 's honor suggest in their way the most notable that history records. On the Appian Way , beyond the wall of Rome , the wealthy Roman of his time rear `` a stern round tower '' to the memory of his wife , which survive to our time a one of the most interesting monument that the traveler in that land beholds. On the bank of a river in a land over which Victoria rule , another eminent man set up a memorial to his wife , in what we know a the Taj Mahal , which have come to be accept a the most beautiful architectural tribute that exist in memory of a lost wife , Victoria 's tribute be to a lose husband. The Prince Consort have be dead not three month when the Queen laid at Frogmore the first stone of the mausoleum that now hold his dust. A few year later she begin at Balmoral the immense cairn bear the inscription , `` To the Beloved Memory of Albert , the Great and Good Prince Consort , Erected by His Brokenhearted Widow , Victoria , 21 August , 1862. '' Six of her child ( `` my poor six orphan '' she call them ) place each a stone upon this pile. Granite without mortar be use in it construction , the shape be that of a pyramid. In various city , among them Edinburgh and Aberdeen , statue of the Prince Consort be set up , and in London the colossal Albert Memorial , which be for a long time a spot of extensive pilgrimage to all visitor to London. In 1867 she lay the foundation stone of the Albert Hall of Arts and Sciences , in which be carry out a project the Prince have in hand when he died. These year in the sixty be of further note in a domestic way for marriage , death , and births. In 1863 the Prince of Wales complete his twenty-first year , and be married. One of the grand sight London have see be the reception it give to the bride of the Prince , the beautiful daughter of the King of Denmark. On hilltop throughout England , Scotland , and Wales , be set beacon lights. The marriage take place in St. George 's Chapel , at Windsor , and be witness by the Queen from a recess or closet. She be still in deep mourning , and do not join the wedding party. Another marriage of special interest occur in 1870 , be that of Princess Louise and the Marquis of Lorne. This be a union between a Princess and a subject , a be the Fife marriage of 1889. Old George III. would never have sanction such a union. His Marriage act forbid it , except with the approval of the reign sovereign. Private grief come to the Queen in 1864 , when her uncle Leopold , then King of the Belgians , pass away ; he have be a friend of great value to the Princess Victoria in her childhood , and she felt the loss keenly. The five year now past have take from her not only this uncle , who be like a father to her childhood , but her husband and her mother. Six year later come the illness of the Prince of Wales , when his life be for some day in great danger from typhoid fever. On his recovery the Queen go in state to St. Paul 's Cathedral to give thanks , and the day be make a national festival. It be a day in February , and she sit in an open carriage with the Prince at her side. The route go lay along the Strand and Fleet Street , and return along Oxford Street. In August of the same year a visit be pay to Edinburgh , when the Queen occupy room in the historic Palace of Holyrood. In September her half-sister , the Princess Hohenlohe-Langenburg , to whom she be much attach , died. After the Franco-Prussian war England receive the royal French exiles. Chiselhurst , in Kent , become the home of the failed Emperor , his wife , and son , and much kindness be show to them by the Queen , who retain for many year afterward a special fondness for the afflicted ex-Empress Eugenie. When Napoleon die , in 1873 , 40,000 person be say to attend his funeral , 2,000 of them be French. The Queen in that year receive a visit from the Shah of Persia and the Czar of Russia , whose daughter have just become the wife of the Queen 's second son. With Lord Beaconsfield a Prime Minister in 1877 a new eminence be acquire by the Queen. She be make Empress of India , and proclamation of the fact be formally make in the old Mogul capital of Delhi , as well a at Calcutta , Bombay , and Madras. She open Parliament in person that year and do Lord Beaconsfield the great honor of a visit to his home , Hughenden Manor , where she take luncheon and plant a tree. In December of the next year , on the seventeenth anniversary of her father 's death , die Princess Alice , and in March , 1884 , another child of the Queen , the Duke of Albany , died. Readers will not fail to recall the message send to Mrs. Garfield on the death of the President : `` Words can not express the deep sympathy I feel with you at this terrible moment. May God support you a He alone can ! '' Another event , the marriage of Princess Beatrice , in 1885 , should be add to this domestic record. She be the young of the Queen 's child and have long be her mother 's inseparable companion. Mr. Frith , the artist who paint a picture of the Prince of Wales 's marriage , relate that he once ask the Princess at Windsor if she would not have like to be one of the bridesmaid at her brother 's wedding. `` No , I do n't like wedding , '' she said. `` I shall never be marry ; I shall stay with Mamma. '' This undoubtedly be the fate already fix up a in store for her. Her marriage , however , be at the time understood to have take place with the understanding that she be not to leave her mother. Her husband die in 1896. Queen Victoria 's life be several time in danger from violence. Serious illness she never know until the last. When a Princess , some shot from a gun accidentally pass very near her. After she be a Queen repeat attempt be make to shoot her. Four month after her marriage , a young bartender out of employment fire at her twice while she be rid with the Prince at Windsor , both shot miss them. In the next year a man snap a pistol at her carriage window a she be return from church in London , but the charge fail to go off. On the day after this man 's sentence of death be commute to transportation for life another pistol be snap at her carriage , but it , too , miss fire. Other attempt be make in late year , but the Queen be never hit. She appear to have be a safe from harm a Washington appear to be to the Indians , who think he bore a charmed life. Reform Bills and Ireland From the forego review of what may be call the personal side of the Queen 's life the course of this article naturally revert at this point to the public measure and event of this remarkable reign. When Victoria assume the crown , English statesman have be for some year occupy with measure of electoral reform. The new Ministry , head by Lord Grey , that come into power with the accession of William IV. , in 1830 , prepare a bill in March of the next year , and after a dissolution finally carry it in the Commons in September on a third reading by a majority of 100. But the Lords postpone the reading of it for six month and Parliament be prorogued. In December of the same year , when Parliament reassemble , what be know a the act of 1832 be read in the Commons without division , and in March go to a third reading by a majority of 116. In the House of Lords the fate of the measure be not so happy. By a majority of 9 it get to a second reading in April , 1832 , but before further progress be make a motion that enfranchisement should precede disenfranchisement lead to a majority vote of 35 against the Ministry , which resign two day later. Great public excitement ensue on this defeat. Prominent in opposition to the measure have be the Duke of Wellington , whose fall a Prime Minister before Earl Grey be due to his declaration against any kind of Parliamentary reform. This opposition make the Duke extremely unpopular for a time. On the anniversary of his victory at Waterloo he be hoot by a mob in London , and he consider it necessary to protect the window of his town residence , Apsley House , by iron shutters. Late in the year 1832 the bill be at last make a law , Earl Grey have be induce to resume office on obtain power from the King to create enough new Peers to secure a majority. By this reform bill 56 borough in England , contain population of less than 2,000 each , be disfranchise , 30 others be reduce to one member only , 22 new one be create with power to send two member , and 20 others with power to send one. These borough which have be disfranchise be rotten boroughs. Victoria thus ascend the throne with a Parliament elect very differently from the Parliaments former sovereign have meet on their accession , and the note of progress have be thus auspiciously sound , a new era in Parliamentary government be about to open. If her reign do not see this reform act pass , she be the first English sovereign who have not to recognize these rotten boroughs. Later on in her reign reform bill become familiar subject in Parliamentary life. Twenty- two year after William IV. have set his name and seal to the act of 1832 Lord John Russell introduce a new bill , but the war with Russia in the Crimea lead to it withdrawal. Five year later Mr. Disraeli bring in a bill , and it be rejected. In the following year Lord Palmerston bring forward a bill , only to withdraw it. Other bill follow in rather rapid succession , to meet no good fate. Great reform meeting be hold in the large town , one in London in 1866 have a a feature a procession of 25,000 men , and one in 1867 a procession of 18,000. As a result , finally , be pass the act which receive the royal assent in August , 1867. By this the franchise be grant in borough to householder rat for relief of the poor and to lodger resident for twelve month and pay £ 10 a year , and in county to person of property of a clear annual value of £ 5 , and to occupier of land or tenement pay £ 12 a year. Reform act of late date be those of 1884 and 1885 , which , together , form an enactment which have be pronounce `` the most extensive reform ever attempt in England. '' By the one of 1884 the suffrage which in 1867 have be confer upon householder and lodger in borough be now extend to the same class in counties. Household suffrage be thus establish for county as well a boroughs. It apply to Scotland as well a England , and be extend to Ireland. England thenceforth practically have possess universal suffrage. Just a bill for reform of the suffrage have be an almost constant feature of Parliamentary discussion , so have the Irish question ; this question , like the poor , England have have always with her. The legislative union of the two island be only two year old when Emmet 's insurrection occurred. This be in 1803. Seventeen year later George IV. make his visit. Then , in 1829 , be pass the Roman Catholic Emancipation act , and in 1831 the Irish Reform act , result closely link with the public career of Daniel O'Connell. When Victoria come to the throne the poor law be before Parliament , and a year later be ready for her signature. In 1840 be form the Young Ireland Party , follow by the great repeal movement ; O'Connell 's trial for political conspiracy and his conviction , the failure of the potato crop , O'Connell 's death , the transportation of O'Brien , Meagher , McManus and O'Donoghue in 1849 , the Queen 's visit a month later , and the Fenian agitation , begin in 1864 , with the trial and execution in 1867. With Gladstone a Prime Minister , after these Fenian affair come the passage of the bill which in 1869 disestablished and disendowed the Irish Church. It be three year later that a Home Rule Party be hear of , through the leadership of Isaac Butt , but an abler and strong man , Charles S. Parnell , soon supersede him , and the formidable Land League movement be organized. Land act pass under Gladstone 's rule have change considerably the system of tenure in Ireland. When , in 1881 , the Land League be suppress , it make it appearance again with a new name , the National League. A period of lawlessness , unusual for a long period in Ireland , now ensue and culminate in the murder of Lord Frederick Cavendish and Mr. Burke , the Chief and Under Secretaries for Ireland , follow by the severe Crimes act , which may have prevent other atrocity , though it do not easily restore good order. Later event be more familiar still , and especially The London Times 's case against Mr. Parnell , the Pigott forgery , and the long- drawn-out commission. Chartism and Corn Laws Connected with these reform movement early in Victoria 's reign be the agitation to which the name Chartism be given. It date from a period shortly after the act of 1832 be pass , that act be regard a not sweep enough , and take it name from the demand make on Parliament for a people 's charter. Six point in this charter be universal : suffrage , vote by ballot , annual Parliaments , payment of member , abolition of property qualification , and equal electoral districts. For the most part the Chartists be men from the low classes. A year after Victoria become Queen they hold meeting in various part of England , arm with gun and pike and carry torch , and a proclamation be issue against them. For some time they hold a sort of Parliament of their own , and in 1848 they arrange to hold a monster meeting in Kensington Common and march to Westminster with a petition to Parliament. It be their intention to bring out 200,000 person at this meeting , and the authority be greatly alarmed. Public building , include the Bank of England , be fortify by military force under the Duke of Wellington , and special policeman , number 150,000 , be swear in , one of them be Louis Napoleon , afterward Emperor of the French. Estimates of the number who attend the Chartist meeting have be as low a 20,000. Probably 50,000 be near the truth. Slight encounter with the police occur , and then the procession dispersed. The monster petition they be convey to Parliament have be sign by nearly 6,000,000 names. It be send to Parliament in detached roll , in several cabs. With this extraordinary effort the career of the Chartists come practically to an end. One of the chief cause of this be the prosperity which now return to English industry consequent on the repeal of the corn law in the Ministry of Sir Robert Peel. The celebrated league form to secure the repeal of these law , which levy duty on the importation of corn into England , the word corn be equivalent to breadstuff , be found at Manchester in 1838. Among it supporter be John Bright , Richard Cobden , and Charles Villiers. Meetings soon begin to be hold in various English town , and in 1842 a fair held at Manchester realize $ 50,000 for the league. In the same year 600 deputy from provincial association hold a meeting in London , and the league in the same year begin to raise $ 250,000 for print pamphlet and send out lecturers. In March , 1843 , an important meeting be hold in Drury Lane Theatre. London , and in 1845 immense meeting be hold in Manchester and a bazaar be open in Covent Garden , London , the Manchester meeting help forward the league 's ambition to raise $ 1,250,000 for the expense of this war on the corn laws. For a time Sir Robert Peel hold out against the argument of Cobden and Bright , but at last , in 1846 , a bill introduce by him be pass and assent to by the Queen. This famous bill reduce the duty on wheat to 4s. ( when bring in at or above 53s. ) until February , 1849 , after which date it become 1s. per quarter only on all kind of import grain , whatever the price. In 1860 even this duty of 1s. per quarter be take off , so that complete free trade in corn exist thenceforth in England. Chinese and Crimean Wars The first year of Victoria 's reign be year of peace ; until the war in the Crimea begin , ( sixteen year after her accession , ) England be little disturbed by her foreign relations. Indeed , the state of Europe in general throughout that period be one of unusual quiet , so far a rivalry among the nation be concerned. Whatever of disturbance occur be in home affair rather than foreign. More than one reign monarch be make anxious for the security of his throne. In France the monarch have good reason for his anxiety , for he lose his throne altogether and , unregal King that he be , depart for England under the name of Smith. Europe still retain a very vivid recollection of the war of Napoleon. England 's mighty effort against the Emperor have cost her Treasury a very pretty sum of money , and she be more than willing to live at peace with the other power while recover her strength. Reform bill in Parliament , moreover , and the corn law agitation , with the attendant commercial depression , afford her ample occasion for the exercise of wisdom and statesmanship. Save for the war with China , begin in 1839 and end with the peace of Nankin late in 1842 , England have no war on her hand until the portentous cloud arise on the Bosporus in 1853. Visits from the Emperor of Russia and the Kings of France , and visit of the Queen to the Kings of France and Prussia , and not war , have be the international event of the time. Wellington and Sir Charles Napier , the soldier of a former generation , have die , and so have Thomas Moore and Wordsworth , poet who have long since do their work and be already step aside for Browning and Tennyson. This war in China , like many of England 's war , be a war for trade. Opium in the first instance be the cause. Mandarins have complain bitterly of the introduction of opium by the English merchant , and for year have attempt to prevent it importation. That the mandarin be disinterested be show by the fact that when in April , 1839 , some 20,000 chest be hand over they destroy them. The precise occasion for declare war be the Chinese demand make in this year for the surrender of opium. Peace be not formally secure until July , 1843. By the term of this treaty England be to receive from China the sum of $ 21,000,000 , and Hongkong be cede to her in perpetuity , while Canton , Amoy , Foo-Choo-Foo , Ning-Po , and Shanghai be throw open to British trade , and British Consuls be permit to reside there. The war in the Crimea be an outgrowth of design respect Turkey long entertain by Russia. When the Czar Nicholas in 1844 make his visit to London he converse with Wellington and Lord Aberdeen in regard to the dissolution of the Sultan 's empire. Later on a formal communication , which be keep a state secret for ten year , be send to London by the Czar 's Minister , and the Czar have several conversation on the same subject with the British Envoy at St. Petersburg. It be in one of these conversation that the Czar compare Turkey to `` a sick man '' who be in a state of decrepitude and at the point of death. His proposal relate to the disposition of the die man 's property. He have no objection to English possession of Egypt , but would not consent to it establish itself on the Bosporus. Some year later dispute arise between Russia , a represent the Greek Churches , and France , represent the Latin one , a to the exclusive possession of the holy place in Palestine. A commission appoint by Turkey decide in favor of Russia. The French accept this decision , though reluctantly. Further claim on Turkey be then make by Russia. A protectorate be demand for herself over the Greek Christians who reside in Turkish dominions. The Sultan regard this a inimical to his own authority , and the Russian Minister , his ultimatum have be reject , depart from Constantinople. The Sultan then appeal to his ally , and the English and French fleet advance for his protection. By July , 1853 , the Russians have enter Moldavia ; by September English and French ship be in the Dardanelles ; in October Turkey have declare war against Russia , and two week later have commit the first act of war by fire on a Russian flotilla. The Danube remain the scene of operation for some month , but the scene gradually advanced eastward , with engagement at Rustchuk , Silistria , Odessa , and the blockading of the mouth of the Danube by the allies. Operations in the Crimea begin properly with the landing of the army of the ally in September , 1854. In that month 65,000 men , with 5,000 horse and 50 piece of artillery , go ashore in the Bay of Eupatoria and march in the direction of Sebastopol. They meet the Russians at the River Alma , and after a severe engagement , in which the Russians lose 5,000 men and the ally 3,400 , force them to retreat to Sebastopol , where preparation be make for the defense of the fortress. Balaklava be seize by the British , and early in October the attack on the fortress be begun. It be impossible to make an attack from the water , a the Russians have sink vessel at the entrance to the harbor. The incident of this celebrate siege need only be name here. They include the battle of Balaklava , with the charge of the light cavalry , which Tennyson have celebrate ; the defeat of the Russians at Inkerman , Florence Nightingale 's work in the hospital , tale of great suffer from cold weather , the death of the Czar Nicholas , the siege of Kars in Armenia and Gen. Williams 's long defense , the retirement of the Russians to the north fort and the destruction of their fleet , the explosion of 100,000 pound of powder in the French siege train at Inkerman with great loss of life , the destruction of the Sebastopol dock , and the treaty of peace conclude in Paris in March , 1856. England lose in this war nearly 24,000 men , of whom 270 be officers. Those kill in action and who die of wound numbered 3,500 ; cholera cause the death of 4,244 , and other disease nearly 16,000. The loss of the French be 63,500 men , and of the Russians nearly half a million , accord to English statistics. England add to her national debt in consequence of this war the sum of $ 200,000,000. Mutiny in the East One year later occur in India the first incident of that famous mutiny , the suppression of which be to tax the best energy of England 's administrator and soldier for more than two year to come. In the year 1857-8 be to occur the hundredth anniversary of the battle of Plassey , the winning of which battle by Clive have lay the foundation stone of the English dominion. It have long be predict by native astrologer that on this anniversary the English power would come to an end. The first serious consequence of native belief in the prediction be show in a mutinous spirit that break out among the sepoy soldier when it be decide that a new kind of cartridge and rifle should be used. Use of this greased cartridge be regard a involve defilement to a Musselman and sacrilege to a Hindu , and a cry of danger to caste and creed spread rapidly. It be say that the cartridge be grease with hog fat ; that to use them a native would sin against his religion ; that the English desire him to do so in order to make him an easy convert to Christianity. Disturbances broker out and massacre of Europeans be committed. Mutineers who mark to Delhi be join by the garrison there , a second butchery be commit , and a restoration of the Mogul Empire be proclaimed. Delhi become thenceforth a centre of revolt. Risings soon occur in the Northwest Provinces and at Benares , while at the military station of Cawnpore several thousand sepoys revolt under Nana Sahib and commit the famous massacre of June 27 , in which neither age nor sex be spared. Other revolt and other massacre occur , and in Oude , a recently annexed kingdom , take on the character of a popular insurrection. Lucknow be the capital of Oude , and nearly every regiment there and elsewhere in Oude mutinied. Allegiance to the ex-King of Oude be proclaim , and a siege of Lucknow , then command by Sir Henry Lawrence , be begun. The other brother be then in the Punjab , and by his genius the Punjab be save after a few risings. In this mutiny the rebel have an immense advantage because of the small number of European troop in the country. Delhi be the object of the first movement against them , and , after a siege of three month , be take and the King sentence to perpetual exile. Sons and a grandson of his be capture outside the city by Capt. Hodson , who shoot them with his own hands. Gen. Havelock , who have collect a small force at Allahabad , then move on Cawnpore. Shortly before his entry into the town , more than two hundred woman and child be make the victim of a second massacre. Havelock pursue Nana Sahib and defeat him , and then , have be join by Gens. Outram and Neill , push on to relieve Lucknow , where Henry Lawrence have die of a wound some week before. Neill be kill in action soon after , and Havelock die two month after Neill. In the meantime Sir Colin Campbell have arrive in India with the rank of Commander in Chief. Later on in the new year European troop land in Calcutta , but Sir Colin at Cawnpore in December have defeat Nana Sahib and the 25,000 rebel under him. Troops from the Punjab be then supply by John Lawrence , and Lucknow be gradually retaken. When Gwalior have be secure in June , 1858 , the last great battle of the mutiny have be fought , although some resistance be maintain until February , 1859. In the Spring and Summer of that year the whole population be disarm ; over 1,200 fort be destroy , and over 1,300,000 arm surrendered. A result of this mutiny , and a point of great moment in India 's history , be the formal transfer of the direct Government of India from the East India Company to the British Crown. Many native think the company an individual , and that the Queen have hang him for his offense and then take matter into her own hands. In November , 1858 , Victoria be proclaim in the principal place of India , and thus become the sovereign to that country in a sense which no other British monarch have be before her. The proclamation of Victoria a Empress of India occur in London in May , 1876 , and in the Indian city in January , 1877. Later Wars Wars of less moment during Victoria 's reign need only be refer to briefly. A second one be wag in China , and in 1860 Pekin be enter by the English. In 1867-8 occur the war in Abyssinia. English missionary and others have be hold in confinement by King Theodore , and Sir Robert Napier be send with an army to demand their release. He meet the King in battle and overthrow him , then enter and destroy Magdala , and , the King have commit suicide , his crown and royal mantle be find and take to England a a present to the Queen. Early in March 1874 , Sir Garnet Woiseley return from a successful expedition against the Ashantees. Then follow , in 1878 , the Russo-Turkish war and the treaty of Berlin , by which England acquire Cyprus. Wars in Afghanistan and Zululand ( in the latter the Prince Imperial of France lose his life ) come then , and next the Egyptian campaign with the battle of Tel-el-Kebir and the death of Gordon at Khartoum. War affect the conquest of Burmah and it annexation. Such an incident a Lord Kitchener 's conquest of the dervish and overthrow of the Mahdi in the Soudan , though undertaken in the cause of Egypt , add to the military glory of Victoria 's reign. The military operation in South Africa need only be briefly referred to. There have be more or less trouble between the English colonist and the Boers for many year and the series of incident that begin with the Jameson raid and include the trial of Cecil Rhodes and the still unfinished Boer war can not yet be view in perspective. Victoria and Elizabeth The reign of Victoria in many point suggest a comparison with the reign of Elizabeth , for one thing in it length , for another in it illustrious men , for another in the change work in the condition of the people. But the land over which Elizabeth be Queen be very different in area and importance from those which acknowledge Victoria a sovereign. Elizabeth be really the Queen of a very small territory and a very small people. The only one of England 's present vast colonial and dependent territory that be then hers be Newfoundland. England possess nothing in Australasia until 1787 , nothing in Africa until 1787 , nothing in Asia until 1785. Save her American dependency she have acquire nearly everything outside the British island in this century. Scotland itself be not united with England until the death of Elizabeth bring James VI. of Scotland to the English throne a King of the two countries. The England of Elizabeth then comprise England proper , Ireland , Newfoundland , and what other land , now part of the United States , she could properly call her own. The area of England proper be 50,823 square mile , that of Wales 7,363 , of Ireland 32,531 , of Newfoundland 40,200 , or a total of 130,817 square mile for the kingdom of Elizabeth. This be actually an area considerably less than the area of Bechuanaland , in South Africa , which England acquire in 1885. It be less than the area of the State of California and only about one-half the area of Texas. Victoria reign over an area of 9,720,000 square mile , or more than seventy time the area of Elizabeth 's empire. In population the showing , could we possess exact figure , would be no less surprising. England , with Wales , have to-day a population of about 32,000,000. This showing make it appear that within this century the population of England and Wales have more than treble , for the census of 1801 give a total of only 8,892,536 souls. If anything like this increase go on during the 200 year between Elizabeth and George III. , we may accept the population in Elizabeth 's time a only a very few millions. With Ireland and Newfoundland add , the total could not have reach 8,000,000. Now the population of the land over which Victoria reign show the mighty total of 388,000,000 soul , or more than forty time 8,000,000. A similar statement of comparison for the trade of England , for her national wealth , her army , and her navy , do we possess the statistic , would be a startling. Elizabeth 's England be really about as much like Victoria 's England a the Rome of Scipio ( purely an Italian State ) be like the Rome of Hadrian , ( practically the known world or , a Gibbon put it , `` the fair part of the earth and the most civilized portion of mankind. '' ) But if the land over which Elizabeth reign possess in population only a fortieth of what be possess by those Victoria claim , and an area of only one-seventieth of Victoria 's area , Elizabeth 's power a a sovereign be far great than Victoria's. Real power Victoria never have ; she reign , but do not govern. Elizabeth govern as well a reigned. Dr. Augustus Jessopp have say of Elizabeth that `` her name will go down to posterity a one of the great personage of history , the virgin Queen , who , by sheer force of character , gain for herself the credit of all the grand achievement which her people effect in peace or war , whose name be hold in something more than honor from Persia to Peru , from Russia to Algiers ; who crush the tremendous power of Spain , break forever the spiritual tyranny of Rome , and lift England into the first rank among the kingdom of the world. '' England 's present Constitution differs vastly from the Constitution of Elizabeth 's day. That broaden down of popular Government `` from precedent to precedent '' which Tennyson refers to have make the English monarch hardly more than a symbol of the State , a sort of perpetual President , shorn of real authority , but hedge about with stately home and elaborate ceremonial. In a nominal sense the Crown be the Executive , but in such a sense only. Real authority lie in the Cabinet , which have come to absorb the function of the old Privy Council , or `` the King in Council. '' The Cabinet owe it existence and the tenure of it place to Parliament , and Parliament , in turn , owe it life to the people. Any Cabinet failing of a majority in the House of Commons cease to be useful and retire ; it successor be the creation , not of the Queen , but of Parliament , and hence indirectly of the people. Apologists for monarchy a it exist today in England pretend for it only authority and influence of another sort. Walter Bagehot have say for it that it `` retain the feeling by which the heroic Kings govern their rude age , and have add the feeling by which the Constitutions of later Greece rule in more refined ages. '' He then proceed to illustrate how a family on a throne be `` an interesting idea , '' how the Government be strengthen `` with the strength of religion '' ; how the monarch be useful a the head of society and morality , and how a monarch without power enable the real ruler to change without heedless people know it. He think it well that the mass do not know how near they be to elective government in England ; they be not fit for it , and do they realize the fact a it be they `` would be surprise , and almost tremble. '' Vast , then , a have be the change in the area and population of the British Empire since Elizabeth , the change n the authority of the sovereign be quite a impressive. It be certainly curious , and it be also an instructive commentary on the efficiency of popular government , that England 's empire have expand almost in exact proportion to the decay of the personal authority of her sovereigns. No account of the life and reign of Victoria would be complete which fail to give due prominence to the influence of her personality all over the world and frequently in grave crises. Her example a a wife and mother and a a potentate adhering to the spirit as well a the tenet of Christianity in all her public act have be generally recognize and admired. By her own people her assertion , in a public address , after the diamond jubilee in 1897 , that she hop to reign until the end of her life , be heartily welcomed. England 's Vast Possessions A detailed statement of England 's colony and dependency be worth attention here. In Europe she have Gibraltar , Malta , and Gozo , with a total population of 184,879. In Asia her possession consist of Aden , Brunei , Ceylon , Cyprus , Hongkong , India , the Indian Feudatory States , the Keeling Islands , the Kuria Muria Islands , Labuan , North Borneo , Perins , Sarawak , and the Straits Settlements. The total population of these land be 261,564,000 soul , and the total area 1,903,800 square miles. This Asian population be more than twice as large a the population of all the land rule over by the Czar of Russia , and this Asian territory of England be very nearly as large a European Russia and two-thirds as large a the United States. In Africa , England possess Ascension Island , Basutoland , Bechuanaland , Berbera , British East Africa , Cape Colony , Gambia , the Gold Coast , Lagos , Matabeleland , Mauritius , Natal , the Niger Districts , Nyassaland , St. Helena , St. Paul and Amsterdam , Sierra Leone , Socotra , Tongaland , Zambezia , Zanzibar and Pemba , Ibea , and thence to the Egyptian frontier , the Northern Lomal coast , Tristan d'Acunha , and Zululand. The total area for Africa be 2,462,436 square mile , and the total population , 39,836,600. On the American side of the globe England 's possession be these. The Bahama Islands , Barbados , Bermudas , Canada , Falkland Islands , Guiana , Honduras , Jamaica , Turk 's Island , Leeward Islands , Newfoundland , South Georgia , Trinidad , Tobago , and the Windward Islands , a total area of 3,648,236 square mile ( the area of the United States , include Alaska , be 3,501,404 , ) and a population of 6,235,211. In Australasia the British Empire claim the following : The Cook Archipelago , the Fiji and Rotumah Islands , the Kermadec Islands , New South Wales and Norfolk Islands , New Guinea , New Zealand , Queensland , South Australia , Tasmania , Victoria , Western Australia , Auckland , and several small islands. For this region the total area be 3,270,532 square mile , and of population 3,675,811. A grand total for the colony and dependency , with the figure for Great Britain and Ireland a make up just before the census of 1891 in the United Kingdom , give a total of 11,355,057 square mile and a total population of 366,642,105 for all the English possession , against 108,814,172 soul in all the Russian land and 8,644,100 square miles. From these figure it may be see to what surprising extent the English Empire surpass the Russian in area and population. The area of the Chinese Empire be 4,179,559 square mile , but in population , accord to the imperfect estimate , the English Empire be outdo by the Chinese ; the figure be 404,000,000 souls. The land that come to England in Victoria 's time be many. First should be name India itself , for , a already state , it be govern by the East India Company ( of course by authority from Parliament ) down to the time of the mutiny. Only then do it pas under the direct administration of the Crown. Other point and country to be name be : Aden , ( 1838 , ) Brunei , ( 1888 , ) Cyprus , ( 1878 , ) Keelling Islands , ( 1857 , ) Labuan , ( 1846 , ) Perim , ( 1855 , ) Sarawak , ( 1888 , ) Basutoland , ( 1868 , ) Bechuanaland , ( 1885 , ) Berbera , ( 1884 , ) Gold Coast , ( 1861 , ) Lagos , ( 1861 , ) Matabeleland , ( 1888 , ) Natal , ( 1838 , ) Niger Districts , ( 1885 , ) Socotra , ( 1875 , ) Zululand , ( 1886 , ) Cook Archipelago , ( 1888 , ) Kermadec Islands , ( 1886 , ) New Guinea , ( 1884 , ) New Zealand , ( 1841 , ) Queensland , ( 1859 , ) and South Australia , ( 1836. ) England 's colonial possession be of three classes. First come the Crown colony , like Gibraltar and Hong-Kong , which be control entirely by the home Government ; second , be those like Natal and Ceylon , which have representative government , in which the Crown retain only the right of veto on legislation and the home Government the control of public officer ; and third , those like Canada and Queensland , which possess responsible government , the home Government have no control over any public officer , though the Crown retain the right to veto on legislation. There be also protectorate , with Governments more or less organize , under Crown administration. Great Facts of the Reign It be not in war and mutiny , not in State pageant , with coronation , marriage , or funeral , not in act of Parliament or the talk of Parliamentary leader that the real glory of an enlightened monarch 's reign will be found. The condition of the people , the advance they have make in material well-being and other mean to happiness , the intellectual product of great mind make accessible to all -- these and the like of these make for real glory and greatness. Above most thing also be Victoria 's reign , a reign in which industrial affair be transform a never before. The story of what machinery and steam and electricity have do be , if properly look at , a more moving story than any Crimean war or Indian mutiny affords. Their influence have pervade every class in the British Empire , and they will still be exert their influence when this century shall have long since round out it full hundred years. Three invention of great moment -- the spinning jenny , the spinning machine , and mule be , it be true , all make in the course of the reign of George III. ; they have in reality begin to prepare the way , a it be , for the commercial expansion which become an accomplished fact in the reign of Victoria. Before the age of Victoria , Watt also have make practical use of the power of steam , just a great progress have be make in the study of electricity. But it be in Victoria 's time that the electric telegraph , the telephone , and the electric light come into the service of man , and in hers that the vast improvement make in our method of locomotion be accomplished. One or two short line of railroad exist when she come to the throne , but they be so insignificant that the present system practically belong in it creation and extension to the year of Victoria. There be no space to enlarge here upon the mighty transformation in the commercial , social , political , and physical world which have be bring about by this single fact in the Englishman 's history. Connected in a very practical way with it belong another , date almost from the first month of the reign. In the year 1837 Rowland Hill be advocate , with all the zeal and courage of a man who know he be right , the establishment of a uniform system of penny postage , and early in 1840 he saw the system carry into effect. Early in 1890 occur the jubilee anniversary of this event , and it be duly celebrate throughout England. In order to realize what be the change wrought by Rowland Hill , it be well to recall that the ordinary postal rate before his reform come into effect be these : For any place not exceed 15 mile in distance , 8 cent ; for any not exceed 20 mile , 10 cent ; not exceed 30 mile , 12 cent ; not exceed 80 mile , 16 cent ; not exceed 170 mile , 18 cent ; not exceed 230 mile , 22 cent ; not exceed 300 mile , 24 cent , and so on , increase 2 cent for every additional 100 miles. By this system a letter from London to Liverpool be charge 20 cent , and one from London to Edinburgh 24 cents. How the substitution for this system of a uniform penny rate , combine with regular and rapid railway mail train , have operate for the advancement and happiness of mankind be obvious to any one. Had the reign of Victoria no other great achievement to record besides these of cheap postage and rapid travel by steam , it would still deserve to be rank among the great epoch of English civilization. Later year , however , have see the penny-postage system in some way supersede by the telegraph -- even a telegraph that connect continent otherwise divide by great ocean -- and still later one have see the telephone dispute with the telegraph it claim to usefulness in the service of man. With respect to the marine steam engine , the fact be not quite so impressive , it have be in use for some year before the locomotive have become familiar , but the reign have witness mighty advance over what have be previously done. Screw propeller be not in successful operation until the year of the Queen 's ascension , and it be in the year 1838 that the Great Western startle most living men by steam from Bristol to this city in eighteen days. Closely relate to the growth of England 's cotton industry have be this vast improvement in the method of transport the raw material. Instead of slow-sailing ship , there have be fast steamer ; instead of week , voyage have become matter of days. Steam , moreover , a a stationary motive power have make such stride forward that the invention of Arkwright , Hargreaves , and others have become power of vaster meaning to the cotton and woolen industry than ever be dream of by the men of an early reign. Skilled labor to guide these machine have be supersede by mechanical contrivance propel by steam , so that the total cost of attendance upon a pair of self-acting mule carry 2,000 spindle have be reduce to about $ 15 a week. Connected by a natural link with these invention have also be the expansion of the iron industry of England. Railways call for iron , other machinery call for it , and the use of iron , instead of wood in shipbuilding and other kind of building bring about colossal transformations. In 1837 the total yearly output of crude iron in England be only about 1,000,000 tons. Now it be over 8,000,000 tons. Twenty year after 1837 an invention be apply in iron manufacture which have work great change in the world. This be Sir Henry Bessemer 's process for make steel by blow air into molten pig iron. This process , supplement by the Gilchrist-Thomas process , have cause the price of steel to be greatly reduce , so that steel competes with iron now for many purpose of construction , notably in railroad rail and building beam and girders. To these invention , and their influence on the convenience with which the burden of life be borne , must be attribute the growth in England 's population. Until the opening of the century few than 11,000,000 soul live in Great Britain ; this number by 1841 have become nearly 19,000,000 , and it be now somewhere about 41,000,000. No less than 22,000,000 soul , or more than the total for 1801 , have be add in the time of Victoria. With this growth of population there come , a be inevitable , great demand on exist mean of subsistence , follow by want and distress that give such peculiar force to the anti-corn law agitation , of which record be make elsewhere in this article. Besides it effect on the case with which men obtain their daily bread , probably the most momentous result of the repeal of the corn law be political. By mean of that law be shatter the political power of the old landed interest of England. Combined with the great reform bill by which household suffrage have finally be secure for county and borough alike , it have work a revolution in the political texture and capacity of the English people , only the more marvelous because of the peaceful method by which it be acquired. Victorian Literature If we turn now to the literature of this reign a noble and lasting output will be find , and under this head may be include book produce by men of science , like Darwin , Lyell , and Spencer , who have give u book a epoch-making a any the mind of man ever produced. It be not for contemporary to say if the verse of Tennyson and the prose of Macaulay , Carlyle , and Thackeray will live with the corresponding product of the mind make by Pope or Dryden , by Fielding or Hume , in previous reign ; but we may assume with some confidence that the chance be good for a reasonable degree of immortality. Some of the great writer or a former age still live on when Victoria come into her royal possessions. For the most part they have do their best work , however , and they properly belong to the last of the Georges. Among these be Wordsworth , who do not die until 1850 ; Southey , who die in 1843 ; Landor , who live on until 1864 ; Moore , who die in 1852 , and Campbell , in 1844. Macaulay be thirty-seven year old at Victoria 's accession , but he have not publish any collected series of his essay ; he have not publish his `` Lays , '' and more than ten year be to elapse before the first volume of his `` History '' be to see the light. Tennyson be twenty-seven year old in the year 1837 , and have be before the public with `` Poems by Two Brothers , '' `` Poems , Chiefly Lyrical , '' and the volume of 1833. He have be criticise with severity , and notably so by `` Christopher North. '' For the next nine year he be to remain silent , but when , in 1842 , he come forth again it be to win very general recognition a a poet of the fine order. The poetry of Mrs. Browning almost exclusively belong to this reign , and so do that of her husband. `` Pauline '' have previously appear without Browning 's name ; in 1836 he first attract real attention by his `` Paracelsus. '' Matthew Arnold 's first success , the poem on Cromwell , date from 1843. Swinburne be bear in the year of Victoria 's accession. Dickens 's first volume , `` Sketches by Boz , '' come out in 1836 , and a year later Thackeray , then ambitious to be an artist and not an author , be offer Dickens to undertake the illustration for `` Pickwick. '' Ere the genius of George Eliot should become known twenty year be to elapse. Carlyle have write many of his essay , his `` Schiller , '' his `` Sartor , '' and be then in the midst of his `` French Revolution , '' but still wait for the day when literature should raise him above actual want. He have arrive in London from Craigenputtock three year before , and have make his home in a house that `` remnant of genuine old Dutch-looking Chelsea '' in which he be to die , a lonely and brokenhearted old man , more than forty year afterward. Succession To the Throne No Interregnum Under the British Constitution -- The Sovereign Never Dies Albert Edward , Prince of Wales for more than 59 year , be now `` Edward VII. , by the Grace of God , of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , King , Defender of the Faith , Emperor of India. '' There be no such thing a an interregnum in the unwritten British Constitution , the force of which be by no mean lessen by the fact that it exist a a `` legal fiction. '' In spite of the fact that from the moment of Queen Victoria 's death the Prince of Wales become King , with all the power and right attach to the monarchy , the ceremony of coronation posse in the British regime considerably more importance than in some monarchies. Queen Victoria succeed to the throne on June 20 , 1837 , and be crown on June 28 , 1838. About the same interval of time will probably be allow to intervene before Edward VII be crowned. The ceremony of coronation , in the case of the English Kings , grow out of the other ceremony of anoint the monarch , with which it be now combined. The most significant portion of the ceremony a it have exist in England for the last 200 year be the solemn `` coronation oath. '' This be virtually a double pledge -- a pledge by the King that he will preserve the establish law , and a pledge by the people , represent by some great functionary , that they will be faithful subjects. The modern form of the coronation oath date from the coronation of William and Mary , in 1689. In that year the oath be make at every point more precise and explicit than before , and in particular there be add an express engagement on the part of the sovereign to maintain `` the law of God , the true profession of the Gospel , and the Protestant reform religion a it be establish by law. '' It provide , far , that the King shall preserve to the Bishops and clergy , and the church commit to their charge , all their actual and legal right and privileges. The intention of this pledge be to restrain the King in his administrative , not his legislative , capacity. It bind him to preserve the establish law , not to refuse his assent to any future modification of that law that may be make by Parliament. The oath which be administer to the new monarch immediately after his succession be another form of the coronation oath. It will thus be see that , while the new King have succeed to the throne , the coronation that must follow will set the seal on his accession. This state of thing be different from the custom in many European country , where the ceremony of coronation seem gradually to be die out. Kaiser Wilhelm have never be crown ; neither have the ruler of Greece and Portugal. The accession of the new ruler of the United Kingdom will be follow immediately by the `` proclamation , '' when the King will appear , probably at Buckingham Palace , and a herald will announce that there be a new King. The Mayors of all city will also announce the event. Certain oath will be administer to Edward VII. at his first Privy Council , but the `` coronation oath '' can only be administer at the ceremony which give it it name. Although the succession to the Crown be automatic , this be not the case with the transferrence of the title of Prince of Wales. Therefore , that title belongs to the sovereign , have be found by a historic act , which be too well know to need recapitulation. However , the title `` Prince of Wales '' have be take by the eldest son of the sovereign for many hundred of year , and there be not the slight doubt that one of the first official act of Edward VII. will be to confer it by royal letter patent upon the Duke of York. In the few hour or day between Queen Victoria 's death and his elevation to the Princedom of Wales , the true title of the heir apparent to the throne will be Duke of Cornwall. Unlike the princedom , this title pass automatically and carry with it the income of 50,000 a year. One of the principal source of revenue of the heir to the throne. The new ruler of the United Kingdom be bear on Nov. 9 , 1841 , and create Prince of Wales on Dec. 4 of the same years. America 's Debt To Victoria The Queen Averted War Over the Mason-Slidell Incident of the Rebellion At one time Queen Victoria , act on the advice of the Prince Consort , be virtually the sole mean of prevent war between Great Britain and the United States. Sympathy in Great Britain , at the opening of the civil war in this country , be decidedly with the South. When the first few month of hostility show a check to the Union force , there be boast that the rebel would win , and the British sympathizer be only await an opportunity to show something more effective than sympathy. It be at this time that serious cause for friction occur between the Northern States and Great Britain. Mason and Slidell , the Confederate envoy , be take from the British ship Trent on the high sea by the San Jacinto and hold a prisoners. Secretary of the Navy Welles declare that the action of Capt. Wilkes of the San Jacinto have the `` emphatic approval of the Navy Department , '' and the House of Representatives vote a resolution of thanks to Capt. Wilkes. The action be take in the United Kingdom a a deliberate violation of neutrality and an expression of hostility. The paper demand war , and even the British public be rouse to the extent of hold public meeting call for revenge. Preparations for war be make , and to Earl Russell , the Foreign Secretary , be intrust the task of formulate a virtual ultimatum. His lordship prepare the demand , and write it in language so insulting that a tenth-rate power could hardly have accede to it without lose all trace of self-respect. The demand have to be submit to her Majesty , who have insist from the time she begin to reign on all her right a sovereign , particularly in question of international importance. The Prince Consort be lie ill unto death. When the dispatch arrive , the Queen , wear out by nurse her husband , have go out for a short drive. The demand to the United States , which call for the return of the Confederates within seven day , get into the hand of the Prince Consort. He take a pen , for the last time in his life. He change the demand so that it could be comply with by this country without sacrifice of dignity. When the Queen return she make up her mind instantly to consent to the dispatch of the demand in the form to which it have be alter by Prince Albert. The argument of Lord Russell be of no avail , and he have to give way. What follow be a matter of history. A friendly answer be return by the United States , and the two Confederate envoy be give up. What would have happen without the counsel of Albert and the firm stand of Victoria can only be surmised. The tone of Lord Russell 's demand before it be modify may be judge by another dispatch to the British Minister to Washington , which be not submit to the Queen : `` Should Mr. Seward ask for delay , '' write the Earl , `` you will consent to a delay not exceed seven days. If , at the end of that time , no answer be give , or if any other answer be give except that of compliance with the demand of her Majesty 's Government , your lordship be instruct to leave Washington with all the member of your legation and to repair immediately to London. You will also communicate Mr. Seward 's answer to Vice Admiral Milne ( of the British Atlantic Squadron ) and to the Governors of Canada , Nova Scotia , New Brunswick , Jamaica , Bermuda , and such other of her Majesty 's possession a may be within your reach. '' The Queen 's Wealth Few Persons Know Its Amount -- Estimated at 6,000,000 Only the confidential clerk at the famous old London banking house of Coutts & Co. , with the Keeper of the Privy Purse and one or two unofficial friend of Queen Victoria , be aware of the extent of the fortune which be leave by her Majesty. There be no doubt , however , that this fortune be a very large one , some estimate place it as high a £ 6,000,000. Until the late year of her life , after the death of the Prince Consort , the Queen be unable to save much. After her bereavement , the comparative retirement in which she live make an enormous reduction in expense possible , while her private estate be augment from other sources. Her father , the Duke of Kent , leave her nothing. Indeed , he be on the verge of bankruptcy during the great portion of his life. From Prince Albert the Queen inherit the great portion of his estate of £ 600,000 , while a fortune of £ 500,000 come to her in an entirely unexpected manner. There be a certain private gentleman name John Camden Nield , the son of a goldsmith who have be employ by George III. , who live in a miserly fashion solely that he might leave his accumulated wealth to Queen Victoria. He bequeath to her every penny he possess , leave his relative unprovided for. This injustice the Queen do not tolerate. She accept the gift , but provide that annuity be pay to Mr. Nield 's relatives. It be say that the interest on the £ 500,000 have be allow to accumulate , until the amount have be nearly doubled. The allowance make by Parliament to the Queen have be £ 385,000 a year , of which amount nearly £ 70,000 be for personal expense and unappropriated. The revenue from the Duchy of Lancaster bring her Majesty 's income up to over £ 100,000 annually , the proportion of which that have be save in the last thirty year can only be guess at. The value of the present give to her Majesty on various occasion have be enormous. Especially valuable be the gift she receive at her two jubilees. Her private plate alone be say to be worth considerably over £ 400,000. The disposition to be make of the Queen 's estate be as much a mystery a the size of the estate itself. It be regard a probable that little or nothing will go to the King , a he will be provide for by Parliament , which may also pay his debt , if they be of an extent calculate to embarrass him .