March 14 , 1901 OBITUARY Benjamin Harrison Dead By THE NEW YORK TIMES Benjamin Harrison , the twenty-third President of the United States , be bear in North Bend , Hamilton County , Ohio , on Aug. 20 , 1833. His father , John Scott Harrison , be the third son of William Henry Harrison , ninth President of the United States and the grandson of Benjamin Harrison of Virginia , who be one of the signer of the Declaration of Independence. One of ex-President Harrison 's ancestor , Thomas Harrison , become Lieutenant General during the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell , and a a member of the Parliament which try King Charles I sign the death warrant of the King. On the restoration of the monarchy he be behead , and his descendant emigrate to this country. John Scott Harrison , the father of the ex-President , be twice elect to Congress , and upon the break up of the old Whig party become an American , support the Bell and Everett ticket in the Presidential campaign of 1860. He marry Miss Elizabeth Irwin of Mercersburg , Penn. , and settle at North Bend. There six child be bear , of whom Benjamin Harrison be the second. As a boy he assist in the work on his father 's farm , which contain some 400 acre on the bank of the Ohio , near the mouth of the Big Miami. The product of the farm be ship in flatboat to New Orleans. Benjamin Harrison 's first education be obtain at a log schoolhouse. At the age of fifteen he go to Farmers ' College , at College Hill , near Cincinnati , and later enter Miami University , at Oxford , Ohio , from which he be graduate in 1852. He rank fourth in his class , and during his course distinguish himself a an off-hand debater. He then study law in Cincinnati in the office of Storer & Gwynne , and be admit to the bar in 1853. In the same year he be marry to Miss Caroline Lavinia Scott , with whom he have fall in love while a student at Miami University. Mrs. Harrison be the daughter of John W. Scott , who be a professor in Miami University at the time of her birth and afterward become President of the Seminary in Oxford. She be graduate from the seminary in 1852 , the year in which Gen. Harrison take his degree at the university. She be a musician and be also devote to painting. In 1854 Mr. Harrison remove to Indianapolis , where he afterward keep his residence until his death. When he begin the practice of law he make no specialty , but take everything , from a five-dollar case before a country justice , to a railroad foreclosure suit in the Federal Courts , and in this school of miscellaneous practice he obtain his training a an all-around lawyer. He have few rival a an examiner of witness , and a an advocate he be clear , cogent , and complete. It be not his plan to confuse or persecute a witness , but to quietly , persistently , and courteously press for a full disclosure of the facts. His skill a a nisi prius lawyer be surpass by his power before the high and appellate court , and his brief be regard a model of strength and preciseness. He reach his high development , however , a an exponent of international law. Harrison 's ability a a lawyer aid well in his political career , which begin with the formation of the Republican Party. In 1860 he make his first canvas of the State of Indiana for the office of Reporter of the Supreme Court , to which he be elected. It be during this campaign that he first meet Gov. Hendricks in public debate. His Civil War Record In August , 1862 , he enter the Union Army a Colonel of the Seventieth Regiment of Indiana Volunteers , and be honorably discharge in June , 1865 , after participate in many important engagement during his three year of service. To his regiment be assign the duty of lead the assault at Resaca on May 15 , 1864 , and for his work there and again at Peach Tree Creek he win the commendation of Gen. Joseph Hooker. Harrison be present at the surrender of Gen. Johnston 's Confederate force at Durham Station , N. C. , in the last year of the war. He be brevet Brigadier General of Volunteers `` for ability and manifest energy and gallantry in command of brigade. '' While he be still at the front Gen. Harrison be again elected Reporter of the Supreme Court , and upon his return to Indianapolis help to form the law firm of Porter , Harrison & Fishback. At the close of his term of office he decline a renomination and apply himself closely to his practice , until 1876 , when he become the Republican candidate for Governor of Indiana through the withdrawal of Godlove S. Orth from the canvass. Although unsuccessful , Gen. Harrison run 2,000 vote ahead of his ticket. In 1879 President Hayes appoint him a member of the Mississippi River Commission , and in 1880 he be Chairman of the Indiana delegation in the convention which nominate James A. Garfield , who offer him a place in his Cabinet. In 1881 Gen. Harrison be elect to the United States Senate by the Indiana Legislature and serve until 1887 , during which time he become one of the strong debater in that body. As Chairman of the Committee on Territories , he be persistent in his demand for the admission to Statehood of North Dakota , South Dakota , Montana , Washington , and Idaho , all of which afterwards become Sates through measure sign by him a President. He also make speech in favor of civil service reform and the restriction of Chinese immigration , and against the importation of contract labor. In 1888 his name be present to the Republican National Convention by the Indiana delegation , and on the first ballot for the Presidential nomination he stand fifth , receive 83 votes. On this ballot John Sherman receive 225 vote , Walter Q. Gresham 111 , Chauncey M. Depew 99 , and Gen. R. A. Alger 84. Gen. Harrison be nominate on the eighth ballot , when he receive 544 vote to 118 for Sherman and 100 for Alger. He take an active part in the campaign , make a great many speech , and in November be elect , receive 233 electoral vote to 168 cast for Mr. Cleveland. His Presidential Term President Harrison be inaugurate March 4 , 1889. He name the following Cabinet : Secretary of State -- James G. Blaine of Maine ; Secretary of the Treasury -- William Windom of Minnesota ; Secretary of War -- Redfield Proctor of Vermont ; Secretary of the Navy -- Benjamin F. Tracy of New York ; Attorney General -- William H. H. Miller of Indiana ; Postmaster General -- John Wanamaker of Pennsylvania ; Secretary of the Interior -- John W. Noble of Missouri , and Secretary of Agriculture -- Jeremiah M. Rusk of Wisconsin. While Mr. Blaine have be credit by many with the full conduct of the affair of the State Department during the time he hold that portfolio , the hand of the President be see in the discussion of the legal right of alien domicile here , contain in the note to the Italian Government concern the New Orleans massacre. The Bering Sea controversy be full of difficulty when Mr. Blaine 's sudden illness throw the burden of the matter for a time upon President Harrison. As Lord Salisbury be delay and no modus vivendi have be agree upon , although the season for pelagic sealing be open , President Harrison take measure for intercept the Canadian sealer and the term of the treaty be soon arranged. In the Chilean affair , in which that Government deny it responsibility for the assault upon American sailor and refuse safe conduct to some of the member of the Balmaceda Administration who have take refuge at the United States Legation , President Harrison be persistent in his demand and finally make a peremptory request , which be promptly answered. During President Harrison 's Administration the Pan-American Congress be hold at Washington , at the session of which delegate from the South American States discuss mutual trade relation and the policy of negotiate reciprocity tariff treaties. Early in 1890 President Harrison make a trip of 10,000 mile to the Pacific Coast and back in thirty-one day , during which he deliver 140 addresses. These address be regard a model of non-political and patriotic speech and do much to fix the high position which he occupy in the public estimation. They be remarkable for felicity of expression and show his ability to make a large number of short speech a day , each have a distinct thought. In these quality he be not surpass by any man of his time. President Harrison 's Administration witness the enactment of the McKinley tariff law and the Sherman Silver Purchase Act , and saw the defeat in the Senate of the Lodge Federal Elections bill. He be renominated for President at the conclusion of his term after a contest in the convention with the supporter of James G. Blaine , but be defeat by Grover Cleveland in the November election of 1892. Resumes the Practice of Law After his retirement from the Presidency , Gen. Harrison be engage by the late Senator Stanford to deliver a course of lecture at the Leland Stanford , Jr. , University , in California , on Constitutional law. He be choose a counsel to represent Venezuela in the Anglo-Venezuelan Boundary Arbitration Commission and be engage for over a year in prepare his case , conclude it in Paris Sept. 27 , 1899. Afterward he be appoint by President McKinley a a member of the International Court of Arbitration , establish by The Hague Peace Conference. He be also prominent in the Presbyterian council and be a member of the Committee on Revision at the time of his death. As preside officer of the Ecumenical Conference on Foreign Missions , hold in this city last Spring , Gen. Harrison reply to the address of welcome deliver by President McKinley and Gov. Roosevelt , and his speech on that occasion have be reckon a perhaps the best speech make during the session of the conference. During the campaign follow the renomination of President McKinley , Gen. Harrison announce his support of the Republican ticket in a letter in which he take sharp exception to the Porto Rican tariff policy of the Administration. After the Presidential election he write several article for magazine publication concern the relation of the United States Constitution to the territorial possession acquire during the Spanish war , and he support by elaborate argument the contention that `` the Constitution follow the flag. '' In his practice of law Gen. Harrison be polite to an opponent , but he never waste word in his politeness. In his political association he be regard by many a cold- blood and unsympathetic. Gen. Harrison 's first wife die in October , 1892 , during the heat of the Presidential campaign , and her fatal illness cast a shadow over the closing day of his official life. In April , 1896 , he be marry to Mrs. Mary Scott Lord Dimmock , his first wife 's niece , by whom he have one daughter. A son , Russell , by his first wife , be graduate at Lafayette in 1887 a a mining engineer , and be later connect with the United States mint at New Orleans and Helena a an assayer. He be afterward engage in journalism in Montana , and during the Spanish war enter the army , from which he be honorably discharge last year. A daughter , Mary , also by the first wife , marry James R. McKee , a merchant of Indianapolis , who afterward remove to this city , and be now a resident of Saratoga. Gen. Harrison be the author of a book , `` This Country of Ours , '' publish here in 1897 , and his speech have be print in several collection .