October 27 , 1902 OBITUARY Elizabeth Cady Stanton Dies at Her Home By THE NEW YORK TIMES Mrs. Elizabeth Cady Stanton die at 3 o'clock yesterday afternoon at her home in the Stuart Apartment House , 250 West Ninety-fourth Street. Had she live until the 12th of next month she would have complete her eighty-seventh year. Mrs. Stanton have be ail for several month , but have not be seriously ill. Of recent year she become very stout , and this , combine with her naturally large frame , make the use of a cane necessary. Saturday she be confine to her bed. Though physically incapacitate , her mental power be as much in evidence a ever , and only in the first part of the week she have write two article for publication. Early on Saturday Mrs. Stanton dictate to her secretary a letter. Toward nightfall she lapse into semi-consciousness and so continued until the end. Her son , Robert L. Stanton , and her daughter , Mrs. Margaret Lawrence , reside with their mother. Six child survive -- Henry , Theodore , , Mrs. Margaret Lawrence , Mrs. Stanton Blatch , Robert L. , and G. Smith Stanton. All reside in New York , except Theodore , who represent Harper 's Weekly and several other American publication in Paris. The funeral will be hold Wednesday and the interment will be at Woodlawn Cemetery. Mrs. Stanton be bear Nov. 12 , 1815 , in Johnstown , N. Y. She be the daughter of Supreme Court Judge Daniel Cady and wife of the late Henry Brewster Stanton , note abolitionist and journalist. She begin her education at the Johnstown Academy , and later become a pupil at Emma Willard 's Seminary , in Troy , a school note then throughout the country. She be graduate with the class of '32. Eight year later , while attend a world 's anti-slavery convention in London , she make the acquaintance of Lucretia Mott , which result in the joint issuance of a call for a woman 's right convention. Mrs. Stanton be on her wed trip at this time. The convention be hold at her home , Seneca Falls , July 19 and 20 , 1848. The first formal claim for suffrage for woman be then made. In 1854 she appear before the New York Legislature and address it on `` The Rights of Married Women. '' Six year later she take the stand that drunkenness should constitute a cause for divorce. She be instrumental in have the question of woman suffrage submit to Kansas in 1867 and Michigan in 1874. She be President of the National Committee of her party from 1855 to 1865. She be also identify with the Women 's Loyal League and be President of the National Women 's Suffrage Association unit 1883. In 1868 she seek to become an actual political factor by enter the list for Congress. For the past quarter of a century and over she have annually address a committee of Congress in favor of an amendment for woman to the Constitution of the United States. `` At the time of her death she be honorary President of the National Women 's Suffrage Association. Mrs. Stanton 's mother be Margaret Livingston , a daughter of James Livingston , an officer in the American Army during the Revolution. Her father 's ancestor come from Connecticut. Mrs. Stanton begin to take a great interest in the law a they apply to woman by have access to her father 's office , and in which she spend a great deal of time. She begin to hold that the statute be unfair toward women. Before she know how great a project be confront her , she have become the evangel of equal rights. `` After graduation from the Willard Seminary in Troy , Mrs. Stanton come to find herself in sympathy with the principle enunciate by her cousin , Gerritt Smith , the anti-slavery agitator. She become desirous of know just what the condition be in the South , and it be at the house of an abolitionist that she meet her future husband. Through her effort , practically unaided , she cause the passage of a `` Woman 's Property bill '' by the New York Legislature , deliver a two-hour speech thereon. With her work a an anti-slavery advocate and claimant for woman 's right , she also find time to devote to the cause of temperance. She be wont to tell that as early a her sixteenth year she become a believer in woman 's rights. Her vexation and mortification be great when her brother go to college and she could not also go. About this time she be often in a tilt with the law student in her father 's office over the right of women. When they could not score any other way they would mention `` The Taming of the Shrew , '' not at all to the liking of their opponent. Mrs. Stanton meet Daniel O'Connell in London. `` He be , '' she say , `` tall , well develop , and a magnificent-looking man , and probably one of the most effective speaker Ireland ever produced. '' She be in Paris in 1840 at the time the body of Napoleon Bonaparte be bring to France from St. Helena by the Prince de Joinville , and witness the wild excitement over the event. While the Stanton family be live at Chelsea , Mass. , Wittier become a regular visitor. During such time he unfold to Mrs. Stanton one of the most deeply interesting page of his life , a sad romance of love and disappointment. Mrs. Stanton first meet Miss Susan B. Anthony when the latter be a demure young Quakeress. The two ever work together in friendship and sympathy. Mrs. Stanton say of their joint labor : `` We never meet without issue a pronunciamento on some question. In thought and sympathy we be one , and in the division of labor we exactly complement each other. In write we do good work than either could alone. While she be slow and analytical in composition , I be rapid and synthetic. I be the good writer , she the good critic. She supply the fact and statistic , I the philosophy and rhetoric , and , together , we have make argument that have stand unshaken through the storm of long year -- argument that no one have answered. Our speech may be consider the united product of our two brains. '' The crowning work of Mrs. Stanton 's life be hold to be by many the `` Woman 's Bible. '' Lady Henry Somerset and Miss Frances E. Willard discuss the project of this Bible with Mrs. Stanton , but finally withdraw their name from the committee , fear that the work would be too radical. Miss Anthony and Mrs. Stanton be the founder of the Loyal League , which have for it object the relief of the suffer family of Union soldier , the head of which be at the front. In 1886 Mrs. Stanton and Miss Anthony issue in collaboration three volume entitle `` History of Women 's Suffrage. '' It be a noteworthy fact that Miss Anthony finish the fourth volume only last week. In 1895 Mrs. Stanton publish `` Eighty Years and More , '' be a volume of reminiscence of her life. She be the author of score of essay upon marriage , divorce , and ally subjects. From 1870 to 1880 she devote the great part of her time to lecturing. On Nov. 12 , 1895 , she be the central figure in a most memorable reception which take place in the Metropolitan Opera House , this city , and be attend by prominent suffragist from every part of the country. This reception mark the completion of her eightieth year. Tribute from Miss Anthony ROCHESTER , N. Y. , Oct. 26. -- The news of the death of Elizabeth Cady Stanton fell with almost crush weight upon Miss Susan B. Anthony , who have plan to go to New York on Nov. 12 to assist the venerable advocate of woman 's suffrage in the celebration of her eighty-seventh birthday. Miss Anthony say to-night : `` Through the early day , when the world be against u , we stand together. Mrs. Stanton be always a courageous woman , a leader of thought and new movements. I always call her the philosopher and statesman of our movement. She be a most finished writer , and every State paper present to Congress or the State Legislatures in the early day be write by Mrs. Stanton. `` I can not express myself at all a I feel. I be too crushed to say much , but , if she have outlive me , she would have find fine word with which to express our friendship. '' `` What period of your life give you the great pleasure ? '' be asked. `` When we be dig together. When she forge the thunderbolt and I fire them. The great campaign we ever have together be in 1869 , at the constitutional convention hold in Kansas for suffrage and the same year in New York State. `` In spite of her big family , to whom she be devote , and the great amount of work she do outside her home , she be one of the fine housekeeper I ever saw . ''