July 18 , 1903 OBITUARY James M'N. Whistler Dies in London By THE NEW YORK TIMES LONDON , July 18. -- James Abbott McNeil Whistler , the celebrated American artist , die yesterday afternoon at his residence , 74 Cheyne Walk , Chelsea , at the age of sixty-nine years. His death come unexpectedly , although for some time he have be seriously ill. This morning 's paper publish elaborate obituary notice , recognize the distinguish and unique personality of Whistler , whose genius greatly dominate European art of the present generation. While admit that it be a question for posterity to decide his exact position a a painter , it be generally concede that he be a consummate etcher. The Daily Telegraph say : `` It may safely be prophesy that the light of his genius will but burn the brighter when his self-asserted individuality have be a little forgotten or , at any rate , obscured. '' The Daily Chronicle say : `` It be mortify to think that there be no example of his work in the public gallery of London , where he live and work for so many years. '' It be twenty-five year since the famous case , `` Whistler versus Ruskin , '' be tried. In the history of art it might be two hundred year , so completely have the point of view of the critic and the public change , so completely have the brilliant genius of the man whom Ruskin call a `` coxcomb '' be vindicated. And yet , even now , there be no standard by which one can judge his work , by which one can form an estimate of his true place in the rank of the world 's great artists. That he be among them be not doubt ; just how high up among them be not so clear. It be only once or twice in a century that the originator of a new style in art or literature appear , and it take at least a century for the world to recover from the dazed condition into which it be throw by such a man 's work. James Abbott McNeill Whistler be a native of Lowell , Mass. , where he be bear in 1834. He be , therefore , nearly seventy year old at the time of his death , which will probably be a surprising fact to most people , for if ever a man live whose manner and behavior convey the impression of youth , it be he. Details in regard to his early life be not easily ascertained. His father and his elder brother be among the engineer who develop the great Russian railway system , and James be take to Russia when he be a child. He return to this country when he be twelve year old , and later he enter West Point. `` If salicylate have be a gas I should have be a soldier , '' he once say , in refer to his failure to pass his examination at the Military Academy. It be extremely lucky for the art world that salicylate be not a gas. At West Point one can see to this day a painting which Whistler execute when be a cadet there. There be nothing remarkable about it , even view in the favorable light which a knowledge of the artist 's after achievement suggests. Later on , however , when Whistler be connect with the Coast Survey , he engrave many a fancy head and landscape at the side of his more formal topographic work ( which habit lead to the severing of his connection with that branch of the United States Government ) that exhibit great mastery of the graver and extraordinary promise. In 1855 Whistler go to England , and shortly afterward move to Paris , and study under Gleyre , who be a painter of classic and early Christian subject in the Neo-Greek style. Needless to say , one look in vain in Whistler 's work for any trace of Gleyre 's teaching. There be no mean of trace the gradual growth of the `` Whistler manner '' in the artist 's work. A portrait of himself which he etch in 1859 be in existence , and show almost all the characteristic of his late productions. The year it be execute he begin to exhibit at the Royal Academy , and four year later he settle in London. It be in 1863 that Whistler 's first famous painting be executed. It be the exquisite `` Femme Blanche , '' now know a the `` Symphony in White , No. 1 : The White Girl. '' Nowadays it be hard to believe that it be reject at the Salon. Such , however , be the case , though the painting , when show at the Salon de Refuses , make a great sensation in the art world of Paris. In the next ten year some of the artist 's best know masterpiece be paint , include the portrait of Carlyle and the `` Portrait de Ma Mere. '' It be only poetical justice that the latter picture should have be buy for the Luxembourg. From the time he settle in London Whistler 's output of work be remarkable. One painting after another now regard a a chef d'oeuvre be produced. Merely to catalogue them all would take up considerable space. The `` Sarasate , '' the `` Lady Meux , '' the `` Harmony in Gray and Green : The Ocean , '' the `` Falling Rocket , '' the `` Miss Alexander , '' the `` Symphony in White No. 3 '' -- each title conveys to the art lover familiar with the master 's work an impression of tender color , exquisite line , fluency of modeling , and refine tone values. And at the same time Whistler be produce etching , which collector now seek as eagerly a those of Rembrandt or Meryon , and which would have make his reputation have he never hold a palette in his hand. Of Whistler the wit , the maker of paradox , the epigrammist , the master of the `` gentle art of make enemy , '' it be perhaps unnecessary to speak. The general public be quite familiar with his achievement in this direction , and for a long time be under the mistaken impression that it be all do for self-advertising. It be safe to say that this side of his career will be forgotten. His work will remain .