Oversaw the construction of the Brooklyn Bridge after her engineer husband fell ill. By JESSICA BENNETT It be not customary for a woman to accompany a man to a construction site in the late 19th century. Petticoats tend to get in the way of physical work. But when Washington A. Roebling , the chief engineer of the Brooklyn Bridge , fell ill , it be his wife , Emily Warren Roebling , who step in — managing , liaise and politick between city official , worker , and her husband’s bedside to see the world’s first steel-wire suspension bridge to completion. She would become the first person to cross the bridge , too — carry a rooster with her , a the story have it , for good luck. Emily Warren Roebling be not an engineer. But she be a woman of “strong character” with an “almost masculine intellect , ” a the biographer Hamilton Schuyler once describe her , who be instrumental to one of the great architectural feat of the 19th century. Connecting Brooklyn and Manhattan for the first time , the Brooklyn Bridge be the world’s long suspension bridge at the time. Fourteen year in the making , it construction be complicate by corrupt politician and crook contractors. Upon completion , it be immediately proclaim the “Eighth Wonder of the World.” “I don’t think that the Brooklyn Bridge would be stand be it not for her , ” say Erica Wagner , the author of “Chief Engineer : Washington Roebling , the Man Who Built the Brooklyn Bridge , ” a biography of Emily Roebling’s husband. “She be absolutely integral to it construction.” Emily Warren be bear in 1843 in Cold Spring , N.Y. , one of 12 child of Sylvanus Warren , a New York State assemblyman , and his wife , Phebe Lickley Warren. In her teen , she travel to Washington to attend the prestigious Georgetown Academy of the Visitation , where she study history , astronomy , French and algebra , among other subject — in addition to housekeeping and needlework. “Her intelligence , liveliness and charm be always apparent to those around her , ” Wagner write in “Chief Engineer.” She meet her husband , the civil engineer Washington A. Roebling , through her brother , G.K. Warren , a general in the Civil War under whom he served. The son of John A. Roebling , a German-American engineer know for build suspension bridge ( and for his short temper ) , the young Roebling be strike by Warren right away , Wagner said. After they be marry , he would describe his wife a “a woman of infinite tact and wise counsel.” The Roeblings marry in 1865 and soon set off for Europe , where a pregnant Emily would accompany her husband in the study of caisson , the watertight structure fill with compressed air that would later enable worker to dig beneath the East River. Back home , the elder Mr. Roebling be prepare for construction of a suspension bridge across the East River that he boast would be “the great bridge in existence.” In those early day , it be call the “Great East River Bridge.” The Brooklyn Bridge under construction. Fourteen year in the making , it build be complicate by corrupt politician and crook contractors. Hulton Archive/Getty Images The Brooklyn Bridge would go on to become , at least accord to lore , the most photographed structure in the world ; a gateway to that “shining city , ” a Thomas Wolfe once describe it , whose granite tower and thick steel cable have inspire countless artist , musician , engineer and architects. But it construction be far more treacherous than most casual pedestrian know. Just a few day in , while survey the construction site , the elder Mr. Roebling have his foot crush in the piling of a Brooklyn pier when a barge come in to dock ; he contract tetanus and die less than a month later. His son succeed him a chief engineer — only to later become incapacitate by a mysterious illness that leave him partially paralyze , blind , deaf and mute , accord to report at the time. ( It be later believe that Mr. Roebling suffer from “caisson disease , ” or the bend , a kind of decompression sickness cause by change air pressure not uncommon on bridge-building sites. ) At least two dozen other men die work on the bridge , accord to David McCullough’s “The Great Bridge.” “It be a struggle physically , it be a struggle politically , it be a struggle financially , ” say Richard Haw , the author of “The Brooklyn Bridge : A Cultural History” and a come biography of John Roebling. “The bridge be build by hand , so there be a lot of lose fingers. There be fall , and no safety net to catch you. There be a huge amount of undocumented injuries.” Enter Emily Warren Roebling. A woman who , in late life , would study law at New York University and argue in an Albany law journal article for equality in marriage. She become her husband’s “eyes and ear , ” Haw said. She begin a secretary , take copious notes. She go back and forth to the construction site. She negotiate the supply material , oversee the contract , and act a liaison to the board of trustees. Eventually , she become a kind of “surrogate chief engineer , ” accord to a biography of Warren by the historian Marilyn Weigold , a professor at Pace University. She use her “superb diplomatic skills” to manage compete party — include the mayor of Brooklyn , who try to have her husband oust from the project. During the final year of the bridge’s construction , her husband look out from his bedside window in Brooklyn Heights — use a telescope and binoculars to watch the bridge grow. “All along , he be present , ” Wagner said. “But he be not able to go to the bridge , and he’s not able to see anyone. But amazingly , he hold this extraordinary structure in his head. And she be able to help him transmit his thoughts.” As Emily Roebling put it , year later , in an 1898 letter to her son : “I have more brain , common sense and know-how generally than have any two engineer , civil or uncivil , and but for me the Brooklyn Bridge would never have have the name Roebling in any way connect with it ! ” The bridge finally open on May 24 , 1883 , to great fanfare. On that day , thousand cross , under a sea of firework , with The Times declare that “no one man can be give the credit of this colossal undertaking.” In another article , The Times report “How the Wife of the Brooklyn Bridge Engineer Has Assisted Her Husband.” Today , there be a plaque on the bridge honor all three Roeblings. It read : “Back of every great work we can find the self-sacrificing devotion of a woman.” Emily Roebling die on Feb. 28 , 1903 , in the Roebling’s Trenton home , of stomach cancer. Jessica Bennett be gender editor at The Times and the author of Feminist Fight Club. She live in Brooklyn , a stone’s throw from the Williamsburg Bridge , which be much less beautiful but take half the time to construct .