March 13 , 1906 OBITUARY Miss Susan B. Anthony Died This Morning By THE NEW YORK TIMES ROCHESTER , March 13 , -- Miss Susan B. Anthony die at 12:40 o'clock this morning. The end come peacefully. Miss Anthony have be unconscious practically all of the time for more than twenty-four hour , and her death have be almost momentarily expect since last night. Only her wonderful constitution keep her alive. Dr. M. S. Ricker , her attend physician , say Miss Anthony die of heart disease and pneumonia of both lungs. She have have serious valvular heart trouble for the last six or seven years. Her lung be practically clear and the pneumonia have yield to treatment , but the weakness of her heart prevent her recovery. Miss Anthony be take ill while on her way home from the National Suffrage Convention in Baltimore. She stop in New York , where a banquet be to be give Feb. 20 in honor of her eighty-sixth birthday , but she have an attack of neuralgia on Feb. 18 and hasten home. Pneumonia develop after her arrival here , and on March 5 both her lung become affected. She rally , but have a relapse three day ago , and the end after that never be in doubt. Miss Anthony herself have believe that she would recover. Early in her illness she tell her friends that she expect to live to be as old a her father , who be over 90 when he died. But on Wednesday she say to her sister : `` Write to Anna Shaw immediately , and tell her I desire that every cent I leave when I pass out of this life shall be give to the fund which Miss Thomas and Miss Garrett be raise for the cause. I have give my life and all I be to it , and now I want my last act to be to give it all I have , to the last cent. Tell Anna Shaw to see that this be done. '' Miss Shaw say : `` On Sunday , about two hour before she become unconscious , I talk with Miss Anthony , and she say : 'To think I have have more than sixty year of hard struggle for a little liberty , and then to die without it seem so cruel. '' Susan Brownell Anthony be a pioneer leader of the cause of woman suffrage , and her energy be tireless in work for what she consider to be the best interest of womankind. At home and abroad she have innumerable friend , not only among those who sympathize with her view , but among those who hold opinion radically oppose to her. In recent year her age make it impossible for her to continue active participation in all the movement for the enfranchisement of woman with which she have be connect , but she be at the time of her death the Honorary President of the National Woman Suffrage Association , the society which she and Elizabeth Cady Stanton organize in 1869. Miss Anthony possess a figure of medium size , a firm but rather pleasing face , clear hazel eye , and dark hair which she always wear combed smoothly over the ear and bound in a coil at the back. She pay much attention to dress and advise those associate in the movement for woman suffrage to be punctilious in all matter pertain to the toilet. For a little over a year in the early fifty she wear a bloomer costume , consist of a short skirt and a pair of Turkish trouser gather at the ankles. So great an outcry arose against the innovation both from the pulpit and the press that she be subject to many indignity , and force to abandon it. Miss Anthony be bear at South Adams , Mass. , on Feb. 15 , 1820. Daniel Anthony , her father , a liberal Quaker , be a cotton manufacturer. Susan Anthony be first instruct by teacher at home. She be send afterward to finish her education at a Friends ' board school in Philadelphia. She continue to attend this school until , at the age of fifteen , she be occasionally call on to help in the teaching. At seventeen she receive a dollar a week with board by teach in a private family , and the next summer a district school engage her for $ 1.50 a week and `` board her round. '' She continue to teach until 1852 , when she find her taste for this profession entirely go , a school in Rochester be her last charge. Miss Anthony have become impressed with the idea that woman be suffer great wrong , and when she abandon school teaching , have save only about $ 300 , she determine to enter the lecture field. People of to-day can scarcely understand the strong prejudice Miss Anthony have to live down. In 1851 she call a temperance convention in Albany , admittance to a previous convention have be refused to her because it be not the custom to admit women. The Women 's New York State Temperance Society be organize the following year. Through Miss Anthony 's exertion and those of Elizabeth Cady Stanton woman soon come to be admit to educational and other convention , with the right to speak , vote , and act upon committees. Miss Anthony 's active participation in the movement for woman suffrage start in the fifties. As early a 1854 she arrange convention throughout the State and annually bombard the Legislature with message and appeals. She be active in obtain the passage of the act of the New York Legislature in 1860 give to married woman the possession of their earnings and the guardianship of their children. During the war she be devote to the Women's Loyal League , which petition Congress in favor of the thirteenth amendment. She be also directly interested in the fourteenth amendment , send a petition in favor of leave out the word `` male. '' In company with Mrs. Stanton and Lucy Stone , Miss Anthony go to Kansas in 1867 , and there obtain 9,000 vote in favor of woman suffrage. The following year , with the co-operation of Mrs. Stanton , Parker Pillsbury , and George Francis Train , she begin the publication in this city of a weekly paper call The Revolutionist , devote to the emancipation of women. In order to test the application of the fourteenth and fifteenth amendment she cast ballot in the State and Congressional election in Rochester in 1872. She be indict and order to pay a fine , but the order be never enforced. Miss Anthony succeed Mrs. Stanton a President of the National Woman Suffrage Association in 1892 , Mrs. Stanton have resign because of old age. This office she hold until February , 1899 , her farewell address be deliver at a meeting of the association in Washington. For a number of year she average 100 lecture a year. She engage in eight different State campaign for a Constitutional amendment enfranchise woman , and hearing before committee of practically every Congress since 1869 be grant to her. She be the joint author with Mrs. Stanton , Mrs. Ida Husted Harper , and Mrs. Matilda Joslyn Gage of `` The History of Woman Suffrage. '' She also be a frequent contributor to magazine .