A feminist poet and revolutionary who become a martyr know a China’s ‘Joan of Arc.’ By AMY QIN With her passion for wine , sword and bomb making , Qiu Jin be unlike most woman bear in late 19th-century China. As a girl , she write poetry and study Chinese martial heroine like Hua Mulan ( yes , that Mulan ) fantasize about one day see her own name in the history books. But her ambition run up against China’s deeply root patriarchal society , which hold that a woman’s place remain in the home. Undeterred , Qiu rise to become an early and fierce advocate for the liberation of Chinese woman , defy prevail Confucian gender and class norm by unbind her foot , cross-dressing and leave her young family to pursue an education abroad. Her legacy a one of China’s pioneer feminist and revolutionary be cement on July 15 , 1907 , when she be behead at 31 by imperial army force who charge her with conspire to overthrow the Manchu-led Qing government. It be her final act of resistance , and it would later earn her a place in the pantheon of China’s revolutionary martyrs. To this day , she be often refer to a “China’s Joan of Arc.” “Qiu Jin live at a time when woman in China be not permit to venture out of their home , let alone participate in public affair , ” say Zhang Lifan , a writer and historian in Beijing. “So Qiu Jin not only participate in politics , her action alone be a rebellion.” Throughout her life , Qiu write often of what she saw a China’s stifle gender role , a see in this passage from a 1903 poem : My body will not allow me To mingle with the men But my heart be far braver Than that of a man. At the time of the poem’s writing , China be an empire in distress. The Qing government be on it last leg , heave under the weight of internal bureaucratic decay and external pressure from foreign powers. With the uncertainty of the period come opportunity for educate Chinese woman like Qiu. As a result , Qiu soon find herself at the forefront of an emerge wave of new feminist who believe that women’s right and political revolution naturally go hand in hand. But scholar say the enduring strength of Qiu’s legacy lie not only in her leadership , but also — and perhaps more important — in her willingness to ultimately sacrifice her life for the cause. “She argue that it wasn’t enough for woman to just sit around and ask for equality , ” say Hu Ying , a professor of Chinese literature at University of California , Irvine. “She believe you have to be willing to put your life on the line. And the fact that she really do put her life on the line be what make her word stick.” As be often the case with any historical martyr , it be difficult to disentangle the fact of Qiu’s life from late myth making. Qiu be behead by imperial force on July 15 , 1907 , become a revolutionary martyr. She be 31. Qiu Guijin ( pronounced Cho GWAY-Jeen ) be bear into a respect , albeit decline , gentry family in the southern port city of Xiamen on Nov. 8 , 1875 ( some scholar say 1877 ) . Her father , Qiu Shounan , be a government official. Her mother , surnamed Shan , also come from a distinguish literati-official family. With her old brother and young sister , Qiu grow up in Xiamen and her family’s ancestral home of Shaoxing in China’s eastern Zhejiang Province. By all account , she have a comfortable childhood. But she be force to bind her foot , learn needlework and — bad of all , in Qiu’s eye — submit to an arrange marriage. The man Qiu’s father chose for her be Wang Tingjun , the son of a wealthy merchant in Hunan Province. In 1903 , seven year after marrying , the young couple move with their two child from Hunan to Beijing. For Qiu , life in the imperial capital be decidedly less dull. She strike up friendship with like-minded woman and begin to take an interest in China’s political affairs. She unbound her foot , drank copious amount of wine and begin experiment with cross-dressing and swordplay. Still , the frustration of her marriage take a deep toll on her psyche. Her husband , she felt , be uncultivated and have no interest in poetry or learning. So in the summer of 1904 , Qiu , then 28 , act on a bold decision : She leave her husband and two child , sell her jewelry and sail for Japan. ( For that reason , scholar sometimes call her “China’s Nora , ” after the character in Henrik Ibsen’s 1879 play “A Doll’s House”. ) She sum up her life in a 1904 poem call “Regrets : Lines Written En Route to Japan” : Sun and moon have no light leave , earth be dark , Our women’s world be sink so deep , who can help u ? Jewelry sell to pay this trip across the sea , Cut off from my family I leave my native land. Unbinding my foot I clean out a thousand year of poison , With heated heart arouse all women’s spirits. Alas , this delicate kerchief here , Is half stain with blood , and half with tears. In Tokyo , Qiu enrol at Shimoda Utako’s Women’s Practical School , shorten her name to Qiu Jin. But she focus most of her energy outside the classroom , connect with other reform-minded Chinese student similarly keen on foment revolution back home. She join influential anti-Manchu secret society , include the Restoration Society and Sun Yat-sen’s Revolutionary Alliance. She come back to China in 1906 with a militant determination to advance women’s cause and topple the Qing government. She start the short-lived “Chinese Women’s Journal , ” which , unlike most feminist magazine at the time , use vernacular language to appeal to a broad audience on topic like the cruelty of foot-binding and arrange marriages. She also learn how to make bombs. By 1907 , Qiu be run the Datong School — a front for a group that recruit and trained young revolutionary — in Shaoxing when she learn that Xu Xilin , who be her friend and the school’s founder , have be execute for assassinate his Manchu superior. After Xu’s death , friend warn Qiu that Qing troop be come to Shaoxing to find the woman think to be his co-conspirator. But Qiu refuse to run away. In a scene that have since be memorialize and embellish in a multitude of form , Qiu attempt to fight back but be quickly capture , torture and beheaded. Over the year , critic have accuse her of be naïve in her belief — widely share at the time — that overthrow the Qing could resolve China’s social and political ills. Others say her death be unnecessary since she have ample time to escape from the advance soldiers. Perhaps her most notable critic be Lu Xun , one of China’s great 20th-century writer , who believe Qiu’s reckless behavior in Shaoxing be link to the enormous adulation she receive during her time in Japan. She be “clapped to death , ” he tell a friend. More than a century after her death , many Chinese still visit her tomb beside West Lake in Hangzhou to pay their respect to the woman now embed in the national consciousness a a bold feminist heroine. Some can also still recite the famous word she write just before her death : “Autumn wind , autumn rain , fill one’s heart with melancholy.” The line be a play on her surname “Qiu” which mean “autumn” in Chinese. Amy Qin cover culture in Asia for The New York Times. Follow her on Twitter : @ amyyqin Owen Guo contribute research .