June 25 , 1908 OBITUARY Mr. Cleveland be Dead at 71 BY THE NEW YORK TIMES Grover Cleveland , twenty-second President of the Untied States , and the only Democrat to hold the office of Chief Executive since the time of Buchanan , be bear at Caldwell , Essex County , N. J. , March 18 , 1837. He be the third child of the Rev. Richard Falley Cleveland and Anna Neal Cleveland , and he be christen Stephen Grover , though the first of his give name be never used. The family of which the late ex-President be a member date back in this country to Moses Cleaveland , a native of Ipswich , Suffolk County , England , who emigrate to Massachusetts in 1635. Aaron Cleveland , a great grandson of Moses and the great-great- grandfather of Grover , be the first of the line to drop from the name the superfluous `` a. '' He be an intimate friend of Benjamin Franklin , and die in Franklin 's house in Philadelphia , whither he have go for medical treatment. Richard Falley Cleveland , the ex-President 's father , be a graduate of Yale , and be ordain into the Presbyterian ministry in 1829 , marry in the same year. His wife , Anna Neal , be of Irish and German descent , the daughter of a book merchant of Baltimore. Thus Grover Cleveland come of a mixed stock , almost typically American , form of a union of English , Irish , and German. At the time of Grover Cleveland 's birth his father be the pastor of a church at Caldwell. The former occupant of the parsonage have be the Rev. Stephen Grover , after whom the son of Dr. Grover 's successor be called. The name Stephen be drop early in boyhood , but much be say and write about it at the time of Mr. Cleveland 's first nomination for the Presidency. When Mr. Cleveland be but 4 year old his father accept a call to Fayetteville , near Syracuse , this State , where the family live nine year , move thence to Clinton , Oneida County , for three year , and afterward to Holland Patent , a small village fifteen mile north of Utica. The elder Cleveland die within three week of enter upon his new ministry at the latter place , leave a widow and nine children. The widow continue to live there until her death in 1882 , and the place be also the home for many year of Grover 's favorite sister , Rose Elizabeth , the writer. Worked for $ 50 a Year Both at Fayetteville and at Clinton Grover Cleveland have the advantage of be able to attend , though not with strict regularity , an academy. At the age of 14 he be a clerk in a small store in Fayetteville at a salary of $ 50 a year. He be to have receive double the amount the second year , but the family move away , much to the boy 's disappointment. He be prepare to enter Hamilton College at the time of his father 's death , be then 17 year old. From that time on he be compel to earn his own living and to aid his mother. At that time , 1853 , Grover 's brother William , who be a teacher in the New York Institute for the Blind , be make Principal of the institution , and Grover obtain an appointment a his assistant. Teaching the blind , at that time , be an exceedingly arduous process , a there be no text books. Grover Cleveland remain but a year in the institution , when he determine to study law , and return to his mother 's home at Holland Patent. This visit home , a late development prove , be the turn point in his life. A neighbor , Ingham Townsend , urge him to enter the ministry , but the young man be intent on study law , and borrow $ 25 from Mr. Townsend wherewith to reach Cleveland , Ohio , where , he believe , he could obtain employment in a lawyer 's office. He decide , however , to visit his uncle , Lewis F. Allen , at Buffalo before go on to Cleveland. Mr. Allen be engage at that time in write a series of book , and employ young Grover to help him , pay him , for six week ' work , the sum of $ 60. Later , however , young Cleveland 's service be acknowledge in the preface of one of the volume , publish in 1861. In the meanwhile , however , Mr. Allen persuade his nephew to give up the idea of a trip far west , and in August , 1855 , Grover Cleveland begin the study of law in the office of Rogers , Bowes & Rogers in Buffalo , his actual position be that of copyist and clerk. He pursue his study arduously , and four year later , in 1859 , he be admit to the bar. He remain with his employer for three year after be admit , however , receive , at first , $ 600 a year , and later $ 1,000. This be in 1863 , and the civil war have reach it critical stage. Years later there be considerable criticism of Mr. Cleveland 's action in not have serve his country in the war. On his behalf his friend have assert that from the time of his first employment in Buffalo a part of his earnings have be dispatch regularly to his mother , and that when the war break out he find himself in the position of have to decide whether he should continue to contribute to his mother 's support or take up arm in defense of his country. It be decide eventually that his two young brother should join the Northern army , while he should remain in Buffalo and take care of his mother. This be done. Later Mr. Cleveland obtain the service of a substitute , to pay whom he have to borrow money. Entry Into Public Life Mr. Cleveland 's professional life really begin in 1863. In January of that year he be appoint Assistant District Attorney of Erie County. His new position take him from the narrow path he have be follow and bring him into contact with men of affair , enable him to obtain a wealth of experience which be of great use to him in later years. As a pleader in court , he obtain his first grounding in public speaking , develop early a directness of speech which mark his utterance ever afterward. Owing to the fact that the District Attorney , Torrance , live twenty-five mile from the city , Mr. Cleveland have , perhaps , more than his share of the office work , but he be glad of the opportunity ; anxious for work that would give him experience ; extremely desirous of a thorough training in his chosen profession. Among the prominent and able politician in Buffalo at that time , with whom young Cleveland come constantly in contact , be Albert Haller Tracy , ex-President Fillmore , Nathan K. Hall , who have be Fillmore 's Postmaster General , and Congressman Solomon G. Haven. He have be appoint a a Democrat , and a Democrat he remain always and unwaveringly. When in 1865 the District Attorney die , he , although only 28 year old , receive the nomination. Erie County be strongly Republican at that time , he be defeated. His opponent in the race , the first political race of his career , be Lyman K. Bass , a warm personal friend. Entering private practice , Mr. Cleveland form a partnership with Isaac V. Vanderpool , and the business of the firm increase rapidly. In 1867 he decline an appointment a Assistant United States District Attorney for Northern New York , and two year later form a law partnership with A. P. Lanning and Oscar Folsom , the father of Frances Folsom , whom he afterward married. After this partnership have do a prosperous business for two year , Mr. Cleveland withdraw to accept the nomination for Sheriff of Erie County , to which office he be elected. The acceptance of this nomination be a matter to which he give deep thought. Finally , have make the choice , he tell his friend that he have do so in order that he might have more time for read and professional study ; an opportunity to save a modest competency and at the same time retain his professional relations. Mr. Cleveland serve a Sheriff for three year , at the end of which time he believe himself a sounder advocate and a man of graver and maturer intellect. While in office two of his brother who have serve in the army be lose at sea in the burning of the steamer Missouri , off the Island of Abaco. This be in 1872. Forming a partnership with Lyman K. Bass and Wilson S. Bissell , Mr. Cleveland again take up the practice of law. Later Mr. Bass 's place in the firm be take by George J. Sicard. Mr. Cleveland 's personal success a a lawyer be considerable , and he remain with the firm until 1881 , when he accept the nomination for Mayor of Buffalo. This nomination be largely the outcome of his own deep interest in politics , which have gradually develop during the year of his residence in Buffalo , until he have become one of the chief counselor of his party in his home town. He be elect by the then unusual majority of 3,530 , the large that have ever be cast for a candidate for that office up to that time. The Veto His Weapon Early in his career a an elected officer Mr. Cleveland become know a the `` veto Mayor. '' Afterward he be know a the `` veto Governor '' and the `` veto President. '' He wield the power of the veto with great freedom , and sometimes quite unexpectedly. His first veto astonish the State , though it have to do with a comparatively small matter. An appropriation of $ 500 by the City Council for the observance of Decoration Day have be authorize from certain money set aside for the celebration of Independence Day , and there be an ordinance against use fund set aside for one purpose for another. Hence the veto. Shortly after this come the so-called `` plain-speech veto , '' which concern a street- cleaning contract award at a price of $ 422,500 for five year , though an unsuccessful bidder have offer to do the work for $ 100,000 less. After a successful administration a Mayor Mr. Cleveland be put forward a a candidate for the nomination for Governor. The Buffalo Daily News , formerly a Republican newspaper , be the first to announce his candidacy. Among his opponent in the race for the nomination be Roswell P. Flower and Gen. Henry W. Slocum. After a spirited canvas he obtain the nomination , largely through the vote of the Tammany representative who have fail of admission to the convention of the year previous. Mr. Cleveland be nominate on the third ballot. Mr. Cleveland be elect Governor of New York State by a majority of 151,000 and a plurality over the Republican candidate , Charles J. Folger , of 192,000. The Republican Party that year be split by factional fight , and there be considerable dissension over Federal interference in State politics. In his first message a Governor Mr. Cleveland urge the removal of restriction on the canal of the State and have the pleasure of see his view carry out. He also devote much of the message to the matter of health , the supervision of bank , school , and charitable institution , and to the question of municipal government , which be just then attract widespread attention. On this score he urge against divide responsibility. As Governor he add to his reputation for veto measure unexpectedly , at one time decline to sign a bill appropriate money for a soldier ' monument , declare that though the object be an admirable and patriotic one , he could not forget that the money must come from the pocket of the taxpayer , and all that justify the collection of such fund be the safety and substantial welfare of the citizens. As , before him , Tilden and Seymour have find the Governorship of this State a step stone to the nomination for the Presidency , so with Cleveland. He meet with opposition of no mean order from Roswell P. Flower , Gen. Slocum , and Abram S. Hewitt. When the convention meet in Chicago with the name of Gen. Palmer of Illinois , Senator McDonald of Indiana , Thomas Hendricks of Indiana , John G. Carlisle , William R. Morrison , Judge Truman , and Samuel J. Randall before it , it be discover that the party be so divided that to unite on any one of these men be practically impossible. The delegate turn their eye then to Cleveland , and he be nominate with great enthusiasm , Mr. Hendricks be name for the second place on the ticket. Thus the preconcerted arrangement of one man from the East and the other from the Middle West be carry out satisfactorily. In the campaign that follow Mr. Cleveland adopt an unusual stand by refuse to make speeches. He make but two during the whole of the time , one at Newark and one at Bridgeport. Each be brief in the extreme. This be the campaign in which the alliterative sentence of the Rev. Samuel D. Burchard , in a speech make at the Fifth Avenue Hotel , represent the Democrats a associate with `` Rum , Romanism , and rebellion , '' play such havoc with the chance of James G. Blaine. There be four ticket in the field , and the popular vote stand : Cleveland. ( Dem. ) 4,874,986 Blaine. ( Rep. ) 4,851,981 Butler. ( Labor and Greenback ) 175,370 St. John. ( Pro. ) 150,369 Mr. Cleveland receive a majority of 37 in the Electoral College. First Presidential Term The first term of Grover Cleveland a President of the United States be not make notable by any striking events. The foreign relation of the country , on the whole , be tranquil. The dispute with Mexico over the imprisonment of Cutting be annoy , but comparatively trivial. The dispute with Italy and Austria-Hungary over the nomination of A. M. Kiely a Minister be more dignified. Both Courts consider Kiely person non grata ; Italy , because he have denounce King Victor Emmanuel for his treatment of the Pope , and Austria-Hungary because his wife be a Jewess. The President administer a stinging rebuke by refuse to appoint any Minister to Vienna for a year. Two treaty be make during the first Cleveland term ; one with England , provide for the extradition of criminal for a great number of offense , and the other with Great Britain and Canada , for the purpose of settle long exist controversy between the latter country and the United States. Home affair be administer with success , the enlargement of the navy be give particular attention , under the administration of William C. Whitney a Secretary of the Navy. It be in this term , in the general belief , that the foundation of the navy a the efficient body of fight ship which deal with Spain be laid. A navy large enough to dignify the dictate of the country be , with Cleveland , a doctrine of the first importance. The term , too , be mark by a restoration of good feeling and relation between the North and the South. The defeat of Cleveland by Harrison in 1888 be generally attribute to his tariff message of the year before , but there be those who differ from this view , declare that if it be true that the President 's view on that question do accomplish the defeat of the party in 1888 it undoubtedly bring victory in 1892. It be freely assert that the party lose because it could not hold States that be naturally Democratic , owe to factional difference and the personal ambition of some politicians. Cleveland be defeat in the Electoral College , but his tariff utterance mush have find favor with the people , for in the popular vote he have a plurality over Harrison of 100,476. Mr. Cleveland spend the four year between his first and second term in practice law in this city , succeed remarkably , and all the time abstain from the discussion of public questions. His second term will undoubtedly be regard always a one of the most important peace period in the history of the country. The President be call upon to deal with almost every question of importance that have at different time perplex the National councils. Pensions , civil service reform , and the silver question be among the chief of these. Perhaps , among home affair , his action in make a contract with J. P. Morgan and August Belmont for the immediate purchase of sufficient gold to prevent the threatened adoption of the silver standard be the most important of all , consider in relation to the man. It raise a great cry of denunciation , but his friend ably defend the President , declare that he have adopt the only mean of save the Nation from dishonorable bankruptcy. Upheld Queen Liliuokalani It be perhaps in his foreign policy , however , that Mr. Cleveland 's second Administration be the more brilliant. His disposition of the case of Queen Liliuokalani be consider admirable , even by some of his enemies. He felt sure that the Minister to Hawaii , Stevens , have act in a lawless manner in land a detachment of troop from Boston and recognize the Provisional Government the day after the old Government have be overthrow , and while it be still able to hold it own except against the arm of the United States , and he say so unequivocally ; though Congress disagree and upheld Stevens. Of even great importance be his action in the Venezuelan boundary dispute ; perhaps the best known of his official actions. In his message of Dec. 17 , 1895 , he give expression to the broad view of the Monroe Doctrine that have ever be enunciate in the diplomatic history of the country. The correspondence between this country and Great Britain over the matter have last a year , and little have be done. There have seem to be no cause for tension between the country , but the Cleveland message , set forth clearly and determinedly the attitude of the United States , be receive with amazement , and the shock of arm between the two old-time foe , Uncle Sam and John Bull , be look for. Reading like an invitation to war , the message really make for peace. As a result of it the question be settle once for all , and the power of the United States in the Western Hemisphere firmly established. Grover Cleveland have marry , on June 2 , 1886 , at the White House , Frances Folsom , the daughter of his former law partner. She become the young and be accredit with be one of the most beautiful mistress of the White House. At the time of her marriage she be 22. Ruth , the first child of the union , be bear in this city on Oct. 3 , 1891. The second child , Esther , be bear in the White House , Sept. 9 , 1893 , during President Cleveland 's second term. Mr. Cleveland retire to private life on March 4 , 1897 , make his home at Princeton , N. J. , and withdraw almost entirely from discussion of public affair , though at one point he oppose vigorously the policy of `` imperialism , '' declare it contrary to the practice of the country since the time of Washington. Mr. Cleveland come somewhat prominently before the public again at the time of the insurance scandal , when the Equitable Life Assurance Society pass from the control of James Hazen Hyde into the hand of Thomas F. Ryan. Mr. Ryan set Paul Morton at the head of the active management of the company , but choose also a committee of three whose duty it should be to guard the policy holder ' interest. This committee be head by Grover Cleveland , his associate be Morgan J. O'Brien and George Westinghouse. The sagacity of Mr. Ryan in choose Mr. Cleveland for such work be recognize at once , and beyond all question the presence of the former President on the committee go a long way toward allay the fear of the policy holder the country over , and quiet the tumult that the disclosure of the former management 's practice have raised. To a certain extent , Mr. Cleveland become identify with the life insurance business from that time on. Last year , in February , he be choose for the position of Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Association of Life Insurance Presidents , at a salary of $ 25,000 a year. In the meanwhile , too , he have act a rebate referee for the Mutual , Equitable , and New York Life Insurance Companies , and this work constitute the chief business activity of his late life. From time to time during the last year at Princeton Mr. Cleveland , in interview and otherwise , reiterate the doctrine that bring him fame in his early year , and occasionally express trenchant view on current topics. Mr. Cleveland after 1897 spend the great part of each year at Princeton , surround by his family , live simply and quietly. His vacation be pass chiefly at Buzzard 's Bay , Mass. , at his country house , Gray Gables , where he indulge in his favorite pastime of fish to his heart 's content. At the age of 70 he declare himself still young , and he be still an ardent tariff reformer and a ardent a fisherman. At time , in 1907 , he fell ill , but rally again and again , while the entire Nation watch with great interest and deep feeling , for Mr. Cleveland unquestionably enjoy the admiration of all , even his former political opponent , and to him be heartily accord the veneration and respect due to the only living ex-President of the United States .