June 25 , 1909 OBITUARY Sarah Orne Jewett , Noted Writer , Dead By THE NEW YORK TIMES An illness last many month end tonight in the death of Miss Sarah Orne Jewett , Litt. D. , author of many book and regard a one of the foremost woman writer of America. Since last March Miss Jewett have be at her old home here , where for many year she have be accustom to pass her Summers , and it be in this old home that her death occur at 6:40 this evening. It be while living in Boston early in the present year , at the residence of her friend , Mrs. James T. Fields , widow of a famous Boston publisher , and herself an author of various book , that Miss Jewett have an attack of apoplexy which cause paralysis on one side of her body , and , although her mind remain clear , she become nearly helpless physically. It be believe that another attack of the brain hemorrhage from which she first suffer be the immediate cause of death. The house where Miss Jewett be bear , on Sept. 3 , 1849 , have be in the possession of the Jewett family since 1740. Miss Jewett be the daughter of Dr. Theodore H. and Caroline F. ( Perry ) Jewett. Miss Jewett be best know to the literary world through her story of New England country life. These be publish both in book form and in the magazines. Her father be a country physician. Delicate health in childhood compel Miss Jewett to spend most of her time in the open air. She therefore accompany her father every day on his round among his patients. During these trip she store up material which later find it way into print. Afterward , gain somewhat in strength , Miss Jewett attend the academy in her native village. Her career a an author begin when she be quite young. While she be at the Berwick Academy , she be only seventeen then , several short story under her name appear in `` Our Young Folks , '' and the Riverside Magazine. She venture to send a story to the Atlantic Monthly when she be nineteen year of age , and since then hardly a year have pass without a volume from her. Although nearly all of her life be spend between the house in which she be bear in Maine and at the home of Mrs. James T. Fields , these place be not the only one with which Miss Jewett be acquainted. She travel throughout this country and make several trip abroad. Among Miss Jewett 's principal writing be `` Deephaven , '' in 1877 ; `` Old Friends and New , '' publish in 1880 ; `` Country Byways , '' which be publish in the following year ; `` A Country Doctor , '' in 1884 ; a series of story of the nation , which be publish in 1887 ; `` Tales of New England , '' in 1888 , and `` The Country of the Pointed Firs , '' publish in 1897. Other story be `` A Marsh Island , '' `` The Story of the Normans , '' her last book be `` The Tory Lover , '' publish in 1901. Miss Jewett be a contributor besides , to many magazines. In 1901 she receive the degree of Doctor of Letters from Bowdoin College .