February 18 , 1909 OBITUARY Old Apache Chief Geronimo Is Dead Special to The New York Times LAWTON , Okla. , Feb. 17. -- Geronimo , the Apache Indian chief , die of pneumonia to-day in the hospital at Fort Sill. He be nearly 90 year of age , and have be hold at the Fort a a prisoner of war for many years. He will be bury in the Indian Cemetery tomorrow by the missionary , the old chief have profess religion three year ago. As the leader of the war Apaches of the Southwestern territory in pioneer day , Geronimo gain a reputation for cruelty and cunning never surpass by that of any other American Indian chief. For more than twenty year he and his men be the terror of the country , always leave a trail of bloodshed and devastation. The old chief be capture many time , but always get away again , until his final capture , in 1886 , by a small command of infantry scout under Capt. H.W. Lawton , who , a Major General , be kill at the head of his command in the Philippines , and Assistant Surgeon Leonard Wood , today in command of the Department of the East , with headquarters at Governors Island. The capture be make in the Summer , after a long and very try campaign of many month , in which Lawton and Wood gain a reputation which will be long remember in the annals of the army. Geronimo be at first sent to Fort Pickens , but be later transfer to Fort Sill. Until a few year ago he do not give up the hope of some day return to the leadership of the tribe of the Southwest , and in the early year of his imprisonment he make several attempt to escape. Geronimo be a Chiricahua Apache , the son of Chal-o-Row of Mangus-Colorado , the war chief of the Warm Spring Apaches , whose career of murder and devastation through Arizona , New Mexico , and Northern Mexico in his day almost equal that of his terrible son. According to story tell by the old Indian during his last day , he be crown war chief of his tribe at the early age of 16. For many year he follow the lead of old Cochise , the hereditary chief of the Apaches , who die in 1875 and be succeed by Natchez , his son , who , however , be soon displace by Geronimo with his superior cunning and genius for the Indian method of warfare. After trail the band lead by Geronimo for more than ten year Gen. Crook would probably have capture him in 1875 have he not be transfer to duty among the Utes just a success seem to be near at hand. For seven year after this the situation in the Southwest be the bad ever face by the settlers. Crook be send back in 1883. A large body of troop be place at his disposal , and in a month he have succeed in drive Geronimo back to his reservation , capture him and his men on the Mexican border. In 1885 Geronimo break out again , and this time be surround by Crook in the Canon de los Embidos. But the Indians succeed in slip away , and Crook be remove and Nelson A. Miles place in command. Miles have already gain a reputation a an Indian fighter , and while he do not exactly cut the field wire behind him to prevent interference from Washington , story be tell of the frequent disregard of troublesome messages. Lawton and Wood be place in command of the scout late in the Summer of 1885. They ask permission to take a picked body of men into the hostile territory and endeavor to run down Geronimo. Gen. Miles finally send them off with many misgivings. There followed month of privation and hardship which be never forget by the men who go with the two young officers. They be go nearly a year , Gen. Miles often not know even where they be or whether or not they have be destroy by the enemy. On the night of Aug. 20 , 1886 , the General be sit at the telegraph instrument in the office at Wilcox , Ariz. , wait for dispatch , when the key suddenly click off the news that Geronimo and his men have be surround at the junction of the San Bernardino and Baische Rivers , near the Mexican border. Miles hasten there and meet the chief on his way north under guard of Lawton. The old warrior be surround by about 400 buck , squaw , papoose , and dogs. They have little else than their blanket and tent pole , and a Gen. Miles afterward state in his memoir , `` The wily old chief have evidently decide to give up warfare for a time and live on the Government until his tribe gain sufficient strength to return to the warpath. '' Gen. Miles write : `` Every one at Washington have now become convinced that there be no good in the old chief , and he be , in fact , one of the low and most cruel of the savage of the American continent. '' The people of the West demand that he be not allow to go back to the reservation. He and his buck be accordingly send to Fort Pickens and the squaw and papoose to Fort Marion , Florida. It be finally decide to keep Geronimo confine a a prisoner of war. His desire to get back to the West be so pitiful , however , that he be transfer to Fort Sill , where he spend the remainder of his days. Gen. Wood tell an interesting anecdote of an incident which occur one afternoon when he be guard the old chief while Lawton go in search of his command , the location of which he have lose soon after the surrender : `` About 2 o'clock in the afternoon the old Indian come to me and ask to see my rifle. It be a Hotchkiss , and he say he have never see it mechanism. When he ask me for the gun and some ammunition I must confess I felt a little nervous , for I think it might be a device to get hold of one of our weapons. I make no objection , however , and let him have it , show him how to use it. He fire at a mark , just miss one of his own men who be passing. This he regard a a great joke , roll on the ground and laugh heartily and shout , 'Good gun. ' '' Gen. Miles , in his memoir , describe his first impression of Geronimo when he be bring into camp by Lawton , thus : `` He be one of the bright , most resolute , determined-looking men that I have ever encountered. He have the clear , sharp dark eye I think I have ever see , unless it be that of Gen. Sherman . ''