August 27 , 1910 OBITUARY William James Dies ; Great Psychologist Chocorua , N. H. , Aug. 26. -- Prof. William James of Harvard University , America 's foremost philosophical writer , virtual founder of the modern school of psychology and exponent of pragmatism , die of heart disease to-day at his Summer home here. Prof. James , who be 68 year old , have be in a critical condition since his arrival at Quebec from Europe a week ago. This morning he take a decided turn for the bad , lapse into unconsciousness about noon. He die three hour later , surround by his wife , daughter , son , and his brother , Henry James , the author. It be to be at the side of the sick bed of his brother Henry that Prof. James several month ago go abroad. He watch over his brother until he recover , then the two make a joint tour through Europe. In one of the Continental city Prof. James be attack by heart disease. Treating the matter lightly , he continue his travel until his condition become more alarming , and he turn his step homeward. With his brother he arrive at Quebec on Aug. 19. His son meet him there and bring him immediately to his Summer home here. During the week the attend physician do not see any cause for immediate fear , although they tell the family that their patient be very ill. This morning Prof. James complain of severe pain , and then gradually lapse into unconsciousness. Prof. James be an active member of the Faculty of Harvard University from 1872 to 1907 , when he announce his retirement in order to devote himself to his writing. A silver love cup be give to him by the advanced student in philosophy when he meet his class for the last time on Jan. 22 , 1907. It be announce then , however , that he be not sever his connection with the Faculty entirely , but would merely retire from his lecture room work. The home of Prof. James be on Irving Street , in Old Cambridge , a stone 's throw from the college yard. It be there that he write his `` Principles of Psychology , '' which bring him much fame and become a standard text book for university use. It appear in 1890 , after twelve year of introspective experimentation upon the physiology of the mind. The book practically found the modern science of psychology in America , although some experimental work have be do along the same line in Europe. Prof. James be one of the group of men who come under the inspiring influence of Darwin 's pupil , Louis Agassiz , who start him out in a career a a zoologist before his introspective turn of mind have lead him into line of mental investigation. The early youth of Prof. James be spend in New York , where he be bear Jan. 11 , 1842. His father , Henry James , a Swedenborgian minister , and a well-known writer upon Swedenborg , be characterize by James Russell Lowell a `` the best talker in America. '' The son be not physically strong a a youth , and be send to England together with his brother , Henry James , Jr. , the now famous novelist. Upon return to America in the early '60s young James enter the Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard. In 1865 he go to Brazil with the Agassiz expedition , and specialize in the study of plant and fishes. He decide , however to abandon this study because , a he put it , he could never get through his `` poor head the horribly long drawn-out designations. '' From the Scientific School he turn to medicine , be graduate from the Harvard Medical School with the degree of M. D. in 1870. In 1872 Prof. James become instructor and later Assistant Professor of Comparative Anatomy and Physiology , a post which he retain until 1880. From 1880 to 1885 he be Assistant Professor of Philosophy ; from 1885 to 1889 professor in the same department. He be Professor of Psychology from 1889 to 1897 , and Professor of Philosophy from 1897 to 1907. When he first take up his mental study -- it be about the time of his graduation in medicine -- and begin to work a an independent investigator , a small ante-room adjoin _arvard laboratory be furnish him , and there he collect sheep 's head and frog and pursue his study of `` physiological psychology. '' The result in a decade be his famous textbook. In 1880 he write for The Atlantic Monthly `` Great Men , Great Thoughts , and the Environment , '' and for a long time be a contributor to The International Journal of Ethics. He be President of the American Psychological Association and of the International Society for Psychical Research. Upon his retirement from active teaching he take up a line of study seek `` to find a balm for men 's souls. '' He become the chief American advocate of `` pragmatism , '' a trend in philosophical thought which hold that `` that be true which works. '' On July 8 of last year he startle the scientific world by announce that he have hold communication with the spirit of the late Dr. Richard Hodgson. He make a report upon his suppose spiritual communication occupy more than 100 page in the `` Proceedings of the American for Psychical Research , '' much of the report consist of allege verbatim record of his spooky conversation. `` I await more fact , '' he say when question about his proof that it be really Dr. Hodgson who speak to him , `` fact which may not point clearly to a conclusion for fifty or a hundred years. '' The honorary degree of Ph.D. and Litt. D. be bestow upon Prof. James by Padua in 1893 ; he be make Doctor of Laws by Princeton in 1896 ; Edinburgh in 1902 , and Harvard in 1903. He be Gifford lecturer on natural religion at the University of Edinburgh from 1899 to 1901 ; a corresponding member of the Institute of France , and of the Royal Prussian Academy of Science , and a member of the National Academy of Sciences. Among his book besides `` Principles of Psychology , '' be `` The Will to Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy , '' `` Talks to Teachers on Psychology and to Students on Life's Ideals , '' `` Human Immortality -- Two Supposed Objections to the Doctrine , '' `` The Varieties of Religious Experiences , '' and `` Pragmatism -- A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking. '' Prof. James be marry , and his wife and four child survive him .