August 15 , 1910 OBITUARY Miss Nightingale Dies , Aged Ninety By THE NEW YORK TIMES LONDON , Aug. 14. -- Florence Nightingale , the famous nurse of the Crimean war , and the only woman who ever receive the Order of Merit , die yesterday afternoon at her London home. Although she have be an invalid for a long time , rarely leave her room , where she pass the time in a half-recumbent position , and be under the constant care of a physician , her death be somewhat unexpected. A week ago she be quite sick , but then improve , and on Friday be cheerful. During that night alarm symptom develop , and she gradually sink until 2 o'clock Saturday afternoon , when the end came. During recent year , own to her feebleness and advanced age , Miss Nightingale have receive but few visitors. On May 12 last she celebrate her ninetieth birthday , and be the recipient of a congratulatory message from King George. Her wish be that her funeral should be as quiet a possible , and though there be a strong feeling among the general public and among military men in favor of a public funeral , there be little doubt that her expressed desire in this connection will be take into consideration. Not even the death of a royal personage could have call forth more universal expression of regret and tribute of love and affection than appear in the English papers. Miss Nightingale 's Career `` The Queen of Nurses '' and `` The Soldier 's Friend '' be title which have stick to Florence Nightingale since her memorable service in behalf of the wounded and die in the Crimean war. Though Miss Nightingale be 90 year old last May , and although she have be an invalid ever since she return from the Levant in the stir time follow the heroic struggle of the British in the Russian Empire , she retain her mental faculty to the last. The last honor to be confer upon her by a grateful country be in 1908 , when the freedom of the City of London be bestow upon her. The ceremony take place in the Guildhall , in the presence of thousand of people , include many nurse and doctors. Miss Nightingale , then in her eighty-eighth year , be too infirm to attend , and be represent by her nephew. Before that , in December , 1907 , she receive from King Edward the English Order of Merit. The statute have to be modify by the King in order to admit of her appointment and Queen Alexandra 's own birthday be select a the most suitable date for the bestowal of the honor. Florence Nightingale , the daughter of William Shore Nightingale , a wealthy English landowner in Florence , Italy , be bear in that city in 1820 and from that city she take her give name. When a mere child she return with her parent to England where she live on her father 's estate of Lea Hurst , Derbyshire. She be highly educate , be thoroughly at home in the French , German , and Italian languages. Her inclination toward philanthropy manifest itself early in life and she do much for the poor neighbor around her English home. She begin her life work by enter a a pupil in the Lutheran Hospital of Pastor Fliedner at Kaiserwerth , near Dusseldorf-on-the-Rhine. Here she acquit herself in such a manner a to draw the high praise from her teacher. In the early fifty she return to London and devote herself to labor in a hospital for sick governess , where her health succumbed to the severity of her tasks. She have hardly recover from the strain of this work when the great undertaking of her life be thrust upon her. The Crimean war have opened. England be engage in the formidable task of try to clip the claw of the Russian bear. Thousands of Englishmen be send away to the Black Sea , where the rigor of Winter on that iron coast be such that , although the army never penetrate the country more than a day 's march from the sea , the campaign almost fail through the breakdown of the chain of commissariat supply , while in 1854 there be 18,000 men in the military hospitals. Her Work in the Crimea In the first stage of the Crimean not a woman nurse be employ in any of the military hospital , for the class of woman who have in the past be employ be so notoriously bad that the War Office decide not to send out any woman nurse to the Crimea. After the battle of the Alma , however , the country rang with indignation at the neglected condition of the sick and wound soldiers. Stirred into action , Sir Sydney Herbert , Secretary of War , write to Miss Nightingale say that she be the one woman to take charge of the organization of a corp of nurses. He offer her absolute authority in this department. Strangely enough , on the same day Miss Nightingale write offer her services. A few day later she sail for the Crimea with thirty-four nurse , and the Government congratulate the country on have obtain her services. The woman arrive just after the battle of Inkerman have be fought. There be 4,000 men in the hospital , some wound , but most of them sick. There be , of course , very few veteran of the war of the Crimea still alive , yet there have be in late year some who remember the sweet and sympathetic face of Florence Nightingale , and who be never tire of tell about her noble work in the hospitals. It be not only in the detail of nursing , but in the gentle and watchful care for his comfort that Miss Nightingale make herself a beautiful memory to the soldier. She lend her aid to the surgeon when strong men turn away in horror , and sustain the courage of the wounded by her appeal to the tie which bind them to home. Nor be it in the hospital alone that her unselfish energy and untiring devotion be felt. There be an invalid ' kitchen , where appetizing food for the sick who could not eat ordinary fare be provide under Miss Nightingale 's eye. She provide also laundry , where clean linen could be obtained. In company with the army Chaplains she establish a library and a school room , where she have even lecture to amuse the convalescents. She personally attend to the correspondence of the wounded , and in many way fully earn the title confer upon her by the soldier -- '' The Angels of the Crimea. '' For a year and a half she labor in this field until her work there be no long necessary. In August , 1856 , she return to Lea Hurst. A grateful country would have welcome her royally , but she have no desire for public praise and shrank from his every manifestation. She arrive when she be least expect and elude those who would have honor her. The Queen , however , be not to be denied. She send for Miss Nightingale to visit her at Balmoral and decorate her with her own hand. The Sultan of Turkey make her a valuable present. The English Government on behalf of the people be very practical in it expression of appreciation , and present her with $ 250,000. Endows St. Thomas 's Hospital She make herself still more popular by refuse to keep the money for her own need , turn it over for the establishment of St. Thomas 's Hospital. In this be the Nightingale Training School for Nurses. In recent year Miss Nightingale have be unable to give her personal attention to the school , but it be and still be conduct on the plan she devised. Ms. Nightingale at this time be the heroine of the hour. Poems be write in her honor , song and pianoforte piece be dedicate to the `` good angel of Derbyshire , '' playbills display her name beside that of Hamlet , grocer put her portrait on their bag a an advertisement , street minstrel find a Nightingale ditty a remunerative attraction , broadsheet ballad on `` The Nightingale '' be the fashion on Seven Dials , and young lady in ringlet and spencer play the `` Nightingale Varsoviana '' in drawing-room circles. Some of the young woman who enter the training school which Miss Nightingale found be of the best social standing , move to emulate Miss Nightingale 's example. The probationer , or nurse pupil , be require to remain three year before they can become Protestant sisters. After this term of probation they usually know whether they have find their proper vocation. Although Miss Nightingale 's health be never robust after her Crimean experience , nevertheless she contrive to write much that be of value. Her `` Hospital Notes '' have be remarkably successful , and her `` Notes on Nursing '' have have a circulation reach into the hundred of thousands. She have write many more paper and report , some for publication , some for the information of her Government. During the American civil war she be constantly consult a to the management of field hospital and great good come of her advice. In recent year Miss Nightingale have lead a quiet life , the condition of her health not permit activity. Hundreds of person have constantly express a desire to visit her , but she be able to receive only a few. She have , however , a distinguish a company of sympathetic correspondent a any woman in Europe. She be a personal friend of Lord Napier , of the Duke of Cambridge , and of Lord Wolseley. Both Queen Victoria and Queen Alexandra be in the habit of send regularly to her home to inquire about her health. In her youth Miss Nightingale have a great desire to study medicine , but then the profession be close to women. The injustice of the exclusion range her on the side of those who later start the propaganda for open the profession to women. She have also be a lifelong exponent of woman 's suffrage. In 1890 England formally celebrate the great nurse 's birthday. There be meeting and speech at various town , and the Prince of Wales preside at the ceremony at the Training School for Nurses. The chorus of praise which reach her ear a she sit in her invalid 's chair at the completion of threescore year and ten be such a few woman have enjoy in the history of the world. Perhaps the great good that have result from her noble life have be the setting in motion of a force which have lead thousand of woman to devote themselves to systematic care of the sick and wound .