November 20 , 1910 OBITUARY Tolstoy Is Dead ; Long Fight Over By THE NEW YORK TIMES ASTAPOVA , Sunday , Nov. 20. -- Count Tolstoy die at 6:05 this morning. The Countess Tolstoy be admit to the sickroom at 5:50. Tolstoy do not recognize her. The family assemble in an adjoining room , await the final event. Tolstoy have suffer several severe attack of heart failure during the night. During the early morning hour they follow each other in rapid succession , but be quickly relieved. Between the first and second attack the member of the family be admit to the bedside. The novelist 's condition after each attack be what the attend physician call `` deceptively encouraging. '' The patient slept for a little , seem to breathe more comfortably than usual. Drs. Thechurovsky and Usoff , nevertheless , in a statement to Tolstoy 's son Michel , hold out but slight hope , and do not hesitate to predict a quick end under ordinary mortal circumstances. Tolstoy , they say , be a splendid patient in mind and body , except for his heart. When one of the heart attack seize him Tolstoy be alone with his eldest daughter , Tatina. He suddenly clutch her hand and draw her to him. He seem to be choke , but be able to whisper : `` Now the end have come ; that be all. '' Tatina be greatly frighten and try to free herself so she might run for the doctor , but her father would not release his grasp. She call loudly from where she sat. The physician come and injected camphor , which have an almost immediate effect in relieve the pressure. Tolstoy soon raise his head and draw himself up to a sit position. When he have recover his breath he say : `` There be million of people and many sufferer in the world. Why be you so anxious about me ? '' Several important communication , include that from Antonius , the Metropolitan of St. Petersburg , have not be show to Tolstoy. The condition of the Count have be all along consider too grave to permit of his be agitate by write appeal to him to make his peace with the Church. ST. PETERSBURG , Nov. 19. -- The Cabinet last night discuss Tolstoy and his relation with the Greek Catholic Church. According to the newspaper , all of those present , include the Procurator of the Holy Synod , be in favor of remove the ban of excommunication a necessary and timely. The Synod , however , have reject the proposal , a there be no indication of a change in Tolstoy 's attitude , nor be it know that he desire to be restore to the faith. Only two Clericals of the Holy Synod favor the proposal. The majority decide that every effort to influence the novelist to modify his position should be made. The presence at Astapova of Count Tchertkoff be believe to be a stumbling block in the way of the Count 's return to the Church. Premier Stolypin , personally , be decidedly in favor of raise the ban , and discuss the possibility of such action with a friend of Tolstoy a year ago. Leo Tolstoy 's Career A Novelist Who Gradually Became a Mystic -- Was Active to the Last Leo Tolstoy have long be prepare for , have even look forward to , his end. Two and a half year ago , when his admirer in St. Petersburg organize a committee to arrange a fit celebration of his eightieth birthday , he write to the secretary of the committee beg that the preparation be stopped. He speak of his approach death , and refer to the animosity that have be arouse in Russia on account of the propose celebration. He could not bear , he say , to be the cause of still more hatred and rancor in the world. The committee could naturally do nothing but respect Tolstoy 's desire and dissolve. An anecdote tell at about that time show how the final physical change in this strange genius , who have be change and develop all his life , have even then come to pass. A few year previously Tolstoy have write a play call `` The Corpse '' -- a very powerful play , that have , owe to personal reason , never be published. Some one mention it to him. He have absolutely forget it. Details of it be repeat to him. He shake his head ; he recall nothing of it. Students of mysticism , student of the life of the mystic will not find it hard to explain such a circumstance a this. The story of the life of Leo Tolstoy have yet to be write , if it ever can be write ; but in it essential it be the story of other great men who , through an inner awakening , have turn from the world to find their salvation in the life of the spirit. With this difference : in Tolstoy 's case the process , which with Loyola , St. Augustine , Mahomet , and many other prophet and saint be sudden and complete , be extend over many year , and in those year Tolstoy produce the work of genius which cause him , during the last two decade , to be regard a the most famous writer of the Occidental world. He have begin to write , have write more than one masterpiece ( book which he loathe afterward ) before the process began. He write one masterpiece after he have become quite a mystic , but by far the great part of his literary work be accomplish in the course of the period of transition. These book be already regard a among the world 's classics. The work do by Tolstoy during his last year be not quite so well know , but some of his admirer declare that in the end it will be these latter writing which will be regard a his great productions. If this be the case there will be a curious similarity between his career and that of John Ruskin. During Ruskin 's life his early book on art be admire , his late work on political economy laugh at. Now people be neglect his art criticism and read his philosophy. Count Leo Nikolavitch Tolstoy be bear on the ancestral estate of his family , Yasnaya Polyana , in the governmental district of Tula , Central Russia , 150 mile south of Moscow , on Aug. 28 , 1828 , accord to the Russian calendar and Sept.10 , accord to the Gregorian calendar. His father be Count Nikolai Ilyvitch Tolstoy , who be the companion and friend of Czar Peter the Great. Tolstoy be say to have sketch his father 's protrait in the character of Peter Rostoff in `` War and Peace. '' As a youth Tolstoy enter the University of Kazan , but before the close of his second year of study he leave the university to take charge of his ancestral estate , to which he have succeed by the death of his parents. In his retirement Tolstoy begin a course in private reading. In 1851 he go with a brother on a visit to the Caucasus. The rugged wildness of the country impress him profoundly , and the study of it influence on the life and character of the people have a great effect on his late philosophy. Tolstoy have enter the Russian Army in the same year , and be appoint a subaltern of artillery. He be assign to the fortress of Kovno , the capital city of the province of the same name , which lie to the south of the Baltic provinces. Here with merely perfunctory duty to perform in his military capacity , he begin his long career a a novelist. He publish in rapid succession his `` Childhood and Youth , '' `` An Attack , '' and `` The Cossacks. '' When the Crimean War begin Tolstoy be anxious to see active service. He seek and obtain a transfer to the staff of his relative Prince Gortachakoff. When aid be be rush to the garrison at Sevatopol , Tolstoy go forward at a head of a battery and take an active part in the seige , distinguish himself by personal act of bravery. He be wound in one of the skirmishes. He have first-hand experience with war which be most valuable to him in his late work a a novelist. At the close of the war Tolstoy resign his commission and go to St. Petersburg. Here he have a most flattering reception a a nobleman , a returning hero , and a literateur. But he soon become utterly disgust with his life there. He describe himself afterward in a passion of remorse a have be an adulterer , a liar , and a robber. He signalize his return to his estate , Yasnaya Polyana , by free his serf , by dress himself in peasant costume , and by preach the gospel of waht be now know a the simple life. From time to time he leave hie estate to make extensive tour in Germany and Italy. While return from one of these trip in 1862 Tolstoy meet and woo his wife Sophia Behrs , the daughter of his friend Dr. Behrs. At the time he meet he she be a young girl. He be already by his own account , a jaded man of the world. His strange religious idea be just begin to find expression. He know the woman of the Russian aristocracy well and have decide he say , that there be no good woman in the world and that he would never marry. So in his customary erratic way , he sell the lovely old mansion which have come to him through his grandfather , one of Catherine the Great 's famous Generals. Then he meet the woman with whom he fell in love , and she change the whole world for him. They be marry soon afterward and the Countess begin her life of constant self-sacrifice by go to a little hut on the Polyana estate -- all that be leave after the sale of the mansion. There she live for many year in a lonely , desert place , many mile from any town. Tolstoy spend his time go up and down the Russian Empire , study social condition , be absent from home a great deal of the time. The Countess attend to her housework. The couple be too poor to have any servant ; she nurse each one of her thirteen child , she dispense with governess and teach the child English , French , and German , give them music lesson , make their clothes and her own. Then , as soon a her husband commence a book , she begin revise it , translate it from Russian into French or German , copy it in here clear handwriting , so that the printer could read it , and attend to the publication of the book when it be completed. With her help and constant inspiration Tolstoy write his great novels. He be appoint a magistrate of his district and devote much time to the education of the peasantry and to the elaboration of plan for their material improvement. Although he have not yet come to the full acceptance of the theory in regard to socioligal subject which he later advance , he realize the necessity of live the life of the people if he hop to benefit them , and accordingly , even with his increased mean , the house , in which he write text book for the poor of the country and instructed class of the peasantry of the neighborhood , be furnish with the rudest of chair and table , and the mode of life in his household be monastic in it simplicity. He profess himself a disciple of the political and economic doctrine of Henry George and declare that George and William Lloyd Garrison be the two great Americans. The salvation of Russia , he declare , depend on the peasant ownership of land , and the introduction of the single tax system of Henry George. During this time Tolstoy write `` Youth , '' `` Two Hussars , '' `` Albert , '' `` Three Deaths , '' and `` Family Happiness. '' His output then cease for a time. His next work issue in 1867 , `` War and Peace '' win him his great reputation a a novelist. The work deal with Russia 's great struggle against Napolean Bonaparte. Eight year later Tolstoy produce his even more celebrated `` Anna Karenina , '' a study of one side of the marriage question , work out in the novel to a conclusion of terrible tragedy. This work provoke discussion throughout the whole civilized world , and provoke Matthew Arnold to say : `` This be less a work of art than a piece of life. But what it lose in art it gain in reality. '' About the time of the publication of `` Anna Karenina , '' Tolstoy who have formerly be an infidel , accept the doctrine of Jesus in a very literal way , although he decline to profess a belief in His divinity. He take a his text and precept the Sermon on the Mount , and add to his work a teacher and physician , friend and adviser , of his poor neighbor , that of a cobbler and farm laborer. He make over his property in it entirety to the member of his family , and refuse to touch the royalty from his works. He permit his child however , to follow their own mode of life , without respect to his own ideas. Tolstoy 's `` The Kreutzer Sonata , '' a surprisingly frank short novel deal with the marital relation be publish in 1890. It cause much censure from the pulpit of various country and be severely criticise in some of the paper in England and in the United States. In Germany the circulation of `` The Kreutzer Sonata '' be forbid by Governmental authority. In 1892 , when a particularly severe famine prevail in Russia , Tolstoy establish a number of relief station in Tula and Samara and publish his volume `` The Famine. '' In the course of the next two year he produce `` The Kingdom of God Within Us , '' `` Christ 's Christianity , '' `` My Religion , '' and `` Patriotism and Christianity. '' Early in 1900 Tolstoy publish `` Resurrection , '' a novel embody the result of year of thought. The immediate object of it publication be to aid the Doukhobors , who be persecute in Russia because of their religious belief and practice , with which Tolstoy sympathized. He devote the fund he derive from the work to finance the emigration of the member of the sect to land which have be promise to them by the Dominion of Canada. The publication of `` Resurrection , '' lead to Tolstoy 's excommunication by the Holy Synod , which have previously manifest it dipleasure at his open disbelief in it dogmas. Tolstoy reply to his excommunication by address an open letter to the Czar , in which he denounce both the State Church and governmental despotism in Russia. Despite his advanced year , Tolstoy keep busily at his work , write and live a hard outdoor life. His home be a mecca for pilgrim from all over the world , include a large number of Americans .