Monday , October 30 , 1911 OBITUARY Joseph Pulitzer Dies Suddenly Special to The New York Times CHARLESTON , S.C. , Oct. 29. -- Joseph Pulitzer , proprietor of The New York World and St. Louis Post-Dispatch , die aboard his yacht , the Liberty , in Charleston Harbor at 1:40 o'clock this afternoon. The immediate cause of Mr. Pulitzer 's death be heart disease. Although he have be in poor health for some time , there be no suspicion on the part of those accompany him that his condition be serious. The change for the worse come at about 2 o'clock this morning , when he suffer an attack of severe pain. By daylight he appear to be good and fell asleep soon after 10:30. He awake at 1 o'clock and complain of pain in his heart. Soon he fell into a faint and expire at 1:40 o'clock. Mrs. Pulitzer , who have be send for , arrive from New York today , and reach the yacht shortly before her husband died. At his bedside also when the end come be his young son , Herbert , who have be cruise with his father. Mr. Pulitzer 's body will be take north at 4:30 tomorrow afternoon on a special Pullman car. The funeral will be hold at Woodlawn Cemetery in New York probably toward the end of this week. Mr. Pulitzer 's son , Joseph , Jr. , be now on his way from St. Louis with his wife , and one of his daughter will come from Florida. Ralph Pulitzer , the eldest son , be on the way to Charleston , and will meet the train en route. Up to an hour and a half before his death Mr. Pulitzer 's mind remain perfectly clear. His German secretary have be read to him an account of the reign of Louis the Eleventh of France , in whose career Mr. Pulitzer have always take the lively interest. As the secretary near the end of his chapter and come to the death of the French King , Mr. Pulitzer say to him : `` Leise , ganz leise , ganz leise. '' ( softly , quite softly. ) These be the last word he spoke. Some member of Mr. Pulitzer 's party will go north to-morrow on the train with Mrs. Pulitzer , Herbert Pulitzer , and the body of the dead journalist. The other member of the party will remain on the yacht which will probably sail for New York to-morrow. Mr. Pulitzer 's yacht have be in Charleston Harbor for six days. She be on the way to Jekyl Island , near Brunswick , Ga. , where Mr. Pulitzer have a Winter home. On account of the threaten weather and the report West Indian hurricane , however , she put into Charleston. Mr. Pulitzer be attend in his last illness by Dr. Robert Wilson of Charleston and Dr. Guthman , Mr. Pulitzer 's physician. Mr. Pulitzer , accompany by his young son , Herbert , leave New York aboard his yacht on Oct. 18 , intend to take a leisurely voyage to Jekyl Island. Aside from a heavy cold which have prevent him from take his daily drive in Central Park , Mr. Pulitzer be in his usual health when he leave this city. He be take ill on Friday , and the yacht put into Charleston. His illness prove serious a telegram be send to his wife who leave New York for Charleston yesterday. Mr. Pulitzer 's Career Remarkable Rise from Poverty to Wealth and Power Joseph Pulitzer 's career be a striking example of the opportunity that have be find in the United States for advancement from penury and friendlessness to wealth and power. Few who have come here to find their fortune have be more handicapped at the start. He be without fund , have no acquaintance in this country , do not know the language , and suffer from defective vision which harass him all his life , and make sad his last year , when he be compel practically to retire from active work. Few have have struggle more severe , yet at 31 , thirteen year after land at Castle Garden , he be the owner of a daily newspaper and on the road to riches. Mr. Pulitzer 's influence on the development of modern American journalism have be large. In the first issue of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch he give expression to those ideal a follow : The Post and Dispatch will serve no party but the people ; will be no organ of Republicanism , but the organ of truth , will follow no caucus but it own conviction ; will not support the Administration , but criticise it ; will oppose all fraud and sham wherever and whatever they be ; will advocate principle and idea rather than prejudice and partisanship. In assume proprietorship of The New York World , Mr. Pulitzer say : There be room in this great and grow city for a journal that be not only cheap but bright , not only bright but large , not only large but truly democratic -- dedicate to the cause of the people rather than that of purse potentate -- devote more to the news of the New than the Old World ; that will expose all fraud and sham ; fight all public evil and abuse ; that will serve and battle for the people with earnest sincerity. Arrived Here Penniless Joseph Pulitzer be bear in Budapest in 1847. His father be a business man , supposedly of mean , but when he die , while Joseph be still a boy , it be find that the estate be very small. In order that he might not be a burden on his mother , Joseph determine to enter the army. He apply to his uncle , who be a Colonel in the Austrian Army , but when he be examine a to physical fitness he be reject because of the defect in one of his eyes. He go to Germany and seek to enter th Prussian Army , but be again reject for the same reason. He try to enlist in France and England with the same result. The civil war be in progress in this country , and he decide to come here. It exhaust his resource to pay his passage , and he land at Castle Garden in 1864 practically penniless. He know nobody in this country and could speak only a dozen word of English. Within a few day , however , he meet a fellow-countryman who have just enlist in a German cavalry regiment then be raise in this city. Men be badly need in the Union Army , and the requirement a to sharpness of vision be not as strict a in time of peace. The young Austrian be enrol and serve to the end of the war in the Lincoln Cavalry , a the regiment be call , part of the time under Sheridan. When he be muster out at it close in New York City he be still ignorant of English , a his soldier companion have all be of foreign birth and speak their native languages. Another Austrian who have be his close companion suggest that they go West to seek their fortunes. They go to a railroad ticket office , throw down all the money they have between them , and ask for passage a far West a their capital would take them. It be thus by chance that Mr. Pulitzer go to St. Louis. Their ticket be only to East St. Louis , Ill. , across the river from the Missouri city. There be no bridge in those day , but Pulitzer make himself acquaint with the fireman on a ferryboat , and offer to do his firing if he would take him across. He not only get across by this mean , but be continue at work a a fireman until he become a stevedore on the wharf of St. Louis. After alternate a stevedore and a fireman on boat ply between St. Louis and New Orleans for some time he have enough money save to start in business a a bos stevedore in St. Louis. This be his first enterprise , and it be not a success. Its failure leave him again penniless , and with his strength diminished. He apply to an employment agency for light work , and get a place a a coachman in a private family. Here again his defective vision prove a handicap , and after two week he be discharge because his employer fear he would run into something. Pulitzer vainly seek employment in every direction. There be a cholera epidemic in St. Louis and the undertaker be in need of help to bury the hundred who died. He eagerly take up this work and be soon dig trench on Arsenal Island. He go from one humble employment to another until a St. Louis politician , note his ignorance of American way , induce him to take a post that no well-informed person would have undertaken. In the reconstruction day , after the close of the war , Missouri be largely in the hand of bushwhacker and guerrillas. In order to have the charter of the St. Louis & San Francisco Railroad record in each county of the State it be necessary that the paper should be personally file with the clerk of every county , and it be expect that the man engage in the task would almost certainly lose his life. Pulitzer realize nothing of this and start off joyously on a horse provide for him. He complete the task and return to St. Louis still in ignorance of the risk he have run. This experience mark the turn point in his early struggles. It give him a knowledge which no other man then possess of the land condition of every county in the State , and real estate men find his service invaluable. Even during his early vicissitude he have be a voracious reader and eager student and have already begin to study law. This he go ahead with rapidly , and in 1868 , four year after he land at Castle Garden , he be admit to the bar. He practice for a short time , but the profession be too slow for him. He be burst with ambition and energy and find it impossible to confine himself to the tedious routine of a young attorney. He look about for some manner of life in which he could bring all his suppressed energy into immediate play. He find it in journalism. Enters Journalism and Politics He become a reporter for the Westliche Post , a German paper edit by Carl Schurz. His first appearance in this capacity be recently describe by one who have be at the time a reporter on an English paper a follow : I remember his appearance distinctly , because he apparently have dash out of the office upon receive the first intimation of whatever be happen , without stop to put on his coat or collar. In one hand he hold a pad of paper and in the other a pencil. He do not wait for inquiry , but announce that he be the reporter for The Westliche Post , and then he begin to ask question of everybody in sight. I remember to have remark to my companion that for a beginner he be exasperatingly inquisitive. The manner in which he go to work to dig out the fact , however , show that he be a born reporter. Mr. Pulitzer 's chief ambition at that time seem to be to root out public abuse and expose evildoers. In work of this kind he be particularly indefatigable and absolutely fearless. This be 1868 , and before the year be over he have rise to city editor and later to manage editor. Still later he become part owner of the paper. In the meantime he have begin take an active part in National and local politics. In 1869 he be elect to the Missouri Legislature , though but twenty-two year old , and only five year after he have land here penniless and ignorant of the language. In 1872 he be a delegate to the Cincinnati Convention that nominate Horace Greeley a the Democratic candidate for the Presidency. In 1874 he sell his interest in the paper and go abroad to complete his education , but soon return to this country. That same year he be a member of the Missouri Constitutional Convention. During the bitter contest that follow the Tilden-Hayes campaign Mr. Pulitzer serve The New York Sun at Washington a special correspondent and editorial writer. His article be of vitriolic brilliancy and appear over his own name , a departure that be rare in those days. He continue this work until 1878 , when he again visit Europe. On his return in the Fall of that year he go to St. Louis , where The Evening Dispatch be to be sell at auction after a precarious existence of several years. Mr. Pulitzer buy it for $ 2,500. When he enter the office the next morning a proprietor of his own newspaper he be unable to find as much a a bushel of coal or a roll of white paper. More complete ruin and decay be never see in a newspaper office. By impress into service everybody within reach he manage to get out an issue of 1,000 copies. He set to work at once with characteristic energy to improve the situation. At that time the journalistic field in the West be occupy almost exclusively by morning papers. There be two other afternoon paper in St. Louis , The Post and The Star. Within forty-eight hour he have absorb the Post , and the first number of The Post-Dispatch , which afterward become an enormous success , be issued. During this period his political activity continued. In 1880 he be a delegate to the Democratic National Convention , and in 1884 he be elect to Congress from a New York district. The duty of this position so interfered with his journalistic affair that he resign after a few month ' service. Buys The New York World It be just at this time , in fact , that he buy the New York World from Jay Gould. The World have never make a striking success. It have be start in June , 1880 , a a penny paper of absolutely blameless feature , eschew in it make-up intelligence of scandal , divorce , and even dramatic news. Its backing be ample , but it fail to make money. Mr. Pulitzer buy this moribund paper and take possession May 10 , 1883. Enormous difficulty confront him from the start. By the adoption of method similar to those he have employ in St. Louis , however , Mr. Pulitzer soon have The World on a pay basis. Of these beginning The World itself recently say : He be unable to expend large sum of money in the gathering of news , for the very excellent reason that he do not have it to spend. He do instill life and energy into every department of the paper on the very first day of his proprietorship , and in no part be the change in the character of matter print more noticeable than in the news columns. But it be a fact , patent to any one who will turn over the file for that year , that the first impetus give to the new World come from the editorial page. To this Mr. Pulitzer give his personal and almost undivided attention , and by this agency first impress upon the public mind the fact that a new , vigorous , and potent moral force have spring up in the community. Of late year Mr. Pulitzer 's health have not be of the best , his old eye trouble make impracticable the prolonged devotion to work that characterize his early career. He have be oblige to spend much of his time abroad or at his country seat at Bar Harbor. But his hand be felt direct the destiny of The World , no matter in what corner of the globe he happen to be. Mr. Pulitzer have one of the most expensive household in America. He have a home in East Seventy-third Street , a fine estate at Bar Harbor , and another country place on Jekyl Island , off the Georgia coast. Also he usually have two or three place abroad under lease , and a 1,500-ton steam yacht that add $ 100,000 a year to his expenditures. His blindness make it necessary for him to have a large personal staff. No man keep more closely in touch with what be go on in the world , and all the information have to come to him by word of mouth. He could not read ; he could not distinguish the face of those about him. He could only listen and think. Of his home he like Bar Harbor best , and often remain there long after the Winter snow be on the ground. In Summer he rise early , and if the weather be fine he breakfast on his own private veranda with his physician and companion , who tell him the important event in the day 's news. Then come an exhausting business session with his private secretary , which usually last two hours. Then , become weary and need the air and sunshine , he go out to drive or to ride in an electric launch , ever bid the boatman to head into the breeze. Then he be ready to work with his newspaper secretary , who have be go over the newspaper since early morning , digest not only The World , but it contemporaries. Sometimes he have a visitor from the office , maybe the chief editorial writer or the manage editor or a reporter. This session usually last about two hour , and then Mr. Pulitzer be ready for luncheon with the family. In his entourage be usually a professional pianist , usually a German. After two hour of music Mr. Pulitzer have one of his staff read to him , usually a novel , until he be ready to sleep. When in New York he ride through Central Park early in the morning , but the hour be even more crowded with work. He completely tire out every one of his men who be associate with him. Also , he keep them busy when they be away from him. His own capacity for work be so enormous that he think the task that would be play for him be equally easy for others. Since attain affluence Mr. Pulitzer have give considerable sum to philanthropy , chiefly in the cause of education. To the City of New York he give a dozen or more free scholarship of $ 250 each for poor pupil anxious to gain a college education. In make this annual gift Mr. Pulitzer say : My especial object be to help the poor ; the rich can help themselves. I believe in self- make men. But it be not the aim of this plan to help people for ordinary money-making purposes. College education be not need for that. There be noble purpose in life , and my hope be not that these scholarship will make good butcher , baker , broker and bank cashier , but that they will help to make teacher , scholar , physician , author , journalist , Judges , lawyer , and statesmen. They certainly ought to increase , not diminish , the number of those who , under our free institution , rise from the humblest to the high positions. I have not enter upon this scheme without careful thought. It be a dream of youth. It be the conviction of experience. Subsequently Mr. Pulitzer give to Columbia University an endowment of $ 1,000,000 for the establishment of a school of journalism , which it have be understand would be utilize after his death. After he have become wealthy he often refer to his early struggle in conversation with his intimates. One night while stroll about the city with Col. John A. Cockerill , one of The World 's editor , he point to a bench in Madison Square on which a poor , decayed specimen of humanity be stretched. `` That , '' he say , `` be where I also sleep many a night. I have no bed when I first come to this city ; I have no roof over my head. Every pleasant night until I find employment I sleep upon that bench , and my summons to breakfast be frequently the rap of a policeman 's club. '' `` What do you do about rainy night ? '' ask Cockerill. `` Come with me , '' be the answer. Mr. Pulitzer take his companion nearly two mile far down Broadway , and , turn into Park Place , show him a number of truck which be place there every evening on account of the insufficiency of stable room in that locality. These vehicle be long and broad and roomy , and , while the bed of cobblestone beneath them be not altogether soft , yet it be dry than that furnish by an uncovered bench. Pointing beneath one of these , Mr. Pulitzer say : `` Under such a wagon a that and on that spot I sleep on rainy nights. '' Mr. Pulitzer be marry in 1877 to Miss Kate Davis of Washington , a niece of Jefferson Davis. He leave five child , Joseph Pulitzer , Jr. , Ralph , Herbert , Constance , and Edith. Ralph Pulitzer marry Miss Frederica Vanderbilt Webb , daughter of W. Seward Webb , in 1905. Joseph Pulitzer , Jr. , be marry last year. His wife be Miss Eleanor Wickham of St. Louis. Mr. Pulitzer 's daughter be both unmarried. Little London Comment News of Mr. Pulitzer 's Death Reached There Too Late Special Cable to THE NEW YORK TIMES LONDON , Oct. 30. -- The news of the death of Joseph Pulitzer reach London too late for editorial comment in this morning 's papers. In fact , only one paper receive the news in time for publication in the regular editions. This be The Daily Mail , which print half a column obituary , recite the fact of Mr. Pulitzer 's life. The Times briefly announce the death in a late edition , follow it with a short record of Mr. Pulitzer 's career , in which it say : `` Journalism be the work of his life. The World , under Mr. Pulitzer 's management , attain not only a huge circulation but the reputation of be the yellow journal in the United States of America , a supremacy which even to-day be only challenge by Mr. Hearst 's American. '' Praise of Pulitzer a a Journalist Originator of the Journalism of Action and Achievement , Says W. R. Hearst His Work for the People Full Testimony to Its Value Given by Editors the Country Over -- Lessons of His Life By WILLIAM RANDOLPH HEARST Proprietor of The New York American Joseph Pulitzer be the founder and foremost exemplar of modern journalism -- the great originator and exponent of the journalism of action and achievement. In his conception , the newspaper be not merely a money-making machine. It be the instrument of the will and power of it hundred of thousand of reader , the fulcrum upon which that power could be exert in the accomplishment of broad and beneficial results. Jospeh Pulitzer know the necessity of make his newspaper financially successful , and he be an able business man , but it be a a great editor that he will be most honored and remembered. Joseph Pulitzer be a Democrat in doctrine and in deed. He come from the people , understand the aim and aspiration of the people , sympathize with the sentiment of the people , and labor to express in his newspaper the popular need and the popular will. Not the great success which Joseph Pulitzer achieve nor the great wealth which he accumulate , nor his association with men of selfish purpose and class prejudice , ever deprive him of his essential democracy or callous him to the requirement of the democratic masses. The cause of the people Joseph Pulitzer and his newspaper ever espouse ably and intelligently , sympathetically and powerfully. In his death journalism have lose a leader , the people a champion , the Nation a valuable citizen. May his son continue his far-reaching work for their father 's great glory , for their own reputation and for the public good. WILLIAM RANDOLPH HEARST By OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD Proprietor of The Evening Post Mr. Pulitzer 's death remove a remarkable figure in American journalism. It be too soon to pass a final judgment upon his career or his influence upon the profession. Nor would such a critical estimate be fit from an individual at this hour. But it may be permit me to say that the evolution of The World into a fearless , outspoken , independent newspaper , with a trenchant editorial page , have make it an invaluable force on the side of the people in their battle against special privilege and that form of `` legalized graft '' know a protective tariff. For this Mr. Pulitzer must long be gratefully remember , however , one may have differ from him in matter of journalistic taste or dissent from some other form his journalism have taken. OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD By ST. CLAIR McKELWAY Editor of The Brooklyn Eagle I have know Mr. Pulitzer for many year , and think I know him pretty well. He always give to me the impression of a man of great force , far vision , extraordinary audacity of thought , strong confidence in himself , and rare power to discern the current and quicken the velocity of public opinion. He be peremptory , versatile , untiring , and could stamp his view so indelibly on his co-worker a to make them feel they have always be their view , which he have draw out of them , instead of force into them by his dynamic personality. In finance , or exploration , or manufacturing , or any grand division of resourcefulness he might have address his genius and energy to result a single and signal a those he work in journalism. The latter call , however , enable what be within him to be expend on what be without him. The reciprocal impact of event and himself on one another produce effect of which the news page of his paper be the evidence , page in which he contribute not a little and to which he inspire his co-worker to contribute to the limit of his power to affect them and of their ambition a his unconscious imitator and understands to rival , please , and if possible , exceed him. That be the executive , achieve , creative , or magnify and picturesque news side of him. The editorial side of him , if I may so differentiate , be essentially idealistic. His red-hot earnestness on that side be extraordinary. What he saw or foresee he do not wait for the trail pace of slow intelligence gradually to approach. His be a glorious impatience and a magnificent precipitancy. Nor do it matter to him that his late conviction might conflict with his former and discard impressions. Them he could shed a event show they be partial and imperfect. His trend be forward. His sentiency be acute. His political ideality be a part of his genius , his optimism , his intellectual mutability , his scorn for sheer consistency which he estimate a an infirmity of mediocre mind , opaque to vision , and regard Deity a worthy of worship only a Deity be a slight extension of themselves. I know Mr. Pulitzer as well a he allow those he have no purpose to use to know him. Yet I doubt I know him thoroughly , for he have reserve of intent and of intensity that those nearer to him than I could probably well know or more accurately surmise than I. Affairs , journalism , all division of energy and endeavor will miss him , but journalism can be glad to know that his paper be leave to his successor in such form and under such condition a will enable them to continue his work on the line of his better or best sense , to which he always would have his staff attain and always regret if he ever , under the temperature of interest or of passion or of competition , fail himself to attain. ST. CLAIR McKELWAY By HENRY L. STODDARD Publisher of The Evening Mail Joseph Pulitzer be the most aggressive and forceful figure in the journalism of his day and will always rank among the great the country have ever known. With tremendous earnestness he devote his whole life to his call , sacrifice friendship and all else to the one purpose of make a newspaper that draw it strength solely from the people and give back that strength solely and intensely in the people 's interest. Mr. Pulitzer know no other interest and have no other. Nothing be permit to stand between him and his sense of public duty. He attack fearlessly and pursue relentlessly. He be often wrong , cruelly wrong , but he be much oftener right and his career be mark with triumph that be notable advance in popular government. HENRY L. STODDARD By Gen. FELIX AGNUS Publisher of The Baltimore American and The Baltimore Star BALTIMORE , Md. , Oct. 29. -- American journalism have lose one of it able leader by the death of Mr. Joseph Pulitzer. While I could not approve all of his method and policy , I recognize in him a strong force that make for the real advancement of the press of the whole country. Some of his achievement be well-nigh marvelous and arouse in others a determination to match his success by similar success of their own. He take The New York World when it be well-nigh moribund , and transform it into one of the best newspaper in the United States. Such a man can have no monument equal to the great paper that he made. FELIX AGNUS By CHARLES GRASTY Editor of The Baltimore Sun BALTIMORE , Md. , Oct. 29. -- Mr. Pulitzer be an editor with a sense of public responsibility. He have a genuine sympathy with and friendship for the people. Whatever may be think of his judgment of news and his method of present it , his newspaper be always vital and vibrant. He be a great and fearless editor , know neither friend nor foe , and contemptuous of business office considerations. The last year of his life be cloud by physical affliction and suffering that would have break any but a dauntless spirit. CHARLES GRASTY By JOHN R. McLEAN Owner of The Cincinnati Enquirer and The Washington Post WASHINGTON , Oct. 29. -- Mr. Pulitzer 's death be a loss to journalism. Always to the fore in journalistic enterprise , fearless in the conduct of his paper , he will be long remembered. Vigorous in thought and action , he be always to be reckon with. Most able in the editorial room , he have full knowledge of the detail of his great business. He be by nature a partisan. He have strong like and dislikes. His great ability be acknowledge by all who know him. His son will be worthy successor of their great father. JOHN R. McLEAN By H. H. KOHLSAAT Publisher of The Chicago Record-Herald CHICAGO , Oct. 29. -- The success of the great publication which he make such powerful factor in modern newspaperdom tell the story of Joseph Pulitzer 's dominate characteristic well than any other possible eulogy. The story of his rise from poverty and obscurity to affluence and power be proof that there be opportunity in this country for those who be capable and ambitious. H. H. KOHLSAAT By GEORGE WHEELER HINMAN Editor of The Chicago Inter Ocean CHICAGO , Oct. 29. -- The death of Joseph Pulitzer be a serious loss to journalism. His fairness in his business deal and his editorial policy stand unparalleled. His success in build up the great newspaper in the country should stand a a monument. He overcome great odds and win in the face of criticism. His success , attribute to a never- varying principle of justice , be his vindication. GEORGE WHEELER HINMAN By HORATIO W. SEYMOUR Editor of The St. Louis Republic ST. LOUIS , Mo. , Oct. 29. -- In three respect Joseph Pulitzer 's influence upon American journalism be very great. He systematize and establish sensation ; he be the most consistent advocate of the newspaper 's duty of public service ; he do a great deal to destroy the old idea of party organ grinding. There be some serious fault in his journalistic code , but it have distinguish virtue also which will live. HORATIO W. SEYMOUR By W. R. NELSON Owner of The Kansas City Star KANSAS CITY , Mo. , Oct. 29. -- Joseph Pulitzer , I believe , be the leading journalist of his day , the pioneer in modernize the newspaper. It be his discovery that newspaper must be entertaining. His energy , ability , and originality in apply this idea bring unprecedented success to The World and make a lasting impression on journalism. Even newspaper that believe his method extreme could not escape be profoundly influence by them. Blind and ill a he be much of his life , he be a tremendous factor in American affairs. W. R. NELSON By VICTOR ROSEWATER Editor of The Omaha Bee OMAHA , Neb. , Oct. 29. -- I believe Joseph Pulitzer will be rank by all historian with the foremost of American journalist , and that he have impress his personality upon American newspaper make more than any other one man. Although self-made , he saw the possibility of a journalistic profession , a be attest by his foundation for a school of journalism in conjunction with Columbia University. The resolution offer by me and adopt by the Associated Press in 1903 congratulate him upon his purpose be recognition of this far-sightedness. VICTOR ROSEWATER Praise by the Press for Mr. Pulitzer Called a Newspaper Genius Who Brought New Life Into American Journalism Active in Public Welfare His Championship of the People Meets General Approbation -- How He Sobered The World From The New York World A man of wide culture , command intellect and compelling genius die yesterday in Joseph Pulitzer. That he be much more than this by reason of his tireless zeal in the public service , The World be the imperfect but sincere witness. This paper be his chief life-work. It have be his absorb passion , not a an end , but solely a a mean to the expression of his idea and idea for human welfare. Mr. Pulitzer bring from his Old World association with social wrong and political abuse a deep appreciation of free government than most men feel who be bear to a share in it birthright. He bring also a high regard for order and authority , and this grow strong with him to the end. He saw no true progress without law ; no true growth without justice ; no true democracy that be not broad enough to shelter all. He saw in our Government of checked and balance power the high type of human administration yet devise ; and against strange new doctrine , whether of executive usurpation , or of short-cuts to hasty popular action , or of conquest and dominion over men of other land and race , he burn a a living flame. Not this the place or time to tell of Joseph Pulitzer 's great service to peace ; of the lash he lay upon corruption in high place ; of his practical and persistent leadership in movement of political reform or public purification , of his intense devotion to liberty and his passionate hatred of wrong and injustice. These be an inseparable part of the history of the United States for thirty years. We would do-day dwell rather upon his many manifestation of warm-hearted interest in less thing that would smooth the path of the helpless , but that will never live in the formal records. Of what have be good in The World more be due to Mr. Pulitzer 's power and his personal attention than most men would deem possible , note his heavy handicap of physical infirmity and his long wandering in search of health. Of it shortcoming he have be the keen critic , and his interest be unflagging to the very day of his death. The cable and the telegraph have bring to it his constant guidance , his ever-ready protest against hasty judgment , his inspiration to endeavor. The high ideal he set for himself he good tell than any one can tell for him when from his sick-bed at Wiesbaden , the day the corner-stone of the Pulitzer Building be lay , Oct. 10 , 1889 , he cable to The World this message : God grant that this structure be the enduring home of a newspaper forever unsatisfied with merely print news -- forever fight every form of Wrong -- forever Independent -- forever advance in Enlightenment and Progress -- forever wed to truly Democratic idea -- forever aspire to be a Moral Force -- -forever rise to a high plane of perfection a a Public Institution. God grant that The World may forever strive toward the Highest Ideals -- be both a daily schoolhouse and a daily forum , both a daily teacher and a daily tribune , and instrument of Justice , a terror to crime , an aid to education , an exponent of true Americanism. Let it ever be remember that this edifice owe it existence to the public ; that it architect be popular favor ; that it cornerstone be Liberty and Justice ; that it every stone come from the people and represent public approval for public service rendered. God forbid that the vast army follow the standard of The World should in this or in future generation ever find it faithless to those idea and moral principle to which alone it owe it life and without which I would rather have it perish. That Mr. Pulitzer himself live by these precept and die true to them the editorial page and policy of The World have be the daily witness for twenty-eight years. From The New York Tribune Mr. Joseph Pulitzer bring to this city from the West new idea and a definite purpose , and he have the boldness and energy to carry them out. A pioneer in path which have become familiar , he prove that a very large constituency be ready to welcome a newspaper of the kind which he be prepare to produce. The method which he employ be unpleasing to a great number of good citizen , partly , no doubt , because they exemplify a passion for publicity which shock conservative instinct ; and that antagonism , which he probably regard a a decoration rather than a reproach , have not disappeared. But we think that in recent year there have be little disposition to underrate the value of the service which the World have render , not without unwarranted judgment and grave mistake , to the general advancement of civic and political morality. Nor , however opinion might otherwise differ , have it be possible not to feel sympathy and admiration for a man who never permit physical disability of a peculiarly depressing nature to impede the activity of a keen and powerful mind. From The New York Herald The death of Mr. Joseph Pulitzer end a remarkable and dramatic career. His life be a romance , show what can be accomplish in a country like America. He come to the United States a young man , very poor , quite unknown , and the unthinking who meet him at that time might have say hopelessly handicapped. But instead of be handicap he be powerfully equip with wonderful originality , phenomenal insight , and bewilder energy. He be essentially the architect of his own fortune. When he reach the zenith of his power about twenty-four year ago he be 40 year old. Few men ever accomplish so much at that age. From The New York Press For year newspaper worker have know of the very delicate health of Mr. Joseph Pulitzer , proprietor of The New York World. Yet perhaps the shock of his death come to none with more force than to those of his own calling. And this because , though long virtually blind and sorely try with other ill , he have continue to be a tremendous power in American journalism and politics. By all newspaper men of impartial judgment he be regard a the foremost editor and publisher of his day. Incomparable be his success in win reader to his publications. Beyond all other newspaper maker in the United States he hold them to his way of thinking. Away from his paper , hundred of mile in the United States or thousand on the other side of the Atlantic in search of good health , he never take his touch off the intimate detail of the huge business of his properties. From The Buffalo Express Mr. Pulitzer 's history differs only in detail from that of many successful newspaper men of his time. At the outset they cut their coat accord to their cloth by make the sort of paper that be immediately salable -- sensationally yellow , fight to attract attention , neither too fair nor too truthful. At any rate the sobering process begin in The World and have continue until now , when The New York World be one of the fair and most accurate , as well a one of the most interesting , newspaper in the country. Nor be such virtue it own reward. The World be more prosperous now than it ever be before. From The Buffalo Courier A great journalist be dead and The World be his monument. His constructive ability be remarkable , so be his industry. Mr. Pulitzer 's career close before he become an old man , a literary and professional men be classed. The World 's history and Mr. Pulitzer 's for the last twenty-eight year be closely identified. He make his newspaper one of the power of the continent. His clear understanding of the American people and their institution , and his abundant genius gain him his extraordinary success. From The Boston Globe One of the giant of journalism , not only of this country , but of the world , pass on to his reward when Joseph Pulitzer die yesterday. His career w one of the most brilliant , inspiring , and successful that have ever be know in the journalism of the world. From the time he start a a reporter in St. Louis he show positive genius a a journalist. No obstacle be too great for him to overcome. He have the nerve to buy a bankrupt newspaper , which be sell by auction for $ 2,000 , and in a few year make it a stanch and permanent success. In 1883 he have the pluck to buy a failing newspaper in New York , one which have lose hundred of thousand of dollar , and in a single year put it on a sound , substantial basis. Personally , Mr. Pulitzer be one of the most charming and entertain men of his time , a those who know him intimately can readily testify. He be devote to his profession. He believe in publicity a a mean of promote what be best for the people and to expose graft and wrongdoing. He be ever earnest in promote with all his mighty power what he believe be for the great good of the great number. From The Springfield Republican Joseph Pulitzer have a genius for touch the heart through his newspapers. He be the father of modern yellow journalism , a the elder Bennett be of the early type , and he have have a vast influence in create the character of the press of to-day , a mixture of good and evil quality , with the evil rather dominating. Pulitzer be , however , a sincere Democrat , a real lover of the mass , and he honestly try to serve them. He have be a valiant fighter in behalf of many popular causes. He have a tender heart and generous instinct , and a strongly sentimental nature. It must in justice be say that he have never attain the editorial influence upon the thought of the country of which he be ambitious. From The Pittsburgh Post In American journalism Joseph Pulitzer occupy a position that be unique. He transform The World from a position of original sensationalism into one of the great newspaper of distinctive feature that make it one of the most popular of the foremost journal of the country. He possess a peculiar constructiveness that be his own , and which have an influence on journalism throughout the country. From The Cleveland Leader One of the great journalist that ever control an American newspaper or leave his impression upon American life have close a strenuous and brilliant career. Joseph Pulitzer leave a gap in the public life of his adopted country which will be felt in the profession and out of it. It be not necessary to subscribe to Mr. Pulitzer 's doctrine a to all great question or to ignore the fault and mistake of his able and masterful newspaper in order to recognize the heavy credit balance which his career pile up. He pay well for the opportunity his chosen country give him. His rise , no less than his service a a great publisher and editor , must be an inspiration to a multitude of ambitious and stout-hearted young men. From The Cleveland Plain Dealer Joseph Pulitzer be without question one of the most important figure in the history of American journalism. The work that he do be great and varied. But perhaps his great achievement be his changing when he know that the time have come to change. Aghast , perhaps , at the storm he have raise , but more probably firmly convince that `` yellowness '' and extreme sensationalism could not retain a newspaper permanently in the esteem of the people , Mr. Pulitzer execute a remarkable right-about-face. The World editorially become one of the sane , ablest , most unbiased newspaper ever published. Its news column , while still delight in play the news for all it be worth , lose their distinctive `` yellowness. '' The World to-day rank a one of the most respected newspaper in America. It have quite live down it former reputation. And , fortunately , Mr. Pulitzer live to see the rehabilitation make complete. From The Charleston News and Courier But little know to the public at large , Joseph Pulitzer be nevertheless one of the most remarkable men of his generation. It may well be doubt whether any other exercise so extend an influence upon the journalism of the last thirty years. The transformation which be work in newspaper method under his leadership be a story familiar to many. Not so generally know , but if anything more extraordinary , have be the manner in which Mr. Pulitzer have gain and control during the last twenty year the great newspaper property which he bring into existence. From The Boston Post With the death of Joseph Pulitzer , the great figure in American journalism pass from the scene. There have be notable newspaper men before him -- Bennett , Greely , Raymond , Dana , Childs , Medill , and others , men of wonderful sagacity , capacity , and enterprise. But for the most part they be men of high development in one particular direction. Mr. Pulitzer have a many-sided personality , and he excel in almost every direction .