December 2 , 1914 OBITUARY Admiral Mahan , Naval Critic , Dies Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES WASHINGTON , D. C. , Dec. 1 -- Rear Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan , U. S. N. , retire , America 's foremost naval strategist and the world 's great authority on sea power , die suddenly at the United States Naval Hospital here at 7:15 o'clock this morning of heart disease. Three intimate friend of Admiral Mahan , who meet him frequently on his visit to Washington this Winter , express the belief tonight that the war in Europe have hasten his death. They say that Admiral Mahan be not only most keenly interested in the great struggle , it relation to sea power , and the naval and strategic problem and lesson be solve or teach by the war , but that the event of the war greatly excite his mind and heart. Admiral Mahan come to Washington on Nov. 1 to take up his labor a a research associate in the Department of Historical Research in the Carnegie Institution , and be pursue a special line of historical research with a view to write a history of American expansion and it bearing on sea power. This be to be a monumental work , and he have give think to it for many years. But he have hardly make a beginning when his heart give way , overtax by his keen interest in the European war. Hostilities Affected Him Though he be in his seventy-fourth year , Admiral Mahan be in apparently good health until the war began. The first month of hostility deeply affect him. There be great demand make upon him for comment a a naval expert , and during the early day of the war he give many interview and write a number of article deal with the contest. The demand on him from American and foreign publication be cut short by President Wilson 's order prohibit American military and naval officer from comment on the conflict , but Admiral Mahan , while discontinue his writing on the war , never lose interest in it one moment. Signs of organic heart disease develop in September , and recur late in October , just before Admiral Mahan come to Washington with Mrs. Mahan and their daughter , Helen and Ellen. Only last week Admiral Mahan visit Secretary Daniels at the Navy Department , and Mr. Daniels say tonight the Admiral be the best-informed man on the war and it lesson he have converse with. On Saturday the Admiral 's condition become such that he decide to enter the naval hospital here. He die in the presence of his wife and two daughters. His son , Lyle Mahan , a New York lawyer , come to Washington tonight. Admiral Mahan be a familiar with Europe , her history , and armament a he be with American history , and know many of the men actively identify with the war in high place in England , Germany , and France. Some of his intimate friend among the military and naval men in Europe have lose their life in the war and this shock him. Some of these officer he meet in his travel , and when he receive honorary degree at Oxford and Cambridge and many more when he go to The Hague in 1899 a American Naval delegate to the First Peace Conference. There be distinct reason why the American people congratulate themselves upon the presence of Admiral Mahan , then Capt. Mahan , in the First Hague Conference. He be not only a naval strategist and scholar , but be even then regard a the most eminent living expert in naval strategy. Then he have always consistently advocate strong navy and preparedness for war with special reference to naval influence in make for peace. Added to his equipment a a diplomatist in the delicate and complex task before The Hague Conference be his experience a a public man who have be hail a the first great exponent of the philosophy of sea power. Book Made Him Famous His great reputation have be develop in the nine year immediately precede the First Hague Conference. It be in 1890 that his first book of international importance , `` The Influence of Sea Power Upon History , '' be publish in Boston and make the author know around the world. This book be really responsible for the German Navy a it exist today. When it be publish it be immediately translate into German. Emperor William be so impressed with the book that he order a copy place in the library of every German warship , and order all German naval officer to read and study it. Emperor William praise it a the great modern work on naval affair , and the great work on sea power. This book teach the Germans the importance of gain sea power. Admiral Mahan himself have tell how it be that he come into the great work -- how , when read Mommsen in the English Club at Lima , he be strike with that historian 's failure to recognize the all-important influence of sea power on Hannibal 's history. He write out the whole outline of `` The Influence of Sea Power , '' discuss it with Admiral Luce , and then set to work with painstaking method. He choose the term `` sea power '' with the deliberate purpose of challenge attention. He be the coiner of that term in it present significance. `` Purists , I say to myself , '' he remark , `` may criticize me for marry a Teutonic word to one of Latin origin , but I deliberately discard the adjective 'maritime ' be too smooth to arrest men 's attention. I do not know how far this be usually the case with phrase that obtain currency. My impression be that the originator be himself generally surprise at their take hold. I be not surprise in that sense. The effect produce be that which I fully propose , but I be surprise at the extent of my success. 'Sea Power , ' in English at least , seem to have come to stay , in the sense I use it. The 'sea power ' be often speak of before , but in an entirely different manner -- not to express , a I mean to , at once an abstract conception and a concrete fact. '' Retired After Forty Years ' Service Admiral Mahan be bear at West Point , N. Y. , Sept. 27 , 1840. His father be D. H. Mahan , an eminent Professor of Engineering at the United States Military Academy. On Nov. 17 , 1896 , Admiral Mahan be retire on his own application , after forty year ' naval service , in order to be able to devote himself to his writing on sea power. Once since then he have be call to active duty -- in May , 1898 , when he be appoint a member of the Naval War Board , commonly know a the Strategy Board , during the war with Spain. Admiral Mahan be a man of most interesting and admirable personal traits. Slender and erect , he be about 6 foot 2 inch tall , with finely chisel feature , very blue eye , and a closely-cropped Vandyke beard. He be soft and gentle in voice and have a pleasant but reserve manner , perhaps a little cold to those who do not know him well. He be a man of high religious ideals. Sunday week , while attend service at St. Thomas 's Church , he sing all the hymn and chant in the Episcopal service. A naval officer say that the chapter of Admiral Mahan 's great work on `` The Influence of Sea Power Upon History '' be first read a lecture to officer at the Naval War College at Newport and be then published. Two year later appear his `` Influence of Sea Power on the French Revolution and Empire , '' in the Spring of 1897 his `` Life of Nelson , the Embodiment of the Sea Power of Great Britain , '' and in the following Winter his `` Interest of America in Sea Power , Past and Future. '' Just after his life of Nelson appear Harold Frederic cable to The New York Times from London that the reviewer of the London daily sit up all night with the advance copy to rush long review into print the next morning. Navy Department 's Tribute The Navy Department tonight issue this tribute to Admiral Mahan : `` Admiral Mahan become famous a an author and historian in the early ninety , when his book on 'The Influence of Sea Power Upon History ' and 'The Influence of Sea Power Upon the French Revolution ' be published. These be follow by a 'Life of Nelson. ' These book be classic in their line , and be widely read throughout the world. In England and Germany in particular they receive the high commendation , and in every country possess a navy they become veritable text book in naval strategy. In England the lead naval men of the day confess that it have remain for him to elucidate the work of the British navy in a way that they themselves have never understand or even dream of. `` Since his first book he have write many of less importance , and these and his essay have keep him before the world a the great modern writer on naval strategy. He be a close student of world politics , and his writing on the trend of the politics of the lead nation of the world be accept a an authority. It may be safely say that no writer of modern time evince a keener insight in the affair of the world or express himself concern them more clearly and convincingly than do the late Admiral Mahan. `` His death will cause international regret not only because of the high esteem in which he be hold in every country of the world interested in naval affair , but also because of the fact that his death leave a void among naval and political authority of the world that no author and writer can fill. '' At the express request of Admiral Mahan there will be no naval funeral. Simple service will be hold at 9 o'clock tomorrow night at St. Thomas 's Church. The body will be then take to the Mahan home at Quogue , L. I. , for private interment .