December 25 , 1914 OBITUARY John Muir , Aged Naturalist , Dead BY THE NEW YORK TIMES LOS ANGELES , Cal. , Dec. 24. -- John Muir , the naturalist , die in a hospital here today of pneumonia. He be 76 year old. Mr. Muir be visit his daughter , Mrs. Helen Muir Funk , at Daggett , a town in the desert of San Bernardino County. He be stricken with pneumonia last week. Doctors from Los Angeles be call into consultation Tuesday , and it be determine to bring him to this city for treatment. When he arrive here last night Mr. Muir be in a critical condition. John Muir be best know to the general public a a great lover of nature , and be affectionately call the `` Guardian of the Yosemite '' and the `` Naturalist of the Sierras , '' because of his love for the riotous wildness of nature in those part of the West. But aside from be a naturalist -- '' more wonderful than Thoreau , '' accord to his good friend Ralph Waldo Emerson -- Mr. Muir be a geologist , an explorer , philosopher , artist , author , and editor , and to each of his avocation he devote that deep insight and conscientious devotion which make him it master. Some inkling of the man 's greatness and versatility can be glean from a glance at the name of the lasting friend he make among the great men of the country. The most intimate of these included several Presidents , among them Taft , Roosevelt , and Woodrow Wilson , and with Thomas A. Edison and John Burroughs he be especially intimate. Like Burroughs , with whose name Muir 's be often link , he infuse his own personality into his writing , which be characterize by a rare clearness of style , that the result assume the aspect of literature more than mere scientific treatise. Born in Dunbar , Scotland , on April 21 , 1838 , the son of Daniel and Anne Gilrye Muir , the youth who be destine to become one of the great thinker of America come to this country when he be 11 year old , and the family plunge into the Wisconsin wilderness and take up the rough life of pioneers. The boy help his father clear a space in the wilderness to call home , and while he be do it work out mathematical problem on chip of wood from the tree he have chop , get up long before daylight for this part of his daily routine. He school himself to get along with five hour of sleep a night to allow more time for his study , and , use his pocket knife a his principal tool , carve intricate device out of wood during his `` spare time. '' This pastime produce results. He invent , for home use , a device for feed horse , a barometer , a thermometer make entirely of wood , which register heat and cold by expansion and contraction ; safety lock , and a number of other practical appliances. In 1860 he be induce by neighbor to exhibit his device at the Wisconsin State Fair , and they attract so much attention that he accept the advice of friend and enter the University of Wisconsin to pursue his studies. He work his way through the university by teach , and at time work in the field at harvest time. Possibly it be a narrow escape from the loss of eyesight in one eye , the result of an accident which happen shortly after he leave the university , that bring John Muir to realize how deeply he love nature and set him off on the career that win him fame. Speaking of the accident in 1867 , Muir say : `` I felt neither pain nor faintness , the thought be so tremendous that my right eye be go -- that I should never look at a flower again. '' Then he set out on a long tramp to live a close to nature a possible while recuperate , and take along a few book of poetry and a plant press. He wander leisurely through part of half a dozen States before he contract a serious fever and start on a vacation by way of Panama , with California a the objective point. He reach San Francisco in 1868 , practically penniless and again begin to walk. The journey take him to the `` glorious Yosemite '' for the first time. `` I come to life in the cool wind and the crystal water of the mountain , '' he write , `` and be it not for a thought now and then of loneliness and isolation the pleasure of my existence would be complete. '' He intend to remain in the Sierras eight or nine month , he say , when he arrive there , but he never leave them again to remain away for long. It be to the Sierras that he return after each of his trip , which take him to nearly all part of the world , and on one of which he discover the glacier in Alaska that be christen `` Muir Glacier '' in his honor. In 1880 the naturalist , whose work be already attract wide attention , marry Miss Louise Strentzel , the daughter of a Polish physician who be a refugee from his own country and have settle in the West. Four year previous to his marriage he have join the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey to improve his knowledge of land beyond his dear Sierras , and it be while thus employ that he travel thousand of mile in Alaska. In 1881 , then familiar with life in the Far North , he go in search of De Long and the lost Jeannette a a member of the Corwin expedition , and while on the trip study glacier formation in the Bering Sea and along the coast of Siberia. Later , in 1893 , he go to Norway and Switzerland to compare the glacial formation there with the one he be familiar with. Soon in magazine article he advance theory regard the Yosemite glacial formation which be consider radical , a they conflict with theory that have be advance by early scientists. Later , all agree that he be right and that the early scientist have be in error. Between 1880 and 1890 Muir steal enough time from his scientific investigation to wage a fight for the preservation of national park in the United States. In 1889 he write a series of article urge that a national reserve be create about Yosemite. In 1890 the reserve be created. His literary output begin to increase rapidly after this fight , but it be a number of year later that he begin to produce the book for which he be best known. Institutions of learn begin to shower honor on the nature lover ; Harvard confer the honorary degree of Master of Arts on him in 1896 , the University of Wisconsin follow in 1897 with the LL. D. degree , and the same degree be confer by the University of California a little more than a year ago. Yale in 1911 confer the degree of Doctor of Literature upon him. He become a member of the Washington Academy of Science , President of the Sierra Club , a member of the American Alpine Club , of the National Institute of Arts and Letters , of the American Academy of Arts and Letters , and a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Since the appearance of Muir 's `` Story of My Boyhood and Youth , '' in 1913 , little from his pen have appear in print. His most noteworthy work be : `` The Mountains of California , '' publish in 1894 ; `` Our National Parks , '' 1901 ; `` Stickeen , the Story of a Dog , '' 1909 ; `` My First Summer in the Sierra , '' 1911 , and `` The Yosemite , '' 1912. Besides these he be the author of about 150 article publish in magazine and newspaper deal with the physiography of the Pacific Coast and Alaska , natural history , and similar subjects. He be the editor of Picturesque California. The last of Muir 's long jaunt into strange corner of the earth be in 1911 and early 1912 , when , at the age of 73 , he journey for a thousand mile up the Amazon in South America , devote a year to study of rare tree , plant , and land formation , and return feel amply repaid for his strenuous trip by the fact that he have find rock formation of the leaf of the ancient araucaria tree in Brazil. In an interview in THE TIMES after his return he describe South America a the future paradise for mankind. After return from South America the naturalist make his home in Martinez , Cal. , until his last illness .