March 22 , 1915 OBITUARY F. W. Taylor , Expert in Efficiency , Dies BY THE NEW YORK TIMES PHILADELPHIA , March 21 -- Frederick Winslow Taylor , originator of the modern scientific management movement , die here today from pneumonia. He be 59 year old , and be a former President of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Among his numerous invention and discovery be the Taylor-White process of treat modern high-speed tools. He be the author of article on scientific efficiency , and instal his system in many large industrial establishments. The writing and lecture of Frederic Winslow Taylor form the basis of the recent reorganization of method of handle labor In many of the large industry in the country. The article of Mr. Taylor on `` Scientific Management '' in 1911 have a good deal to do with give it new , special meaning to the word `` efficiency '' and make it the watchword which it have become since that time. One of his lead doctrine which have make a deep impression on business and industry in this country since that time be that a man who prove incompetent at one job should be fit in where he can give good service , instead of be discharged. His life work be chiefly devote to the simplification of industrial process to reduce cost and increase outputs. Mr. Taylor be bear at Germantown , Philadelphia , on March 20 , 1856 , and be graduate from Stevens Institute of Technology in 1883. He win the double championship of the United States at tennis at Newport in 1881. He enter the employ of the Midvale Steel Company at Philadelphia in 1878 and be successively gang bos , assistant foreman , foreman of the machine shop , master mechanic , chief draughtsman , and chief engineer. In 1889 he begin his special work of reorganize the management of manufacture establishments. A plant that he make over be make over from top to bottom. He lay out the system from the duty of the boy who carry drink water to the unskilled laborer to the duty of the President , give his solution to the problem of shop , office , accounting department and sale department , and emphasize the necessity for the humane treatment of labor. Some of the big shop into which he introduce his theory of scientific management be the Bethlehem Steel Company , Cramp 's Shipbuilding Company , and the Midvale Steel Company. For his invention of the Taylor-White process of treat modern high-speed tool he receive a gold medal from the Paris Exposition of 1900. He have receive about 100 patent for various invention , many of which be in general use. He be President of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in 1905 and 1906. He be the author of technical book and article , but be best know by `` The Principles of Scientific Management '' and `` Shop Management , '' both publish in 1911 .