November 15 , 1915 OBITUARY Dr. B. T. Washington , Negro Leader , Dead BY THE NEW YORK TIMES TUSKEGEE , Ala. , Nov. 14. -- Booker T. Washington , foremost teacher and leader of the negro race , die early today at his home here , near the Tuskegee Institute , which he found and of which he be President. Hardening of the artery , follow a nervous breakdown , cause his death four hour after Dr. Washington arrive from New York. Although he have be in fail health for several month , the negro leader 's condition become serious only last week while he be in the East. He then realize the end be near , but be determine to make the last long trip South. He say often : `` I be bear in the South , have live all my life in the South , and expect to die and be bury in the South. '' Accompanied by his wife , his secretary , and a physician , Dr. Washington leave New York for Tuskegee at 4 o'clock on Friday afternoon. He reach home last midnight , and die at 4:40 o'clock this morning. His last public appearance be at the national conference of Congregational church in New York , where he deliver a lecture on Oct. 25. The funeral will be hold at Tuskegee Institute on Wednesday morning at 10 o'clock. Dr. Washington 's Career No one know the day , nor even with certainty the year , of the birth of Booker T. Washington ; but the day of his death be announce by telegraph and cable to many part of the world. He begin life a `` just another little nigger '' on a plantation of a family name Burrows in Hale 's Ford , Va. The month and year of his birth be probably April , 1858 , although Dr. Washington himself be not sure of this. In the biographical paragraph under his name in `` Who 's Who in America , '' it be say that he be bear `` about 1859. '' The only certain fact be that he be bear into slavery when negro mother make no record of nor long remember the date of a child 's birth. Soon after the close of the civil war the little negro boy go with his stepmother to Malden , West Va. , where he work in salt furnace for nine moth in the year and attend school for three months. After several year of such life the boy obtain work in the kitchen of Mrs. Viola Ruffner , a New England woman who have marry a Southerner. Mrs. Ruffner soon recognize the boy 's eagerness and ability to advance himself , so she teach him the elementary subjects. Booker Washington felt grateful to her to the end of his life , because she really give him his start. He hear of the Hampton Institute , for negro , in 1871 , when he be about thirteen year old , and he decide at once to attend it. So , with the little money he have be able to save from his wage of $ 6 a week , he set out for Richmond , Va. , hop to earn enough there to enable him to go on to Hampton , which be near Norfolk. This be in 1871. Dr. Washington found the Tuskeegee Institute just ten year later. He be admit to the institute and be graduate at the head of his class in 1875 , after work his way through the school. After graduation Dr. Washington return to Malden and taught school until he have earn enough to enable him to go to the Wayland Seminary in Washington , D. C. , where he study until 1879 , when he be call to Hampton a a teacher in the institute. After he have teach for two year , in 1881 the State of Alabama vote to find an industrial institute for negro similar to that at Hampton , and , after search for a negro qualify to head the proposed institution , Dr. Washington be selected. This be his entrance into the `` black belt '' of the South , a chance which he have long desire , and when he assume charge of the institute at Tuskegee , Ala. , his real life 's work began. The Start of Tuskegee The State have appropriate $ 2,000 a year , and it be the task of the negro to organize the school. How well he do this be show by a comparison of statistics. The institute open on July 4 , 1881 , with one teacher and thirty pupils. At that time it have neither land nor building , nothing but the $ 2,000 a year grant by the Alabama Legislature. When the institute celebrate it twenty-fifth anniversary it own 2,000 acre of land and eighty-three large and small building , which , with it equipment of live stock , stock in trade , and other personal property , be value at $ 831,895. This do not include 22,000 acre of public land remain unsold from the 25,000 acre grant by Congress , value at $ 135,000 , nor the endowment fund , which be $ 1,275,644. During the year there be more than 1,500 student enrol in the school , more than 1,000 young men , and more than 500 young women. The student be train in thirty-seven industries. It be on the opening day of the Atlanta Exposition in 1895 that Dr. Washington become a national character. On that day he deliver an address that be hear by thousand and read by other thousand in far-away place with wonder that a man so wise and clear- seeing should arise from among his people to lead them upward. For it be because Dr. Washington stand out a a negro striving in a sensible and sincere way to help negro that he command attention on that day in Atlanta. His subject be `` The New Negro , '' and white men saw in what he say a sane hope for the negro race and a real solution of the vex `` negro problem. '' The character and difficulty of Dr. Washington 's work be tell in a magazine article write by him. When elect to organize the Tuskegee Institute , he travel through the `` black belt '' in order to become acquainted with the people whom he be to teach. `` In the plantation district , '' he write later , `` I find large family , include visitor when any appear , live and sleep in a single room. I find them live on fat pork and corn bread , and yet not infrequently I discover in these cabin sew machine which no one know how to use , which have cost as much a $ 60 , or showy clock which have cost as much a $ 10 or $ 12 , but which never tell the time. I remember a cabin where there be but one fork on the table for the use of five member of the family and myself , while in the opposite corner be an organ for which the family be pay $ 60 in monthly installments. The truth that force itself upon me be that these people need not only book learning , but knowledge of how to live ; they need to know how to cultivate the soil , to husband their resource , and make the most of their opportunities. '' Men of Affairs Come to His Aid Word of his aim , advertise to the world in the Atlanta speech , spread all over the country , and soon men and woman of mean begin to want to assist Dr. Washington. Chief among these be Andrew Carnegie , who begin by give a $ 20,000 library to the institute , which he follow with a regular contribution of $ 10,000 a year. The climax of Mr. Carnegie 's generosity toward the institute be reach in 1903 , when he give $ 600,000 to the endowment fund. Among those who indorse and support Dr. Washington by act and speech be Presidents McKinley , Roosevelt , Taft , and Wilson ; the official of many States , and the head of many institution of learning. Though he never seem to seek them , honor of all kind be bestow upon the negro. The degree of M. A. be confer upon him by Harvard in 1896 , and LL. D. by Dartmouth in 1901. In 1910 , when Dr. Washington be in Europe , he be receive by the King of Denmark , address the National Liberal Club in London , and visit Mr. Carnegie in Skibo Castle. Among those who give the most effectual assistance to Dr. Washington in his work be Robert Curtis Ogden , who die in Maine on Aug. 6 , 1913. Mr. Ogden become interested in negro educational work through his association with General Samuel Chapman Armstrong , the founder of the Hampton Institute , and a the President of the Southern Educational Board he do much to overcome southern prejudice against the education of negro and spread the knowledge of Hampton and Tuskegee among both the white and black people. An incident of Dr. Washington 's life that stir up a controversy throughout the country be the occasion of his dining at the White House with President Roosevelt on Oct. 16 , 1901. Dr. Washington go to the White House at the invitation of the President , and , when the news be spread abroad , thousand , both North and South , who be move by race prejudice or by a belief that social equality between black and white have be encourage , become angry. Most of the criticism fell upon Colonel Roosevelt , but the incident serve also to injure Dr. Washington 's work in some part of the South. In addition to his work at Tuskegee and upon the lecture platform , Dr. Washington write a number of book and pamphlet upon the negro question. Chief among his work be : `` Sowing and Reaping , '' 1900 ; `` Up from Slavery , '' 1901 ; `` Future of the America Negro , '' 1899 ; `` Character Building , '' 1902 ; `` The Story of My Life and Work , '' 1903 ; `` Working with Hands , '' 1904 ; `` Tuskegee and Its People , '' 1905 ; `` Putting the Most Into Life , '' 1906 ; `` Life of Frederick Douglass , '' 1907 ; `` The Negro in Business , '' 1907 ; `` The Story of the Negro , '' 1909 ; `` My Larger Education , '' 1911 , and `` The Man Farthest Down , '' 1912. Dr. Washington be marry three time , and be survive by his third wife , two son and a daughter .