May 30 , 1916 OBITUARY J. J. Hill Dead In St. Paul Home At The Age of 77 Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES ST. PAUL , May 29 -- James J. Hill , builder of the `` Northwest Empire , '' die at 9:30 A.M. today at his house , 240 Summit Avenue. In his room , in the southeast corner on the second floor of the brownstone house , overlook the city to which he come sixty year ago a a clerk , the end came. His age , 77 year , be a handicap in combat the hemorrhoidal infection , which date from May 17. At the bedside be the child , hastily summon from home throughout the nation , the only member of the immediate family not present be Mrs. Anson M. Beard of New York. Kneeling at the bed , her hand clasp the hand of the man whose wife and helpmate she have be since 1867 , be Mrs. Hill. Near by be the Rev. Thomas J. Gibbons , Vicar General of the Catholic Diocese of St. Paul , Mr. Hill have for year be on intimate term with the clergy here , though not a member of the Church to which his wife belongs. Dr. Hermann M. Biggs , who be call into consultation during the last illness of the financier , be the only physician present a the end approached. Drs. William F. and Charles H. Mayo have go ; there be no more they could do. John J. Toomey , Mr. Hill 's confidential business agent for many year , leave the Hill residence twenty minute after his chief died. Shortly afterward come Ralph Budd , assistant to Louis W. Hill , President of the Great Northern. Then come Louis W. Hill. The latter walk between the Rev. Father Gibbons and George A. MacPherson , intimate friend of the family. Grief , show plainly in the face of all the men , be most poignant in the face of the son , Louis , who will take up the generalship of the interest his father built and husbanded. The funeral will be hold at his Summit Avenue home at 2 P.M. Wednesday. Interment will be in a private mausoleum to be erect at North Oaks , long the Summer home of the empire builder. The general public will not have an opportunity formally to pay tribute to the lead citizen of the Northwest , but Mr. Hill 's associate and the faithful employes who make possible his great achievement will be admit to the house to view the body before the funeral services. The family statement include a request that no flower be sent. The Rev. Thomas J. Gibbons , vicar general of the Catholic diocese of St. Paul , who attend Mr. Hill during his last few hour , will officiate at the funeral. The family statement be a follow : St. Paul , Minn. , May 29 , 1916 Mr. Hill pass away very peacefully after several hour of unconsciousness. All the member of the immediate family be present except one daughter , Mrs. Anson Beard , who will arrive tonight , and one grandson , James N.B. Hill , son of Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Hill , who will arrive from Cambridge tomorrow. Vicar General Gibbons attend Mr. Hill during his last hour , and will officiate at the funeral service at the house and also at the grave. The public service will be hold at the residence , 240 Summit Avenue , 2 P.M. Wednesday. Interment will be in private at North Oaks , where a family mausoleum or memorial chapel will probably be built. Following the simplicity which the family know would be the desire of Mr. Hill , the request be make that no flower or floral offering be send to the house. Tuesday at 2 P.M. , at the residence , an opportunity will be give the veteran employes and the other employes of the Great Northern Railroad Company to pay their respect and take a last farewell of their old employer. All afternoon telegram continue to pour in from all part of the country with expression of condolence for the family. The active pallbearer will be M. R. Brown , private secretary to J. J. Hill ; Ralph Budd , assistant to the President , Great Northern Railway Company ; C. W. Gordon , President Gordon & Ferguson Co. ; J. M. Gruber , Vice President Great Northern Railway Company ; W. P. Kenny , Vice President Great Northern Railway Company ; Theodore Schulze , President Foot , Schulze & Co. ; P. L. Howe , Minneapolis ; G. A. MacPherson , intimate friend of the Hill family ; J. J. Toomey , official of the Great Northern Railway and the First National Bank , and Charles Maitland , for twenty-five year a coachman in the Hill family. At the announcement of the death of Mr. Hill Governor Burnquist order the flag at the Capitol place at half mast , to remain so until after the funeral. This be say to be the first time that such deference have be show a private citizen in the State. `` In the passing of James J. Hill the great constructive genius of the Northwest be go , '' Governor Burnquist said. `` He be acknowledge a it foremost railroad builder and business man , but his unparalleled ability appear in many other field of endeavor. He be ever greatly interested in agriculture , art , and education. His great and numerous gift , especially to his city and to various institution of learning , show his philanthropic spirit. The loss which his city , his State , and nation have sustain through his death can not be measured. '' James J. Hill 's wealth be estimate all the way from $ 100,000,000 to $ 300,000,000. It probably be nearer the former figure than the latter. The control of the First National Bank of St. Paul pass from James J. Hill to his son L.W. Hill , two week ago. Mr. Hill plan a great future for the First National Bank , and his policy will be carry out by his son. In pass over the control of the First National Bank Mr. Hill tell his son that he be more responsible for it rapid growth and development than any other person ; and that he be entitle to the reward of his efforts. The transfer of the stock be make at the same time. The First National Bank have a combine capital and surplus of $ 5,000,000 and more than $ 54,000,000 in deposits. It be the second large bank west of the Mississippi River. All traffic on Hill road and all boat on the Hill line will be stop for five minute , from 2 P.M. until 2:05 P.M. , Wednesday , in tribute to the dead. Mr. Hill have absolute control of the First National Bank and Northwestern Trust Company , which have a combine capital and surplus of [ miss text ] . He be a large owner of stock [ miss text ] the Chase National Bank of New York , the First National Bank of Chicago and the Northwestern National Bank in Minneapolis. He hold a large share in the Great Northern Pacific Steamship Company. The great portion of Mr. Hill 's wealth , however , lie in the stock and bond of the Great Northern , Northern Pacific , and Burlington Railroads. The executor of Mr. Hill 's estate probably will be Louis W. Hill , son , and the Northwestern Trust Company. L.W. Hill will succeed his father a head of the Hill properties. Since become President and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Great Northern Road , Chairman of the Board of Directors of the First National Bank and the Northwestern Trust Company , L.W. Hill have be get into the harness to take up his father 's business. Heads of these company today would not talk of a possible successor to Mr. Hill. The Career of James J. Hill From a Small Beginning to the Greatest `` Empire Builder '' Leaving a a monument of his life 's work more than 6,000 mile of railroad , with gross earnings of $ 66,000,000 from carry 15,000,000 ton of freight annually , along whose line in six different States of the great Northwest be scatter 400,000 farm , with 65,000,000 acre of improved land worth $ 5,000,000,000 , James Jerome Hill be call the great empire builder of the new world. Born near Guelph , in Wellington County , Ontario , Canada , he be the son of an Irish- Canadian , who go there in 1826 and become a successful farmer. His mother be Scottish , and Mr. Hill inherit the best trait of both races. His early education be obtain in the Rockwood Academy , a Quaker school , which he attend until his fifteenth year , when his father died. It be three year later that the boy make his first vital decision to emigrate to the United States. In memory of this there still stand a stump at his old home , on which be rudely cut , `` The last tree chop by James J. Hill. '' His resolution to leave his home for pasture new be bring about by one of those chance incident that mold the life of great men. According to the story , a way-worn traveler stop at the Hill farm for dinner , leave his horse tie at the gate. The boy saw that the animal be tire and carry it a pail of water. The stranger be please at his thoughtfulness , and a he ride off toss him a newspaper from the United States and call out gravely , `` Go there , young man. That country need youngster of your spirit. '' Young Hill read the paper carefully and find that it contain glow account of the opportunity in the States. He decide to investigate for himself , and with that decision Canada lose one who might have prove to be her most useful citizen. The next morning he chop that famous last tree. Gets Work on River Front Then he start on his travel , which lead from Maine to Minnesota , during which he be always investigate and observe -- always look for the chance that he felt would come to him. It be in 1856 that he disembark from a Mississippi River packet at St. Paul , then a frontier town of about 5,000 inhabitants. After look the town over , young Hill decide to go to work and obtain a job a stevedore and clerk with W.J. Bass & Co. , agent for the Dubuque & St. Paul Packet Company. True to the instinct that be to make him great , he begin to study river transportation and during the next fifteen year become a master of it problems. With knowledge come the realization of the need of the great Northwest , and in 1865 Mr. Hill take the agency of the Northwest Packet Company , later become representative for the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad. In 1869 Mr. Hill start in business for himself , when he organize the firm of Hill , Griggs & Co. , in the transportation and fuel trade , and bring to St. Paul the first coal ever see there. Two year later , after learn first hand of the fertile Red River Valley and see that adequate transportation be it cry need , he obtain a flat-bottomed steamer and establish the first regular communication between St. Paul and the Manitoba port along the river. St. Paul be then have it first experience with railroad building and be meet with poor success. Eighty mile of road have be lay to St. Cloud , 316 mile to Breckenridge. In addition , there be 100 mile build into space which be say to begin and end nowhere. This railroad venture finally collapse with a deb of $ 33,000,000 , it only asset be `` a few streak of rust and a right of way. '' In addition it have earn the ill-will of all those connect with it. Close to the land and know it promise , Mr. Hill felt that there be great thing in store for the property. He felt a consuming desire to acquire it. Success have be the result of his hard work and foresight so far , and he begin to make definite plan for get hold of those dead railroads. For five year he dicker , those who know his hope regard him a a visionary , and then he make the final decision and acted. He sell all his other interest , receive $ 100,000 for them , and , in partnership with Donald A. Smith , afterward Lord Strathcona , George Stephen , afterward Lord Mountstephen , and John S. Kennedy , the New York banker , obtain the property he desired. Becomes Railroad Manager This be the birth of the St. Paul , Minnesota & Manitoba Railway , which be form to operate the property , with Mr. Hill a General Manager and chief of practically all operations. This be in 1878 , and four year later he become Vice President , be elect President the following year. As chief executive he hold the power to realize his dream of a great transportation system , and he undertake to extend the road to the Pacific Ocean. Again the skeptic regard his plan a impossible of successful completion , and the extension become know a `` Hill 's Folly. '' It be think that it would be utterly impractical for his system to live in the face of the competition it be force to meet. There be three great system to the south , all of which receive large Government bonus , whereas the `` Manitoba , '' or the `` Great Northern , '' a it soon come to be know , do not have a dollar of Government subsidy or the grant of an acre of land to help it in it progress from the Minnesota boundary to the sea. Those who consider these fact fail to remember that the line have `` Jim '' Hill , a he be know , back of it. With his indomitable energy and grim determination the Great Northern have more behind it than all the Government land grant and subsidy the other road have lean on. Critics say that he be build through a country barren of people , which could give his line no tonnage and would mean ruin. But they reckon without the genius of the empire builder. He lay rails westward at the rate of a mile a day , and at an average cost of $ 30,000 a mile , and a he go he leave a trail of embryonic farm and homestead by the railside. Thus be the foundation laid for the come empire. Then come the completion of the line to Puget Sound , and the empire builder turn his genius to build up the land that must support his road. Knowing that there be quick money in beef and hog , he introduce the livestock industry into vast area of bunch-grass plain and improve the breed of stock by import the best blood that money could buy. He turn to farm and sent demonstration train through the country with expert who show the people how to grow more wheat to the acre , and then to market this grain , he make a cheap rate by railroad and steamship to Buffalo , where it be handle in the great elevator he built. For twenty year Mr. Hill leave nothing undone to develop his empire and to make it bring tonnage to `` Hill 's Folly , '' the Great Northern. During these year he come to be regard a a sort of father by his people. They come and take up the land and thriving town grow up almost before the weed have grow on the railroad cut and embankments. All through four States the name of Hill sway the destiny of men , and there seem to be nothing that could happen unless he be directly or indirectly responsible for it successful conclusion. The term `` Hill 's Folly '' gradually change to `` Hill 's Fortune '' -- his courage , foresight and will power have won. With his fast-growing empire behind him , he stand at the Pacific tidewater , and the Orient beckon to him. He saw the golden opportunity that await him there , and he organize a fleet of Pacific steamship for the commercial invasion of China and Japan. Japan , then in the first flush of her recent growth , want steel rail , but propose get them from England , a the rate be less. It be say that John W. Gates , the Chicago steel magnate , come to Mr. Hill with the proposition of get American rail to China , and the railroad man reply : `` I will make you a rate of $ 8 a ton from Chicago or Pittsburgh to Yokohama. If that be too much , I will carry it for the axle grease use on the locomotive and freight car ; if you ca n't stand that , I will carry your freight for nothing ! '' Northern Pacific `` Corner '' Mr. Hill 's great passion for empire building conflict with another great passion for railroad domain , and there ensue the great stock market fight for the control of the Northern Pacific , with it memorable `` Blue Thursday , '' May 9 , 1901 , the story of which be still tell in Wall Street. E.H. Harriman and his associate have then develop the Union Pacific system and have form a close alliance with the Chicago , Milwaukee & St. Paul. Mr. Hill 's road lack a Chicago outlet. Together with the late J.P. Morgan , Mr. Hill first endeavor to secure the St. Paul. That road be not for sale. They then buy control of the Burlington and turn it over to the Great Northern and Northern Pacific. Mr. Harriman and Jacob H. Schiff meet this move by start after the Northern Pacific in the open market , and so well conduct their campaign that they have all but control of the property before the Hill-Morgan crowd learn of the fight against them. Mr. Morgan , who be abroad , cable order to buy all the Northern Pacific to be find in the market. The Harriman party be no less eager. Brokers act for both side bid the stock up until on the day of the corner it sell at $ 1,000 a share , while panic seize the Stock Exchange and the rest of the market break widely , sweep away an estimated $ 1,000,000,000 of market values. If all of the Northern Pacific stock that have be contract for on the Exchange could have be deliver , it turn out , each party would have have a majority. But delivery be impossible , and a compromise be reach in which short be permit to settle. Following the settlement of the struggle in the stock market , the count of stock show the Harriman party in possession of the majority of Northern Pacific common and preferred combined. But Mr. Hill and his associate have a majority of the common , and , be in control of the company , be in a position , under it charter , to retire the preferred stock. Thus the upshot be not far from a drawn battle , and there be evolve , by way of peace term , the Northern Securities Company , to which be turn over the Great Northern and Northern Pacific , carry the control of the Burlington , hold by both parties. The United States Supreme Court subsequently dissolve the hold company , but in so do order it share distribute pro rata , much to Mr. Harriman 's disappointment , and the control of the three road revert to Mr. Hill and his associates. The best pen picture of `` Jim '' Hill be that write during the day of the Northern Pacific `` corner. '' He be always a Westerner and in time of stress be at his best. After the smash -- when more than $ 1,000,000,000 have be sweep away , precipitate one of the bad panic know in the history of finance -- James J. Hill , the storm centre of it all , stand grim , unshaken , and impregnable. He be aptly describe by one of those who call on him at his hotel here. `` Somewhat below the average height , '' he say , `` but build like a buffalo , with a prodigious chest and neck and head ; his arm long , sinewy , powerful ; his foot large and firm plant and his leg as solid a steel column -- truly a massive , imposing figure of a man. And the head -- shaggy brow , shade an eye that bore right through ; a mass of long , iron-gray hair reach to the collar of his coat , and a heavy , rough , iron-gray beard , grow without restraint over the entire face , yet hide nothing of the immense chin and powerful jaw , and the wide lip , between which show two row of teeth seemingly fit to crunch iron. `` A very pile-driver of a man , slow and deliberate to rise , but swift and crushing in the downward stroke. A man to avoid a an enemy , a joy a a friend. On this night , the whole financial structure of the country lie about him in ruin , Hill 's eye be veil with the light of combat. The skin showing at the temple be pale with the strain , the great hand clench and open and clench again. His voice be harsh and his speech tense with suppression. '' In time such a these Mr. Hill be a resourceful and dominant a the late J. Pierpont Morgan. Like him , he be brusque and willful -- his enemy call him overbearing. Mr. Hill be interested in many other property in addition to his railroad and steamship line , and be say to have buy into the famous Mesaba iron range at exactly the right time. So huge be his interest there that he testify before the Stanley Steel Committee in 1912 he would receive $ 750,000,000 in ore from property which he acquire for $ 4,050,000. In April , 1907 , he retire a President of the Great Northern , and become Chairman of the Board of Directors , from which he resign in June , 1912 , retain only his membership in the Executive Committee of the Board. His son , Louis W. Hill , succeed him both a President and Chairman. For more than a score of year Mr. Hill be a national figure , and in September , 1915 , come here from his home in St. Paul on the urgent request of the group of banker who make the $ 500,000,000 loan to the Allies , and spend some time in consultation with them over the transaction. He say that it would prove to be a help to this country , but express regret that his presence here force him to forego his birthday celebration at home. The story of Mr. Hill 's marriage be one that be often tell a an example of romance. When he be a station agent near St. Paul he board at the Merchants ' Hotel , where Mary Mehegan serve his meal to him. He lose his heart to her and win her promise that she would marry him. Then he send her away to school , where he pay for her education , and when she return some year later they be married. Their home life be say to be most happy , and they be never more joyful than when surround by their three son and six daughter in the St. Paul home. Mr. Hill always insist that there be no secret in his great success. He have no new receipt for success to offer , and say : `` The man with the big opportunity today be the man in the ranks. '' Extravagance , he insist , be often the cause of failure. Mr. Hill regard this a a national tendency , against which he strongly set himself , particularly when it concern the natural resource of the United States. During his active supervision of the Great Northern system , Mr. Hill oversee every detail , often to the wonder and despair of the employes with whom he often come in contact. His fame in his own country , the Northwest , and among his own people , those with whom he people his `` empire , '' be attest by the fact that there be say to be at least ten thousand story afloat in the Swedish section , and all have him for their hero. He rule his road and people almost like a dictator. The route of the road , and the location of it settlement , be all decide by him , whether others like it or not , a part of his economic policy. Branch line of his road be build with singular regularity , always provide a minimum of short line on which light train be necessary. The principal tenet of his railway gospel be low grade , heavy power , large capacity car , big trainload on main line , and he begin to preach these thing at a time when the best railway men think them mere visions. His Interest in Art It be say that Mr. Hill be gift with fine taste and a keen artistic sense of beauty of form and color , and his collection of art and jewel be among the fine in the country. From the early day of his prosperity he spend money in indulge what might be call his secret passion for gem of the rarest. None of these be ever use for personal adornment by either their owner or his family , except on the rarest occasions. His pleasure in them be that of the collector. His knowledge of precious stone be that of an expert , and several year ago it be say his collection be worth more than $ 2,000,000. One of his delight , in his hour of leisure , be to take out his collection and show it to his friend , explain the distinctive point of each stone. From precious stone , his first love , he turn to art. When he build his great home on Summit Avenue , in St. Paul , one of his chief feature be the picture gallery , two hundred foot long , and run from one end to the other of the residence. It be finish in oak , with a large pipe organ at one end and a great fireplace at the other , over which hang Ribot 's `` Christ Taken from the Cross. '' Mr. Hill be his own agent in the selection and purchase of his work of art , and it be say that he could not be deceive by spurious work or copy , and seldom fail to discern the true value of a picture. It be not generally know that he be a fair artist himself. He would take his brush and palette , and with a keen sense of the value of light , shade , color and perspective , would turn out a very fair painting. When he be a boy in the Quaker school in Rockwood , Canada , he use to draw and make copy of famous engraving and paintings. His picture gallery be say to be a paradise for art lovers. There be eighteen example of the best work of Corot , which critic say can not be match in the world , not even in the Louvre. Among the best example of this artist 's work be his `` Bibils. '' There be also splendid work by Fromentin , Decamp , Puvis de Chavannes , Millet , Troyon , Bouguereau , Banvin , Cazin , Henner , Laurens , Jules Breton , Daubigny , Dupre , Delacroix and Diaz. No estimate of the value of his collection have ever be give , but it be know that Mr. Hill Seldom pay less than $ 50,000 for a picture. Gifts to Charity Mr. Hill be generous in his charity , and have give hundred of thousand of dollar to the worthy poor. When he give up his old home in St. Paul and move into the Summit Avenue mansion , he give the old residence , complete in all it furnishing , to the Little Sisters of the Poor. In addition to this gift he have always contribute largely to their work in St. Paul and the Northwest. He take an active interest in the Catholic College , near St. Paul , and give it an endowment of $ 500,000. Mrs. Hill be always a devout Catholic , and they be marry in a Catholic church by a priest. Mr. Hill also give largely to other church organization and charitable societies. In 1908 Mr. Hill bring the house at 8 East Sixty-fifth Street , where he make his home when in this city. He be a member of the Union , Metropolitan , Manhattan , Jekyl Island , Down Town and New York Yacht Clubs , and an honorary member of the Rocky Mountain Club. In addition , he belong to numerous club and other organization in the West. Honored by Yale Mr. Hill receive the degree of LL.D. from Yale in 1910. Harvard have the Hill Professorship of Transportation endow by seventy-four friend of the great railway builder. He address many audience on railroad and other economic topic and write a good deal. `` Highways of Progress '' and many pamphlet deal with the business problem of the day .