November 14 , 1916 OBITUARY Prof. Lowell Dies ; Martian Theory His By THE NEW YORK TIMES FLAGSTAFF , Ariz. , Nov. 13. -- Dr. Percival Lowell , founder and Director of the Lowell Observatory here , and an astronomer of international reputation , die here last night from a stroke of apoplexy suffer yesterday morning. Dr. Lowell apparently be in good health when he arrive here recently from a lecture trip. Professor Percival Lowell , astronomer and author of book on the Far East , whose popular fame rest on the association of his name with the theory that Mars be inhabit , be bear in Boston on March 13 , 1855. The great controversy among astronomer , in which he play a leading part , begin in 1907 after his announcement that the observation make by his astronomical station , the Lowell Observatory at Flagstaff , Ariz. , prove that Mars be inhabited. Professor Lowell have put the theory forward tentatively as early a 1895. Many eminent astronomer in this country and Europe accept his conclusion of 1907 a unassailable. Others be skeptical. Professor Lowell continue from year to year to produce fresh evidence in favor of his theory by his observation at Flagstaff , where be locate the best astronomical plant in the world for the observation of Mars. Professor Lowell 's theory begin with the demonstration that the primary requisite for human life exist on the planet -- water , heat , and atmosphere. His positive proof of the existence of human life on Mars be the network of line which mark certain area of the planet 's face , indicate the digging of artificial canal , which would require an intelligence and engineering skill a great or great than that possess by the inhabitant of this earth. The Seasons on Mars The great white surface see on the pole of Mars , Professor Lowell hold , be polar snowcap , and the fact that they shrink in size and then increase again at certain season indicate the snowfall of the Martian Winter and the thaw of the Summer. Lowell describe a series of observation in which it be discover that , with the come of a Martian Spring and the melting of the polar snow , certain of the dark area grow darker , even show straight black line crisscross over their surface and over the surface of the orange-ochre area ; and that with the come of the Martian Autumn those dark area and line fade almost to the vanish point. Professor Lowell continue in his book : `` But , if instead of be due to water the blue-green tint have be due to leaf and grass , just such a fading-out a be observe should have take place a Autumn come on , and that without disproportionate increase of green elsewhere , for the great continental area , be desert , be incapable of support vegetation ; from which it follow that Mars be badly off for water , and that the planet be dependent on the melting of the polar snow for practically it whole supply. * * * `` Now , if a planet be at any stage of it career able to support life , it be probably that a diminishing water supply would be the beginning of the end of that life , for the air would outlast the available water. Those of it inhabitant who have succeed in survive would find themselves at last face to face with the relentlessness of a scarcity of water constantly grow great , till at last they would all die of thirst , either directly or indirectly ; for either they themselves would not have water enough to drink , or the plant or animal which constitute their diet would perish for lack of it -- an alternative of small choice to them , unless they be conventionally particular a to their mode of death. Water the Supreme Problem `` Before this lamentable conclusion be reach , however , there would come a time in the course of the planet 's history when water be not yet want , but be simply scarce and require to be husband ; when for the inhabitant the one supreme problem of existence would be the water problem -- how to get water enough to sustain life and how best to utilize every drop of water they could get. '' Professor Lowell go on to show that only irrigation on a vast scale could save the inhabitants. He put aside by elaborate reason the various theory which have be put forward to account for the canal of Mars a natural phenomenon and concludes that they be the work of human skill. The co-operation display by a whole planet in these work be the basis for some conclusion on what must be the political and social life on the planet. Professor Lowell be the first to discover water vapor on Mars. His careful observation detect 550 canal on the planet , Schiaparelli have find only 104. In 1910 Professor Lowell discover a new canal 1,000 mile in length. In the Spring of 1910 he lecture on his discovery before the Royal Institute of London and the Association Astronomique of Paris , where his theory create wide interest , but leave many unconvinced. His Other Discoveries His investigation be not confine solely to Mars. Professor Lowell make discovery concern Mercury , Venus and Saturn , and finance several expedition to odd corner of the earth for research and observation of all sort of polar phenomena. In 1894 he make a visit to Tripoli to observe the eclipse of that year from a favored spot. In 1906 he send an expedition to the Andes to photograph Mars. He receive the Jansen Medal of the French Astronomical Society in 1904 for his research on Mars , and a gold medal in 1908 from the Sociedad Astronomica de Mexico. He be appoint non-resident Professor of Astronomy at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1902 and be a member of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland , the French Astronomical Society , the American Philosophical Society , the National and American Geographical Societies , and a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Dr. Lowell begin life , after his graduation from Harvard in 1876 , by several year of travel and scientific observation in all part of the world , but particularly in China , Korea and Japan. In 1883 , while in Japan , he be appoint Secretary and Counselor to the Korea Special Mission to the United States. Returning to Korea the same year , by invitation from the King , he spend the Winter at Seoul , where he become popular with the people. Outside of his astronomical publication , his writing be mostly concern with phase of oriental life and thought. Professor Lowell 's Writings He be the author of the following work : `` Cho-son , the Land of the Morning Calm ; '' `` The Soul of the Far East , '' `` Noto , '' `` Occult Japan , '' `` Mars , '' `` Annals of the Lowell Observatory , '' `` Mars and Its Canals , '' `` Mars a the Abode of Life , '' and `` The Evolution of Worlds. '' Dr. Lowell be the son of Augustus and Katherine Bigelow Lowell. His father be Vice President of the American Academy and Trustee of the Lowell Institute , both of Boston. His mother be a daughter of Abbott Lawrence , Minister to England , 1849 to 1852. He be a cousin of James Russell Lowell and a brother of A. Lawrence Lowell , President of Harvard University .