May 26 , 1919 OBITUARY Wealthiest Negress Dead By THE NEW YORK TIMES Mrs. C. J. Walker , know a New York 's wealthy negress , have accumulate a fortune from the sale of so-called anti-kink hair tonic and from real estate investment in the last fourteen year , die yesterday morning at her country estate at Irvington-on-Hudson. She be proprietor of the Madame Walker hair dress parlor at 108 West 136th Street and other place in the city. Her death recall the unusual story of how she rise in twelve year from a washerwoman make only $ 1.50 a day to a position of wealth and influence among member of her race. Estimates of Mrs. Walker 's fortune have run up to $ 1,000,000. She say herself two year ago that she be not yet a millionaire , but hop to be some time , not that she want the money for herself , but for the good she could do with it. She spend $ 10,000 every year for the education of young negro men and woman in Southern college and send six youth to Tuskegee Institute every year. She recently give $ 5,000 to the National Conference on Lynching. Born fifty-one year ago , she be marry at 14 , and be leave a widow at 20 with a little girl to support. She work a a cook , washerwoman , and the like until she have reach the age of about 37. One morning while bend over her wash she suddenly realize that there be no prospect on her meager wage of lay away anything for old age. She have often say that one night shortly afterward she have a dream and something tell her to start a hair tonic business , which she do , in Denver , Col. , on a capital of $ 1.25. In a few year she have accumulate a large sum , and invest in real estate in the West and South and in New York State , nearly all the property greatly increase in value. She then own a $ 50,000 home in the northern part of this city , which some year ago she give to her daughter , Mrs. Lelia Walker Robinson , associate with her in business. In 1917 Madame Walker complete at Irvington , on the bank of the Hudson , a mansion which cost $ 250,000 , and since then have make her home there. The house , which be one of the show place in the vicinity , be three story high and consists of thirty or more rooms. She have instal in this home an $ 8,000 organ with furnishing , include bronze and marble statuary , cut glass candelabra , tapestry , and painting , say to be of intrinsic beauty and value .