July 3 , 1919 OBITUARY Dr. Anna H. Shaw , Suffragist , Dies By THE NEW YORK TIMES PHILADELPHIA , July 2. -- Dr. Anna Howard Shaw , honorary President of the National American Woman 's Suffrage Association , die at her home in Moylan , Penn. , near here , at 7 o'clock this evening. She be 72 year old. Dr. Shaw also be Chairman of the Woman 's Committee of the Council of National Defense and recently be award the Distinguished Service Medal for her work during the war. She be take ill in Springfield , Illinois , about a month ago while on a lecture tour with former President Taft and President Lowell of Harvard University , in the interest of the League of Nations. Pneumonia develop and for two week she be confine to her room in a Springfield hospital. She return to her home about the middle of June and apparently have entirely recovered. Last Saturday she drive to Philadelphia in her automobile , and upon her return say she be feel `` fine. '' She be take suddenly ill again yesterday with a recurrence of the disease and grow rapidly bad until the end. Her secretary , Miss Lucy E. Anthony , a niece of Susan B. Anthony , who have be with Dr. Shaw for thirty year , and two niece , the Misses Lulu and Grace Greene , be at her bedside when she died. No arrangement for the funeral have yet be made. They probably will be announce tomorrow. Dr. Shaw continue her active participation in public affair to the last. Immediately precede the great war , in the early Summer of 1914 , Dr. Shaw go to Rome a Chairman of the Committee on Suffrage and Right of Citizenship at the quinquennial season of the International Council of Women. Immediately after hostility have be terminate in France by the armistice Dr. Shaw sign the resolution she help draft for the National American Woman Suffrage Association , address to the Peace Conference , ask for punishment of the Germans for their crime against woman and girls. For her endeavor in the interest of woman at home as well a soldier in France during the war , Dr. Shaw receive letter from Queen Mary of England , Mme. Poincare , wife of the President of France ; President Wilson , General Pershing , and other celebrities. Dr. Shaw 's Long Life of Service In the death of the Rev. Dr. Anna Howard Shaw there be bring to a close a life crowd with activity from her early youth until her last illness , a career as remarkable a it be rare. The whole course of her life be bent upon human betterment , and she be for many year a leader , especially in the cause of woman suffrage. Dr. Shaw be bear at Newcastle-on-Tyne , Eng. , Feb. 14 , 1847 , and come to America with her parent in 1853 , be nearly shipwreck on the way over. When she be 9 year old her parent go from Massachusetts to Michigan , settle in what be then a wilderness , 40 mile from a post office and 100 mile from a railroad. In `` The Story of a Pioneer , '' which Dr. Shaw publish in 1915 , she tell the interesting story of her life. The family endure many hardship in that sparsely populated region. The little log cabin which they occupy have the earth for a floor , and hole in the wall instead of window and doors. Her father be without horse or other farm animal , and without farm implements. Dr. Shaw help plant corn and potato by chop a hole in the ground with an axe. She do most of the work in the digging of a well , chop wood for the big fireplace , fell tree , and later help in the laying of a floor in the house and put in door and window and partitions. The father be compel to leave his wife and child at the mercy of Indians and wild animal while he earn a living for them. When she be 15 she begin teach school , receive $ 4 a week and walk eight mile a day. Later she go to live with a married sister in a Northern town. She be determine to have a college education , and by preach and lecturing , which be frown upon by member of her family and friend , she manage to pay her way through Albion College , where she study from 1872 to 1875. She have only $ 18 in her pocket when she arrive at Albion. She later go to the Theological School of Boston University , where she be graduate in 1878. She suffer extreme poverty during this period , live in an attic in Boston. She often go cold and hungry and know the exhaustion due to continued insufficient food and hard work. On account of her sex , she be refuse when apply for ordination by the New England Conference and by the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church , but in the same year have the honor of be the first woman ordain by the Methodist Protestant Church. In her struggle to become a minister she fight against ridicule , dissension , and lack of the bare necessities. Pioneer Among Women in the Ministry She receive a local preacher 's license from the District Conference and in 1878 be pastor of the Methodist Episcopal Church at Hingham , Mass. , and from 1878 to 1885 she be pastor at East Dennis , Mass. She be ordain by the Methodist Protestant Church on Oct. 12 , 1880. While serve a pastor of the Dennis congregation Dr. Shaw study medicine also at Boston University , graduate with the M. D. degree in 1885. Kansas City University confer on her the honorary degree of D. D. in 1902 and the LL.D. degree in 1917. When the suffrage movement begin to show increase energy in 1885 , Dr. Shaw resign her pastorate to devote her life to a fight for temperance , suffrage , and social purity. She become the lecturer for the Massachusetts Woman 's Suffrage Association , and from 1886 to 1892 she be national superintendent of franchise of the Women 's Christian Temperance Union. Her association through her preach with such prominent woman a Mary A. Livermore and Julia Ward Howe enlarge her view of life and arouse her enthusiasm for the cause of suffrage and liberty. On the resignation of Dr. Shaw 's most intimate friend , Susan B. Anthony , in 1900 , the Presidency of the National Woman 's Suffrage Association rest between Dr. Shaw and Mrs. Carrie B. Chapman , whom Miss Anthony finally choose a be the more experienced , while Dr. Shaw be make Vice President-at-Large. She have be national lecturer for the organization since 1886 and continue in this work until 1904 , when Mrs. Chapman Catt be compel to resign the Presidency on account of ill health , and Dr. Shaw succeed her a head of the National Association. She serve in this capacity until 1915 , when she decline re-election. Her administration be mark by unprecedented progress. The number of suffrage worker increase from 17,000 to 200,000 , and one campaign in ten year be replace by ten in one year ; the expenditure of the association increase from $ 15,000 to $ 50,000 annually , while the number of States with full suffrage grow from four to twelve , and the whole suffrage movement change from an academic discussion to a vital political force arouse the attention of the entire nation. The year of 1912 be the banner year for Dr. Shaw and the cause , when Arizona , Kansas , and Oregon receive full suffrage. During that year Dr. Shaw speak in the principal city in each of these States , make four or five speech a day and travel in any sort of conveyance , from freight car to automobiles. Dr. Shaw have speak in every State in the Union , before many State Legislatures , and before committee of both house of Congress. She be say to have be the only woman who ever preach in Gustav Vasa Cathedral , the State Church of Sweden , and the first ordain woman to preach in Berlin , Copenhagen , Christiania , Amsterdam , and London. In London Dr. Shaw visit all the suffrage headquarters , study the method and organization that prevail there. On her return she say that she learn much , but that a to method , the American suffrage advocate would have to work out their own. Dr. Shaw figure in a number of lively meeting of the anti , who be heckle by the suffrage advocates. Earned Service Cross in the War As Chairman of the Committee of Women 's Defense Work , appoint by the Council of National Defense , in April , 1917 , Dr. Shaw perform great service throughout the war. The Government recently award the Distinguished Service Medal to her for her work in this capacity , the presentation be make by Secretary of War Baker in his office at the War Department on May 12 last. During the war she write article and deliver address in arouse the people of the country to a realization of the true meaning of the struggle with Germany. She be greatly pleased when word come that the League of Nations office would be open to woman as well a men. She be attend the annual convention of the National Association at the time. `` It be splendid , '' she said. `` People of the United States will understand what democracy mean by the time the Peace Conference get through and recognize the service of woman -- not only recognize their service , but their intellectual counsel and experience. The world moves. The United States must hurry. '' On Dec. 15 last Dr. Shaw be swear in a a special member of the Washington police force , have remark at a reception the night before on the fact that she have have a forty year ' desire to serve a a policewoman. The regulation oath be administer by Superintendent Pullman and Dr. Shaw receive a badge. As a minister , Dr. Shaw would not perform a marriage ceremony in which it be insist that the word `` obey '' be used. `` The marriage service , '' she say , `` be a poll-parrot affair. The method use in recite the pledge be ridiculous , to say the least. There be no solemnity , dignity or character to that kind of marriage ceremony. '' She have say that she believe in make the ceremony fit the occasion , have a different service for each marriage. As evidence of the fact that her position be right , she point out that she have never know of a divorce among person marry by her. One of Shaw 's last appearance in New York City be at the National Conference on Lynching , hold at Carnegie Hall early in May. She be one of the leader in arrange for the conference , and in her address she urge the passage of the Suffrage Amendment a a solution of the lynching problem. She say that woman of intelligence have be bring to a realization of the fact that womanhood be not be protect by the lynching of negro , a pretext which she describe a `` merely camouflage on the part of men for exhibition of barbarism. '' Though an ardent suffragist , Dr. Shaw do not approve of the method of the militant suffrage workers. She condemn the picketing of the White House when the President be be annoy in November , 1917 , say that the picket have endanger the life of the President by their action , and assert that the picket at the time of the visit of the Russian Mission to Washington have carry treasonable banners. Her remark be make at the annual meeting of the Pennsylvania Woman Suffrage Association , and a resolution condemn `` the mistaken method of the picket '' be almost unanimously adopted. In 1913 Dr. Shaw figure in a lively skirmish with the authority in Delaware County , Penn. , where she lived. Dr. Shaw refuse to make out a statement of her `` personal property , mortgage , stock , '' and other property , return the blank that have be leave at her home to be fill out on the ground that taxation without representation be tyranny. The Tax Assessor assess her property at $ 30,000 , which she declare be excessive , but the Tax Commissioner decline to do anything about the matter unless Dr. Shaw personally make out the declaration. The result be that her automobile , a pale yellow roadster , give to her by admire suffrage worker , be levy upon and sell by the Sheriff for the taxes. The car be buy in by her friend and return to her. Alighting from a Lehigh Valley train in the Jersey City Station one morning in February , in 1914 , Dr. Shaw slip on the icy car step and fracture her right ankle , which lay her up for some time right in the midst of a busy speak tour in behalf of equal suffrage. She afterward bring suit for $ 25,000 against the railroad company , but lose the case. Dr. Shaw never married. She be a member of the International Woman Suffrage Alliance , the League to Enforce Peace , National Society for Broader Education , the Women 's Civic Club of New York , and editor of the Woman 's Committee War Department of The Ladies ' Home Journal. Besides write `` The Story of a Pioneer , '' she have contribute many short story and article to various magazine .