OBITUARY Marlene Dietrich , 90 , Symbol of Glamour , Dies Marlene Dietrich , the magnetic movie star and singer who be an international symbol of glamour and sex for more than half a century , die yesterday at her home in Paris. She be 90 year old. In her film and record-breaking cabaret performance , Miss Dietrich artfully project cool sophistication , self-mockery and infinite experience. Her sexuality be audacious , her wit be insolent and her manner be ageless. With a world-weary charm and a diaphanous gown show off her celebrated leg , she be the quintessential cabaret entertainer of Weimar-era Germany. The Dietrich image , personify by Lola-Lola , the seductive cabaret singer in top hat and silk stocking whom she portray in `` The Blue Angel , '' be that of a liberated woman of the world who choose her men , earn her own living and viewed sex a a challenge. Audiences be captivate by this creature out of no one 's experience but out of everyone 's imagination. 'Most Vulnerable Fantasies' Her manner , the critic Kenneth Tynan write , be that of `` a serpentine lasso whereby her voice casually wind itself around our most vulnerable fantasies. '' `` She have sex but no positive gender , '' Tynan wrote. `` Her masculinity appeal to woman and her sexuality to men. '' Her friend Maurice Chevalier say : `` Dietrich be something that never exist before and may never exist again. That 's a woman. '' The Dietrich image be bear in the Berlin of the 1920 's , when she appear in play , cabaret , and film role of vary importance ( she be an extra in G. W. Pabst 's 1925 `` Joyless Street , '' which feature Greta Garbo ) . Her mentor , the American director Josef von Sternberg , make her an international star with `` The Blue Angel , '' which be film in 1930 in both German and English. Although in the movie 's offstage scenes her 5-foot-5-inch frame seem a bit blowzy and her manner a bit too Teutonic , her portrayal of Lola-Lola , who degrade and destroy an infatuated elderly professor ( Emil Jannings ) , win her a Hollywood contract. She shed 30 pound , and in six more von Sternberg movie the director and his star mold the legend. Her hair become a golden blond , makeup and light make her cheekbone and nose appear patrician , and her dreamy blue eye be frame by thinly pencil , sweepingly arch brows. Perhaps the best description of her face be provide by Erich Maria Remarque , her longtime friend , in his novel `` Arch of Triumph '' : `` The cool , bright face that do n't ask for anything , that simply exist , wait -- it be an empty face , he think ; a face that could change with any wind of expression. One could dream into it anything. It be like a beautiful empty house wait for carpet and pictures. It have all possibility -- it could become a palace or a brothel. '' A Lifelong Task Of Creating an Image Working with von Sternberg , the actress become a thorough professional and perfectionist , expert in makeup , light , clothes and film editing. In later decade , she repeatedly have cosmetic surgery to keep her face taut , and adroitly have herself film with soft-focus , gauze-covered lenses. `` Glamour , '' she observe , `` be assurance. It be a kind of know that you be all right in every way , mentally and physically and in appearance , and that , whatever the occasion or the situation , you be equal to it. '' In clothes , she be a trend setter. Both on screen and off , she often wear trouser and mannish costumes. By prove that a woman could still look feminine in such clothes , she establish `` the Dietrich silhouette , '' emphasize trimness and inconspicuous hip and bust. The Dietrich-von Sternberg collaboration produce `` Morocco '' ( 1930 ) , in which Miss Dietrich , again a cabaret singer , spurns and then pursue a French legionnaire ( Gary Cooper ) in the Sahara ; `` Dishonored '' ( 1931 ) , about a spy who betray her country for love of a worthless man ( Victor McLaglen ) , and `` Shanghai Express '' ( 1932 ) , a melodrama in which she be a China Coast prostitute who offer herself to a warlord ( Warner Oland ) to save the life of a former lover ( Clive Brook ) . The last three Dietrich-von Sternberg film be `` Blonde Venus '' ( 1932 ) , a mother-love soap opera ; `` The Scarlet Empress '' ( 1934 ) , an opulent and visually stunning melodrama about a lascivious Catherine the Great , and `` The Devil Is a Woman '' ( 1935 ) , an erotic tale about a soldier-corrupting vamp in turn-of-the-century Seville. Because it display her beauty most effectively , `` The Devil Is a Woman '' be her particular favorite. But it anger Spanish official , at whose demand Paramount Pictures soon withdraw it and destroy the master print. Miss Dietrich give her own print of the film to the Museum of Modern Art in New York , where it be show frequently. The von Sternberg movie be increasingly self-indulgent , lyrical , exotic romance with pallid plot that trap the actress in elaborate decor and special effects. They be lose a fortune , so Paramount 's top executive , to protect their big investment in Miss Dietrich , bar von Sternberg from direct her again. Seeking variety , she make her first comedy , `` Desire , '' in 1936. It be a satire about an urbane jewel thief who steal a choice necklace from a Parisian jeweler and , in effort to keep it , become involve with a hayseed Detroit engineer ( Gary Cooper ) . A second comedy , `` Destry Rides Again , '' a 1939 spoof of the Old West , be even more successful. The actress , a a freewheeling saloon entertainer , seduce a valiant sheriff ( James Stewart ) and have a hair-pulling , face-pummeling brawl with a competitor ( Una Merkel ) . Miss Dietrich be a Berliner who be an early and passionate opponent of Nazism. When Hitler start arrest Jews , she finance the escape of several friends. Rejects Germany ; Films Are Banned In 1937 , while film the melodrama `` Knight Without Armour '' in England , she be approach by agent of Hitler offer her an almost blank check to return to Germany to star in movie of her choice. She angrily reject the offer , and her film be ban in Germany. Soon after , she apply for American citizenship , which be grant in 1939. During World War II , Miss Dietrich become somewhat of a symbol of free Germany. She make anti-Nazi broadcast in German , take part in many war-bond drive and , in three year , entertain half a million Allied troop and war prisoner across North Africa and Western Europe. Tirelessly and good-humoredly , she rough it with the G.I. 's , stand patiently in food line , wash with snow and sleep in dugout and ruin , often near the front lines. She sing her movie song , the international wartime ballad `` Lili Marlene '' and some current song , and even play a musical saw , a skill she have master for the Berlin stage. The troop love her. After the war , she be award the Medal of Freedom , the high civilian honor the United States Government bestows. France name her a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor and Belgium dub her a Knight of the Order of Leopold. Her most noteworthy movie role after the war be a an exotic gypsy in Mitchell Leisen 's `` Golden Earrings '' ( 1947 ) , with Ray Milland ; a manipulative Berlin cabaret singer in Billy Wilder 's `` Foreign Affair '' ( 1948 ) ; a saloon manager hide outlaw in Fritz Lang 's `` Rancho Notorious '' ( 1952 ) ; a duplicitous wife in Mr. Wilder 's `` Witness for the Prosecution '' ( 1958 ) ; a cynical brothel-keeper in Orson Welles 's `` Touch of Evil '' ( 1958 ) and an aristocratic widow in Stanley Kramer 's `` Judgment at Nuremberg '' ( 1961 ) . `` Touch of Evil '' provide Miss Dietrich with one of her most memorable lines. She admonish the character play by the corpulent Welles to `` lay off the candy bars. '' Her last film be a small part in the forgettable 1979 melodrama call `` Just a Gigolo. '' In 1986 , Maximilian Schell make a documentary about her , entitle `` Marlene '' ; she do not appear on screen because of vanity , but she be interview and her voice be hear almost continuously. Miss Dietrich begin her cabaret performance in 1954 , and for more than two decade , for fee up to $ 30,000 a week , she hypnotize audience in such disparate city a London , Las Vegas , Paris , New York , Montreal , Johannesburg and Tokyo and Tel Aviv ( where she sing in German with some apprehension , but with stunning success ) . Her manner match her movie image : at once intimate and elusive. In 1960 , also with trepidation about wartime animosity , she sing in Berlin. There be a few heckler , but the vast majority of Berliners welcome her home. To keep her show up to date , she intersperse the nostalgia with new song , and in 1963 she perform in London with -- or perhaps against -- the youthful Beatles. Marie Magdalene Dietrich be bear in Berlin on Dec. 27 , 1901. Her father , Louis Erich Otto Dietrich , who be a police lieutenant and a former cavalry major , die when she be 9 year old. Her mother be Wilhelmina Elisabeth Josephine Felsing , the daughter of a well-to-do watch merchant , who soon after be widow , married Edouard von Losch , a cavalry lieutenant. He be kill on the Russian front in 1918. The young Marie Magdalene and her elder sister , Elisabeth , be bring up strictly in an upper-middle-class Prussian home. Marie Magdalene attend a private school in Weimar , study French and take violin lesson , hop for a concert career. But when she be 18 , a hand injury threaten that dream and she decide to try dramatics , contract her two give name to Marlene because her family disapprove of acting. She fail an audition with Max Reinhardt and join the chorus of a tour musical revue. A year later , she pass a second audition and be admit to Reinhardt 's drama school. Soon after , she win small role on the stage and in German films. Her only substantial role be in the film `` Tragedy of Love '' ( 1923 ) . She be assign the part by Rudolph Sieber , a young Czechoslovak production assistant. They be marry on May 17 , 1924 , and the next year have a daughter , Maria. After the early year of their marriage , Mr. Sieber be rarely see with his wife. He hold movie job in New York and Hollywood and , in 1953 , become a chicken farmer in California in the San Fernando Valley. They never divorce , but live apart for most of their remain years. He die in 1975. In the late 1920 's , Miss Dietrich win increasingly important lead role on the German stage and be liken in the German press to Greta Garbo. A Director 's Search For a Cruel Temptress In early 1930 , von Sternberg arrive in Berlin to make `` The Blue Angel , '' base on the Heinrich Mann novel `` Professor Unrat. '' The director have be search for an actress who could exude the electric eroticism of the movie 's cruel temptress. He saw Miss Dietrich in a play and know his search be over. Two decade later , the actress be refer to by the press a `` the world 's most glamorous grandmother. '' Her daughter , also an actress , marry William Riva , a scenic artist , in 1947 , and have four sons. Miss Dietrich be often see with her grandson in Manhattan , wheel their carriage in Central Park , later see them off to camp at Grand Central Terminal and even carry their laundry. She be deeply devote to her family , work hard to advance her daughter 's career and help her daughter and son-in-law financially. To be with her family , Miss Dietrich live in Manhattan when not tour , but in 1972 she move her chief residence from Park Avenue to Paris , where she live in a four-room apartment on Avenue Montaigne , in the Eighth Arrondissement. She be a close friend of many famous people , include Ernest Hemingway and Sir Alexander Fleming , the discoverer of penicillin. She also have widely report love affair with the writer Erich Maria Remarque and the actor Jean Gabin , Michael Wilding and Douglas Fairbanks Jr. `` I 've always be attract to intelligent men , '' she once said. `` I can pick 'em in a full room , just like that. I do n't care what age they are. '' Miss Dietrich keep in touch with friend around the world by telephone and letter. She often cook delicacy for friend , as well a for stagehand and doormen. Her specialty include goulash and apple strudel. She be also knowledgeable about antique , and own painting by Delacroix , Cezanne , Utrillo and Corot. A Faith in Astrology , For Herself and Others Deeply influence by astrology , she regularly have horoscope prepare for friends. On that subject , she once remark : `` Astrology ! Of course. After all , everyone know that the moon pull the sea away from the land , and farmer do n't plant when the moon be wrong. `` Why should humans escape ? '' She grant occasional interview to friendly journalist , but over the year she grow impatient with those who ask question she regard a stupid or pointless. In her memoir , `` Marlene Dietrich 's ABC , '' publish in 1962 , she write : `` Once a woman have forgive her man , she must not reheat his sin for breakfast. '' Miss Dietrich , who stop perform in the mid-1970 's , live the last year of her life a a virtual recluse in her Paris apartment. A photograph of her in `` Shanghai Express '' be choose to publicize this year 's Cannes International Film Festival , which start Thursday. The poster adorn billboard all over France .