January 28 , 1922 OBITUARY Nellie Bly , Journalist , Dies of Pneumonia By THE NEW YORK TIMES Mrs. Elizabeth Cochrane Seaman , know to thousand of people throughout the world a Nellie Bly , her nom de plume , die yesterday morning of pneumonia at the age of 57 in St. Mark 's Hospital , to which she be remove a few day ago from her room in the Hotel McAlpin. Services will be hold at 2 o'clock tomorrow afternoon at the Church of the Ascension , Fifth Avenue and Tenth Street. Friends may view the body today at the funeral parlor of Herbert H. Baxter , 597 Lexington Avenue. Born at Cochrane 's Mills , Pa. , a town found by her father , Judge Cochrane , Elizabeth Cochrane find herself penniless when still in her teen and begin her journalistic career write for a Pittsburgh paper at $ 5 a week. Later she reach a high water mark of $ 25,000 earn with her pen in one year. She go down into the sea in a diving bell and up in the air in a balloon and live in an insane asylum a a patient ; but the feat that make her famous be her trip around the world in 1889. She be send by The World to beat the mark of Phileas Fogg , Jules Verne 's hero of `` Around the World in Eighty Days , '' and she succeed , make the tour in 72 day 6 hour 11 minutes. Every one who read newspaper follow her progress and she land in New York a national character. In 1895 , she marry Robert L. Seaman , forty year her senior , President of the American Steel Barrel Company and the Ironclad Manufacturing Company. They live happily together at 15 West Thirty-Seventh Street , and on Mr. Seaman 's death in 1910 she take entire charge of the properties. Luck turn against her , however , and a series of forgery by her employee , dispute of various sort , bankruptcy and a mass of vexation and costly litigation swallow up Nellie Bly 's fortune. Her courage and liveliness remain , however , and she return to journalism with all her old spirit. At the time of her death she be a member of the staff of The New York Evening Journal .