August 3 , 1922 OBITUARY Dr. Bell , Inventor of Telephone , Dies By THE NEW YORK TIMES SYDNEY , N. S. , Aug. 2. -- Dr. Alexander Graham Bell , inventor of the telephone , die at 2 o'clock this morning at Beinn Breagh , his estate near Baddeck. Although the inventor , who be in his seventy-sixth year , have be in fail health for several month , he have not be confine to bed , and the end be unexpected. Late yesterday afternoon , however , his condition , bring about by progressive anemia , become serious , and Dr. Ker of Washington , a cousin of Mrs. Bell , a house guest and a Sydney physician , attend him. With Mr. Bell when he die be Mrs. Bell , a daughter , Mrs. Marion Hubbard Fairchild , and her husband , David G. Fairchild of Washington. The inventor leave another daughter , Mrs. Elise M. Grosvenor , wife of Gilbert Grosvenor of Washington , who now be with her husband in Brazil. At Sunset on Friday , on the crest of Beinn Breach Mountain , the body of Dr. Bell will be bury at a spot choose by the inventor himself. The grave of the venerable scientist , the immensity of whose life work be attest by score of Telegrams which come today to the Bell estate from the world 's prominent figure , be at a point overlook the town of Baddeck , Cape Breton. The sweeping vista from the mountain top , so admire by Dr. Bell , stretch far over the Bras d'Or Lakes. Sunset , choose a the moment when the body will be commit to the sturdy hill , gild the water of the lake until they be really what their name mean -- '' the lake of the arm of gold. '' Dr. Bell ask to be bury in the countryside where he have spend the major portion of the last thirty-five year of his life. The inventor come to Cape Breton forty year ago , and five year later purchase the Beinn Breagh estate. His last experiment , deal with fly boat , be make on Bras d'Or Lake. American specialist who be rush to the bedside of Dr. Bell be today return to the United States. They be tell of his death while aboard fast train bound for Baddeck , and , be too late , turn back. Alexander Graham Bell live to see the telephonic instrument over which he talk a distance of twenty foot in 1876 use , with improvement , for the transmission of speech across the continent , and more than that , for the transmission of speech across the Atlantic and from Washington to Honolulu without wires. The little instrument he patent less than fifty year ago , scorn then a a joke , be when he die the basis for 13,000,000 telephone use in every civilized country in the world. The Bell basic patent , the famed No. 174,465 , which he receive on his twenty-ninth birthday and which be sustain in a historic court fight , have be call the most valuable patent ever issued. Although the inventor of many contrivance which he regard with as much tenderness and to which he attach as much importance a the telephone , a business world which he confess he be often unable to understand make it assure that he would go down in history a the man who make the telephone. He be an inventor of the gramophone , and for nearly twenty year be engage in aeronautics. Associated with Glenn H. Curtiss and others , whose name be now know wherever airplane fly , he pin his faith in the efficacy for aviation of the tetrahedral cell , which never achieve the success he saw for it in aviation , but a a by-product of his study he establish an important new principle in architecture. Up to the time of his death Dr. Bell take the deep interest in aviation. Upon his return from a tour of the European country in 1909 he report that the continental nation be far ahead of America in aviation and urge that step by take to keep apace of them. He predict in 1916 that the great war would be win in the air. It be always a theory of his that fly machine could make ever so much more speed at great height , in rarefy atmosphere , and he often say that the transatlantic flight would be some time make in one day , a prediction which he live to see fulfilled. A Teacher of Deaf Mutes The inventor of the telephone be bear in Edinburgh , on March 3 , 1847. Means of communication have be a hobby in the Bell family long before Alexander be born. His grandfather be the inventor of a device for overcome stammering and his father perfect a system of visible speech for deaf mutes. When Alexander be about 15 year old he make an artificial skull of guttapercha and India rubber that would pronounce weird tone when blow into by a hand bellows. At the age of 16 he become , like his father , a teacher of elocution and instructor of deaf mutes. When young Bell be 22 year old he be threaten with tuberculosis , which have cause the death of his two brother , and the Bell family migrate to Brantford , Canada. Soon after he come to America , at a meeting with Sir Charles Wheatstone , the English inventor , Bell get the ambition to perfect a musical or multiple telegraph. His father , in an address in Boston one day not long after , mention his son 's success in teach deaf mute , which lead the Boston Board of Education to offer the young Bell $ 500 to introduce his system in the newly open school for deaf mute there. He be then 24 year old , and quickly gain prominence for his teaching methods. He be soon name a professor in Boston University. But teach interfere with his inventing and he give up all but two of his pupils. One of these be Mabel Hubbard of a wealthy family. She have lose her speech and hearing when a baby and Bell take the most acute interest in enable her to hear. She later become Mrs. Bell. Works Three Years on Telephone Bell spend the following three year work , mostly at night , in a cellar in Salem , Mass. Gardiner G. Hubbard , his future father-in-law , and Thomas Sanders , help him financially while he work on his theory that speech could be reproduce by mean of an electrically charge wire. His first success come while he be test his instrument in new quarter in Boston. Thomas A. Watson , Bell 's assistant , have strike a clock spring at one end of a wire and Bell hear the sound in another room. For forty week he work on his instrument , and on March 10 , 1876 , Watson , who be work in another room , be start to hear Bell 's voice say : `` Mr. Watson , come here. I want you. '' On his twenty-ninth birthday Bell receive his patent. At the Centennial in Philadelphia he give the first public demonstration of his instrument. He have not intend to go to the exposition. He be poor and have plan to take up his teach again. In June he go to the railroad station one day to see Miss Hubbard off for Philadelphia. She have believe he be go with her. As he put her on the train and it move off without him , she burst into tears. Seeing this , Bell rush ahead and catch the train , without baggage or ticket. An exhibition on a Sunday afternoon be promise to him. When the hour arrive it be hot , and the judge be tired. It look a if there would be no demonstration for Bell , when Dom Pedro , the Emperor of Brazil , appear , and shake Mr. Bell by the hand. He have hear some of the young man 's lectures. Bell make ready for the demonstration. A wire have be string along the room. Bell take the transmitter , and Dom Pedro place the receiver to his ear. `` My God , it talk ! '' he exclaimed. The Lord Kelvin take the receiver. `` It do speak , '' he said. `` It be the most wonderful thing I have see in America. '' The judge then take turn listen , and the demonstration last until 10 o'clock that night. The instrument be the centre of interest for scientist the rest of the exposition. The commercial development of the telephone date from that day in Philadelphia. His Other Inventions While Alexander Graham Bell will be best remember a the inventor of the telephone , a claim he sustain through many legal contest , he also become note for other inventions. With Sumner Tainter he invent the gramophone. He invent a new method of lithography , a photophone , and an induction balance. He invent the telephone probe , which be use to locate the bullet that kill President Garfield. He spend fifteen year and more than $ 200,000 in test his tetrahedral kite , which he believe would be the basis for aviation. The inventor be the recipient of many honor in this country and abroad. The French Government confer on him the decoration of the Legion of Honor , the French Academy bestow on him the Volta prize of 50,000f. , the Society of Arts in London in 1902 give him the Albert medal , and the University of Wurzburg , Bavaria , give him a Ph. D. Dr. Bell regard the summit of his career a reach when in January of 1915 he and his old associate , Mr. Watson , talk to one another over the telephone from San Francisco to New York. It be nearly two year later that by a combination of telephonic and wireless telegraphy instrument the engineer of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company send speech across the Atlantic. In 1915 Dr. Bell say that he look forward to the day when men would communicate their thought by wire without the spoken word. `` The possibility of further achievement by the use of electricity be inconceivable , '' he said. `` Men can do nearly everything else by electricity already , and I can imagine them with coil of wire about their head come together for communication of think by induction. '' In April of 1916 he declare that land and sea power would become secondary to air power. He express then the opinion that the airplane would be more valuable a a fighting machine than the Zeppelin and urge that the United States build a strong aerial fleet. The inventor 's last few year be spend in energetic effort to materialize new dream and in see wider and wider application of his great one. In December , 1920 , he be in London when that city talk by wireless with Geneva. That same year he perfect a device for cool houses. Always he keep work at something , more often than not a something far afield from his early interests. The telephone , in fact , have pal on him. There have pile up 3,000 patent atop his original basic one , and meantime he have put in some of his hard year try to develop flying. It be on his seventy-fifth birthday that he disclose that he would not have a telephone in his own study , and that there be no telephone in the Cocoanut Grove home of his daughter-in-law , Mrs. Fairchild , in the Miami suburb where he be spend the Winter work toward fresh inventions. Dr. Bell go abroad the last time two year ago , pay a farewell visit to his native Edinburgh , and return to say that he have find himself a stranger in a strange land , and that he be glad to get back to America , where he have live most of his life. Throughout his life Dr. Bell maintain his interest in deaf mutes. He found the American Association to Promote Teaching of Speech to the Deaf , and contribute $ 250,000 to it support. He be a member of many of the leading American society of learning .