August 3 , 1923 OBITUARY Harding a Farm Boy Who Rose by Work By THE NEW YORK TIMES Nominated for the Presidency a a compromise candidate and elect by a tremendous majority because of a reaction against the policy of his predecessor , Warren Gamaliel Harding , twenty-ninth President of the United States , owe his political elevation largely to his engage personal trait , his ability to work in harmony with the leader of his party and the fact that he typify in himself the average prosperous American citizen. Although he have be prominent in Ohio politics for a generation , Mr. Harding do not really become a national figure until 1920 , the year of his nomination at Chicago. He have be mention a a possible compromise candidate in 1916. Mr. Harding , then United States Senator , be the Temporary Chairman of the 1916 convention , also hold at Chicago , and his `` keynote speech '' on that occasion be expect by many to put him in a position where the nomination might go to him , if a deadlock should arise. The nomination go to Charles E. Hughes , whom he later pick for Secretary of State , and who be defeat at the poll by Woodrow Wilson. Mr. Harding 's opportunity be to come four year later , when General Leonard Wood and Frank O. Lowden , then Governor of Illinois , be the early leading candidates. When development in a Senatorial committee 's investigation of alleged improper use of campaign fund make the party leader deem Governor Lowden 's nomination inadvisable , most of the latter 's strength be transfer to Mr. Harding. His friend in the Senate , who have oppose the League of Nations propose by President Wilson , become active and Mr. Harding 's nomination by the convention followed. Wife Had Premonition of His Death Mrs. Harding have a premonition that the arduous duty of the Presidency might lead to her husband 's death. On June 10 , 1920 , two day before his nomination , while she be await information of the result of the balloting at Chicago , she say : `` I be content to bask in my husband 's limelight , but I can not see why any one should want to be President in the next four years. I can see but one word write over the head of my husband if he be elect , and that word be 'Tragedy. ' `` As a matter of fact , I would rather have him Senator than President. Being Senator and be a Senator 's wife be really a wonderful life. Of course , now that he be in the race and want to win I must want him to , but down in my heart I be sorry. '' Began a a Farm boy Mr. Harding be bear on a farm in Morrow County , Ohio , near the village of Blooming Grove , on Nov. 2 , 1865. It be his grandfather 's farm , where his father then lived. He be the old of eight children. His father , Dr. George T. Harding , a village physician , come of Scotch ancestor who settle in Connecticut and then move to the Wyoming Valley , Pa. , before go to Ohio. His mother , Phoebe Dockerson , come of a Dutch family , the Van Kirks. Dr. Harding at the time live in a two-room house , which he have build with his own hand in pioneer days. He have little mean , and to supplement his income a a physician farm on a small scale. Warren Harding be distinctly a farm boy. He help in the clearing and cultivation of the land , and learn to fell tree , chop wood , split rail and plant and hoe corn. In the Winter he have chore to do before and after school. He grow up strong of body and sunny of disposition. At the age of 14 he enter Ohio Central College , a school of the academy grade , at Iberia , Ohio. At interval he stop school to earn money to continue , and all his vacation be devote to earn money. He cut corn , paint a barn , drive a team for a contractor grade the roadbed of the Toledo & Ohio Central Railway and teach a district school. One Summer he raise eighteen bushel of wheat on half an acre of ground which his father give him. During this period he play an alto horn in the Iberia brass band , but this be for recreation rather than for pay. More important in it influence on his late career , he learn to set type and acquire his first contact with newspaper work. While President Mr. Harding still carry a a luck piece the printer 's rule which he use when `` stick type. '' As editor of his college paper he show an aptitude and a liking for journalism. In the meantime Dr. Harding have move his family from the farm to Caledonia , and when Warren be 19 year old move to Marion , in the adjoining county , then a place of about 4,000 population. There Warren get a job in the office of a small weekly , The Marion Mirror. Just before that he have be study law , sell insurance and teach school , but from the moment he go to Marion he determine to be a newspaper man. While with The Mirror he do all the odd job that fell to the lot of the apprentice in the old-time country newspaper office , from scrub out the office and set type to write editorial and solicit advertisement and subscriptions. Worked for a Democratic Paper The Marion Mirror be a Democratic paper and the majority of the voter in Marion at that time be Democrats. Doctor Harding be a Republican and Warren , then just become greatly interested in public affair , be also a Republican , and one of the uncompromising variety. The situation in The Mirror office become somewhat embarrassing , for the youthful Harding not only join the local James G. Blaine Club which the Republicans have form for the Presidential campaign , but insist upon wear a black , shiny Blaine high hat to work. It have often be say that Harding be discharge from The Mirror for this , but that be not true. He be too valuable to his employer. He not only know the mechanic of the printer 's trade , but have a pleasant way of write about birth , wedding and other local happening that make friend for the paper. The best proof of the error of the story that he be discharge by the owner of The Mirror for his Republicanism be that this same owner , the future President 's first `` bos '' in the newspaper business , help him realize his ambition to become a newspaper owner. There be a little daily newspaper in Marion , call The Star , which have be start by a former peanut vendor , who have fail to make it successful. This paper be about to be sell for debt by the Sheriff and Harding 's employer , the owner of The Mirror , advise the owner of The Independent to buy The Star and scrap it l it might later compete actively with The Independent. This the owner of The Independent refuse to do. Nettled by the rejection of his advice , the owner of The Mirror call in Harding and tell him to go over to the court house and buy the Star. `` I 've nothing to buy it with , '' say Harding. `` You go over and do what I tell you , and it will work out all right , '' Harding be told. On the following day , Nov. 26 , 1884 , this announcement appear in The Star : `` We have purchase the Star and will stay. '' `` The Star Publishing Company. '' The company consist of Warren Harding and his equally youthful friend , Jack Warwick. This begin Harding 's career a a publisher. For several year he work every available hour to put The Star on it feet. First , the property have to be pay for. Harding ransack Marion and vicinity for news and advertisements. When his writing and his business manage be do , he help his partner set the type , make up the paper , run the press and get the carrier boys out. After the issue be out , the partner then turn to and distribute the type , for they have barely enough of it for one day 's paper , and have to have it ready for the next day. Harding 's early year with The Star be full of difficulties. He sell insurance `` on the side '' and resort to all sort of expedient to meet the Saturday payroll. During this time come his break with his partner , Warwick. In the midst of his trouble , Harding decide that the paper must have a telephone. His partner balk at this and Harding buy him out and put him on the payroll a an employe , thus take on himself all the responsibility. Harding could not modernize the ramshackle equipment of the paper for several year because of lack money. To add to his difficulty the editor of The Independent , the compete daily , attack him so bitterly that Harding once threaten to `` mop up the street '' with him if his opponent do not stop `` lying. '' The provocation must have be sever , for Harding 's method before and after be always to win his way by conciliation. Helped by His Wife in Struggles With his ability , energy and courtesy , Harding finally win the good will of the people of Marion for The Star. He devote himself to boom the town and make friend among the business men. They turn advertise his way , and at last , aid greatly by Mrs. Harding , who work with her husband in his office , The Star `` arrive '' and it editor become a power in the community. Mrs. Harding 's father be Amos Kling , a lead business man of Marion. He strongly oppose her marriage to Harding , which take place in 1891. The Star have not yet become the success it be later and Kling underestimate it proprietor. In her work for The Star , Mrs. Harding do no writing , but take up the management of the circulation and the newsboys. She literally save the penny , take the coin home with her until the collection be large enough to be banked. Warwick in a sketch of his former partner , say : `` I have see W. G. march down to the bank with a gallon of penny in either hand. I be always curious to find out how many penny make a gallon , but never find out. '' There never be a strike in the office of The Star. The employee always call Harding `` W. G. '' and esteem him a a comrade. When the paper become firmly establish , he organize a stock company , in which the permanent employee hold shares. When Harding relinquish his control of The Star , in June , 1923 , it be a prosperous newspaper , with the large circulation of any paper in a city of 30,000 in the Middle West. It have a full telegraphic service , the late type of perfect press , eight linotype machine and fifty employees. Largely through Harding 's effort , factory and railroad shop go to Marion during the year he run the paper , convert the one-time farming town into an important manufacturing city. Turned to Political Speechmaking Harding 's ability to `` talk on his foot '' probably lead to his entrance into politics , although a owner and editor of a successful paper in Ohio he would have have political influence in any event. He align himself with the Republican Party even before he be a voter and soon become a member of the Republican County Committee , at the meeting of which he be a regular attendant. He make his first political speech in the early ninety , in the hamlet of Martel , near Marion. His second speech , at Scottstown , so pleased an old Lincoln Republican that the veteran rush up to him and say : `` Young man , you have the gift of gab. Keep it up and some day you 'll be President of the United States. '' This not unusual but infrequently fulfil prediction indicate at least an appreciative auditor , and there be many who praise the young campaign speaker. His oratory attract the attention of the State Republican leader and soon he find himself bill to speak with McKinley , Foraker and other notable among the Ohio Republicans. Thus develop Harding 's close friendship for McKinley , to whom he have be so often likened. From speak for others , Harding naturally turn to speak for himself. In 1898 the voter of Hardin , Logan , Marion and Union county elect him to the State Senate , and rather against precedent he be re-elected for another term. In his first public office of consequence he perform his duty satisfactorily , but without particular distinction and continue to make friends. During this period he be particularly friendly with the Foraker faction and be class a an adherent of the then United States Senator in the bitter fight between group of Ohio Republicans. Yet , year later , when the Foraker-Standard Oil correspondence be publish , his editorial criticism of Foraker be as caustic a anything he ever printed. When his second term a State Senator have expire , Harding be elect Lieutenant Governor in 1903 on a ticket head by Myron T. Herrick , later one of his principal supporter for the Republican nomination for President. He be mention in the next State campaign a a possibility for the nomination for Governor. He decline a renomination and resume his newspaper work. Drafted a Code for Reporters Shortly afterward he formulate this newspaper creed , which be receive by every reporter on The Star : Remember there be two side to every question. Get them both. Bu truthful. Get the facts. Mistakes be inevitable , but strive for accuracy. I would rather have one story exactly right than a hundred half wrong. Be decent , be fair , be generous. Boost , do n't knock. There 's good in everybody. Bring out the good and never needlessly hurt the feeling of anybody. In report a political gathering , give the fact. Tell the story a it be , not a you would like to have it. Treat all party alike. If there be any politics to be play , we will play it in our editorial columns. Treat all religious matter reverently. If it can possibly be avoid , never bring ignominy to an innocent man , woman or child in telling of the misdeed or misfortune of a relative. Do n't wait to be ask , but do it without the asking , and above all be clean and never let a dirty word or suggestive story get into type. I want this paper so conduct that it can go into any home without destroy the innocence of any child. Rose to Victory Through Defeat In 1910 Harding receive the Republican nomination for Governor of Ohio , but be defeat by Judson Harmon , Democrat. His nomination be bring about largely by George B. Cox , Republican leader , who cause a break in a deadlock by swing his support to Harding to avert a threatened stampede for Representative Nicholas F. Longworth , son-in-law of the late Theodore Roosevelt. Harding take his defeat at the election philosophically and keep on run his newspaper. In 1912 come the split in the Republican Party and the candidacy of Roosevelt for President on the Progressive ticket. Harding make a speech renominating President Taft at the 1912 convention. In support Taft in the campaign he attack Roosevelt vigorously in his paper and on the platform. His nomination for United States Senator in 1914 come in spite of himself and almost against his wish , the situation in this respect be much the same a that precede his nomination for President. A strong element of the Republican Party ask him to be a candidate for the Senate ; but Foraker , who have be retire in 1908 by the election of a Democratic Legislature , be ambitious for a `` comeback. '' Despite difference at time , they be personal friend of long standing. Harding be so reluctant to become a candidate that he leave the State for two month on a hunting trip to Texas. The Republican leader favor him be insistent , however , and Harding on his return go to Cincinnati to see Foraker and tell him he be a candidate. Harding win the nomination by a substantial margin and be elect Senator by a plurality of 102,000 , run 73,000 ahead of the next high candidate on the ticket. His election to the Senate really mark his entrance into national politics. Before that time he be comparatively unknown outside of Ohio and it ws not until after his election that his brief biography appear in the publication , `` Who 's Who in America. '' Impressive Bearing in the Senate During his early year in the Senate , Harding occasionally attract the attention of visitor by his speeches. Handsome and large , with an impressive bearing , please voice and dignity of gesture , he make his reputation a a speaker by his effect on his audience rather than on newspaper readers. For several year after he enter the Senate he be generally overlook by the press , or receive scant attention. Senator Harding be little know to the country when he be put forward to make the `` keynote speech '' at the Republican National Convention at Chicago in 1916 , and be mention a a possible `` dark horse '' for the nomination. His friend predict that he would make a great speech , and there be even the prediction that he might repeat the feat of William J. Bryan in a Democratic convention and win the nomination by sheer power of oratory. It be no disparagement of Harding to say that his speech fell short of his friend ' expectations. It be consider an excellent speech in many way , but the task of show that President Wilson 's Administration have blunder in it dealing with Germany without give to understand that the Republican Party intend to reverse that policy by go to war prove too difficult. Like Hughes , nominate a little later a the candidate for President , Harding fail to outline the Republican policy boldly or clearly. He receive a few vote in the convention , but the lack of definiteness in his `` keynote speech '' prevent him from become a Presidential possibility that year , although he strike accurately the keynote of the oratory that mark the subsequent losing Republican campaign. Supporter of War Measures Once the country be at war , Senator Harding be a strong advocate of all war measure , a supporter of President Wilson 's war policy and a critic of obstructionists. He be impatient of all legislative delay in carry out war policies. In an interview in The New York Times of Aug. 12 , 1917 , he say that the United States be drift toward a war dictatorship and that he favor it. When he be ask if this be not an un- American idea , he say : `` Whether it be or be not American , it will be make American once the condition be an establish fact , but at the same time let me answer your question more fairly by a short glance at our history a I see it. While I be neither historian nor constitutional lawyer , it appear to me that the experience of the founder of our nationality , George Washington , have convince himself that in time of national crisis supreme power should be vest in one head and that all responsibility as well a all power should be vest there. In his matchless vision , Hamilton saw the necessity of such provision and his influence in the drafting of the Constitution , exert through Washington , be such that every avenue be open for cast to one man in a crisis all the power. '' Coming down to a discussion of Civil War day , Senator Harding continue : `` During the early day and in fact during the first two year of the Civil War , the Congress in the North be rent with disagreement and dissension and it be only the logic of event combine with the perception generally of the unparalleled character of Mr. Lincoln that power be place more and more in the hand of the President , until toward the close of the war Congress as well a the Cabinet have all but abdicate in favor of the one man who have prove himself to be a safe dictator for the destiny of the nation. '' Signed Senatorial Round Robin Once the war be over , Senator Harding , like the majority of his Republican colleague in the Senate , align himself against the policy of President Wilson , although in not so extreme a manner a some of them. He be one of the thirty-seven Senators who sign the famous `` round robin '' notify the world that they disapprove the way President Wilson be tie up the League of Nations with the Peace Treaty. He vote for , or be pair with Senator Underwood in favor of , every one of the reservation to the League Covenant propose by Senator Lodge. `` I think that as originally negotiate it be the colossal blunder of all time , '' Senator Harding say in a speech in the Senate referring to the Peace Treaty , `` but , recognize the aspiration of our own people and the people of the world to do something toward international co-operation for the promotion and preservation of peace and a good understanding between nation , I have wish to make it possible to accept this Covenant. I could , however , no more vote to ratify this treaty without reservation which make sure America 's independence of action , which make sure the preservation of American tradition , which make sure and certain our freedom in choose our course of action , than I could participate in a knowing betrayal of this Republic. `` I welcome the moment we can go to the people of the United States on the issue a to who be responsible therefor [ refer to the treaty ] . I speak a one who be old-fashioned enough to believe that the Government of the United States of American be good enough for me. '' Senator Harding vote for the submission of both the prohibition and the woman suffrage amendments. On most measure come before the Senate he vote with the majority of his party. He make a speech occasionally in the Senate and speak more frequently at dinner and other gathering throughout the country. By 1920 , five year after he have enter the Senate , he be on friendly term with all the Senate leader and like by all the Senators. He be a friend of every member of the so- call `` Senatorial group '' in the Republican Party , but be by no mean consider a leader of that group. Helped by Daugherty in 1920 So far a the public know this be Senator Harding 's position in the Republican Party , when Harry M. Daugherty , later Attorney General in President Harding 's Cabinet , undertake the campaign which be to get him the Republican nomination and elect him to the White House. A close friend of Harding and an astute politician , Daugherty begin a quest for delegate to the Republican National Convention and for support from the party leader and business interests. Looking back at the situation , it be evident now that Senator Harding be always a formidable `` dark horse '' candidate , but the activity of the friend and supporter of General Wood and Governor Lowden force him into the background in the early stage of the campaign for the nomination , which be not an unfavorable position in a Presidential race. As early a January , 1920 , the report be current that Senator Harding have formidable backing. A few month later , Daugherty in an interview make his remarkable prediction that the convention would be deadlocked , that a little group of men would gather in a hotel room at 2 o'clock in the morning to pick the candidate and that Harding would be named. In undoubted realization of the potential strength of Harding the friend of General Wood decide to make a fight for delegate in Ohio in defiance of the political custom which permit a candidate to have the vote of his own State , at least on the early ballot , a a `` favorite son. '' The Wood supporter fail to carry the State for their candidate , but do succeed in get approximately one-quarter of the Congressional district and in defeat Daugherty for delegate-at-large. This division of the Ohio delegation be generally consider to weaken Harding 's chance greatly. It need a `` break '' of some sort to overcome that handicap. The break be forthcoming when a Senate investigating committee which be aim to uncover huge campaign expenditure by the Wood force disclose that supporter of Governor Lowden have pay money to certain party leader and delegate in Missouri. Although Governor Lowden have no knowledge of the matter , there be a feeling among the leader at the convention that this might weaken him a a candidate and he withdraw after a conference of his supporter have acquiesce in this judgment. Strong opposition have develop in the meantime to General Wood , and , although he be the leading candidate at the start , it become evident that he would not be able to get a majority. The switch of the Lowden delegate , or most of them , to Harding , follow a conference in Colonel George Harvey 's hotel room , at which a decision be reach much along the line predict by Daugherty , settle the contest. Nominated on the Tenth Ballot Harding be nominate for President on the tenth ballot , receive 692 1/2 vote to 156 for General Wood , 11 for Governor Lowden , 80 1/2 for Senator Hiram Johnson and scatter vote for Governor Coolidge of Massachusetts , later nominate for Vice President ; Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler , Herbert Hoover , Will H. Hays , then the Republican National Chairman , and Senators La Follette and Lenroot. Senator Harding , accord to close friend , originally have little hope of get the Presidential nomination. His personal preference be for renomination for Senator -- his term end that year -- and he tell Daugherty , when the latter first suggest that he become a candidate for President , that he could not get the nomination and that the result would be that he would necessarily lose the nomination for the Senate. Several time Senator Harding be report to be on the verge of withdraw a a candidate for President , but be prevail upon by Mr. Daugherty to remain in the race. Shortly after the convention Senator Harding tell a newspaper reporter that he have but small hope of get the nomination until the night before it be decide and that it be make possible only by the deadlock of Wood , Lowden and Johnson. `` With Wood , Johnson and Lowden out of the way , '' Senator Harding say , in tell of his feel the night before the nomination , `` I know I could count on friend in every one of their delegation , because I have follow in my pre-convention campaign the rule that have guide me throughout my political career , which be not to hurt any one 's feeling or to step on anybody 's toe if I could find foot room elsewhere. I figure that if politeness and an honest desire not to humiliate any rival just for the sake of win a few vote be ever go to produce anything , this be the time. Other fellow , just as competent a I , or more so , have make enemy , and it look to me that there be no one in sight that the convention could unite on except myself. '' Campaign Fight Over League The reaction against President Wilson and the League of Nations , the flame of which be fan by the Republican leader , be at it height. Senator Harding for the most part remain at his home in Marion and conduct a `` front porch '' campaign by speech to visit delegations. The policy of the Republican campaign management be to `` play safe , '' and Senator Harding 's speech indicate an acquiescence in that policy. Perhaps his great difficulty during the campaign -- certainly the great difficulty of his campaign manager -- be his attitude toward the League of Nations. A group of influential Republicans , among whom be Mr. Hughes , Mr. Hoover , George W. Wickersham , formerly Attorney General , and others , be for some form of participation by the United States in international work for peace. The `` bitter-enders , '' head vocally by Senators Hiram Johnson and William E. Borah , but include also a number of Senators class a belonging to the `` Old Guard , '' be oppose to any such participation. It be Senator Harding 's task to hold between the two. Mr. Harding do this. He advance the idea of an association of nation , in which the right of independent action of the United States should be preserve , a a substitute for the League of Nations , and declare that in his opinion an international court of justice , subsequently embody in the World Court proposal , be the cornerstone of any international effort to promote peace. Efforts be make to commit Senator Harding to the League idea. Pro-League Republicans express confidence that he would advocate some form of international co- operation , if elect , and a committee of distinguished Republicans issue a statement to that effect. The candidate , however , do not commit himself to these statement and recently have occasion to say that he could not be responsible for view express by anybody but himself. Added to other factor in shape the result of the election be a certain resentment against war taxation and the cost of living , which necessarily operate against the party in power. All these thing contribute to give Senator Harding a popular majority of more than 7,000,000 over Governor James M. Cox , a fellow-Ohioan , the Democratic nominee , and a majority in the Electoral College of 177. Assuming office on March 4 , 1921 , with the prestige of his great popular majority , President Harding find a task of many difficulty confront him. The Government office be overmanned with employee leave over from the war period , tax be high and the cost of Government have mount tremendously from that of prewar days. Work of Arms Conference The outstanding feature of the Harding Administration during the first two year and a half of it existence be undoubtedly the Conference for the Limitation of Armament , during the Winter of 1921-22. Nine nation -- the United States , Great Britain , France , Italy , Belgium , the Netherlands , Portugal , Japan and China -- participated. An agreement be reach for the limitation of naval armament on the basis of a ratio of 5-5-3 on the part of the three great naval power , the United States , Great Britain and Japan , and a treaty be adopt adjust the situation in the Pacific in a way to remove the likelihood of conflict. In other matter the President have less success , due largely to Congress and the development of bloc and group in the Republican majority in both house , which destroy the solidarity of party action. A beginning be make in the revision of the tax system , of which there have be widespread criticism. A budget system be established. The Fordney-McCumber Tariff law , base upon the protective principle , be subject to much public criticism. The President 's veto of the Bonus bill stir up political antagonism against him. The result of the election in the last two year indicate a resentment against the Republican national organization , believe to be control by the `` Old Guard '' element of the party , and naturally lessen the vote-getting strength of the party , although Mr. Harding retain much of his personal popularity. While the Republicans retain their majority in the House of Representatives in the 1922 election , it be so greatly reduce a to give a strong indication of a decided trend away from the party in power. The election of Shipstead and Magnus Johnson to the Senate indicate that the West be turn from Republicanism. The threat of a third party be believe to come largely from popular belief that the Administration have fail to do what have be expect in relieve the burden of the farmer and wage earners. In his attempt to find a solution of international problem , President Harding find strong opposition in his own party. His recommendation that the United States join the permanent Court of International Justice , which be already function at The Hague , be attack by Senator Hiram Johnson , Senator Borah and other irreconcilables , and the discussion revive many of the old animosity and prejudice which characterize the debate over the League of Nations. In his speech at St. Louis , at the beginning of his Alaskan trip , President Harding defend his suggestion for the participation of the United States in the World Court and declare that the League issue be dead. He say : `` If the country have desire to join the League , in 1920 it have it opportunity. It most emphatically refused. It would refuse again , no less decisively , today. In the face of the overwhelming verdict of 1920 , therefore , the issue of the League of Nations be as dead a slavery. Is it not the part of wisdom and common sense to let it rest in the deep grave to which it have be consign and turn our thought to live thing ? '' Referring to the World Court , the President say : `` But let there be no misunderstanding. I do not say three year ago , and I do not say now , that there be no element in the League organization which might be use advantageously in strive to establish helpful , practical cooperation among the nation of the earth. On the contrary , I recognize generally then , and perceive more precisely now , rudiment of good in both the League and The Hague Tribunal. `` Having mark the fundamental difference between a Court of International Justice , which I espouse , and the Council set up by the League Covenant , which I disapprove , a 'the difference between a government of law and a government of men , ' I say plainly on Aug. 28 , 1920 : 'I would take and combine all that be good and excise all that be bad from both organizations. ' `` That be what I be now propose to do. The abstract principle of a World Court find it genesis in The Hague Tribunal. The concrete application of that principle have be make by the League. Sound theory and admirable practice have be join successfully. The court itself be not only firmly establish , but have clearly demonstrate it utility and efficiency. '' Attractive Personal Traits President Harding have be refer to a a man of engage personal quality , who have make no distinct achievement before he become President. Much have be write about his be a representative of `` Main Street. '' He be a resident of a `` small town '' a reckon by citizen of New York , Chicago and other large city , but his success before he enter public life be substantial. A trait that endear President Harding to million of his fellow countryman be a certain quality of homeliness. This be the quality that make him like by his fellow townsman , Democrats as well a Republicans , and the President know no politics where his personal relation with his neighbor be concerned. His secretary , George B. Christian , be a Democrat. Perhaps President Harding 's happy faculty in keep apart his personal and political relation be never show good than in his letter to Senator Pat Harrison of Mississippi , a Democratic leader , thank him for an article in which Senator Harrison have refer in a complimentary way to President and Mrs. Harding and have write with delicacy and feel concern a visit of the President 's father , a Union veteran , to a reunion of Confederate veteran in New Orleans. In a letter to Senator Harrison President Harding say : `` I have just be read the article which you contribute to The New Orleans Item of May 5 , in which you make very please reference to the participation of my father in the Confederate reunion in New Orleans. I be write to thank you for the kindly thing you have say concern him and his visit , and the courteous reference you have make to the present resident of the White House. `` In your capacity of chief trouble maker in the Senate you have say some thing which have make me lay down my newspaper and turn to a fresh pipe of tobacco for consolation. This very generous an considerate article have antidoted all the thing which have go before. You will be interested to know that my father be very greatly please by the article and that he have the time of his life in meet the Confederate veteran at New Orleans. '' The Only Baptist President Mr. Harding be the only Baptist President. For many year he be a member of and for the latter year of his residence there a Trustee of Trinity Baptist Church , Marion , Ohio. Sunday morning , if he be in town , find Mr. Harding regularly in his pew. When Mr. Harding go to Washington a Senator from Ohio he and Mrs. Harding begin attend Calvary Baptist Church there. They continue this when Mr. Harding become President. The Rev. Dr. William S. Abernathy , pastor of Calvary Church , and Mr. Harding be close personal friends. It be Dr. Abernathy who , on invitation of the President , offer the opening prayer at the Conference on the Limitation of Armament. This prayer subsequently provoke criticism because it do not contain the name of Christ. Mr. Harding 's Marion pastor die on July 20 , last. He be the Rev. Dr. Thomas H. McAfee. Because of ill-health he be pastor emeritus. When Dr. McAfee be stricken Mr. Harding come forward and pledge the salary of a new pastor so that Dr. McAfee might retain the title and receive compensation. This Mr. Harding continue to pay. Dr. McAfee be stricken in July , 1920 , only a few day before he be to have take part in the ceremony in which Mr. Harding be officially notify of his candidacy. The pastor never recovered. Recently the third congress of the Baptist World Alliance in Stockholm , Sweden , send a message of greet `` To the President of the United States , his Excellency , Warren G. Harding. '' The Northern Baptist Convention be to have meet last June in Washington , that city be choose because the President be a Baptist , and Mr. Harding be to have deliver an address to it. The convention vote a year ago in Indianapolis to meet the follow June in Washington. This be on the invitation of Dr. Abernathy. But the hall in which the convention be to have be hold could not be finish in time , and late in the year the meeting place be switch to Atlantic City. President Harding have accept an invitation to preside at the World Conference on Faith and Order which be schedule to be hold in Washington , probably in May , 1925. Bishop William T. Manning be one of those who issue the invitation. Mr. Harding number many clergyman of different denomination among his intimate friends. One of these be Bishop William F. Anderson , resident Methodist Bishop in Cincinnati .