November 1 , 1926 OBITUARY Harry Houdini Dies After Operations Special to The New York Times DETROIT , Oct. 31. -- Harry Houdini , world famous a a magician , a defier of lock and sealed chest and an exposer of spiritualist fraud , die here this afternoon after a week 's struggle for life , in which he undergo two operations. Death be due to peritonitis , which follow the first operation , that for appendicitis. The second operation be perform last Friday. Like a newly discover serum , use for the first time in Houdini 's case , it be of no avail. The chapter of accident which end fatally for the man who so often have seem to thousand to be cheat the very jaw of death begin early in October at Albany , N. Y. On the opening night of his engagement at a theatre there a piece of apparatus use in his `` water torture cell '' trick be overturn and strike him on the foot. Houdini call a physician from the audience , have his foot examine and then complete his performance. Afterward he go to a hospital and have the injured foot X-rayed. Appendicitis Follows Blow A bone be find to be partly fracture and Houdini be advise to discontinue his tour a few day and give prompt attention and plenty of rest to the injured foot. He decline to cancel his engagement , however , and do not miss a show. From Albany he and his company go to Schenectady. Houdini be suffer continuous pain and return to Albany for several treatments. By the time he leave Schenectady for Montreal his whole system be in a weakened condition. On Tuesday , Oct. 19 , while in Montreal he address a class of student on spiritualistic tricks. During a reception follow the address he comment on the strength of his stomach muscle and their ability to withstand hard blow without injury. One of the student without warn or give time for Houdini to prepare struck him twice immediately over his appendix. He suffer no distress at the time but after he have board a train for Detroit he complain of pain. At first he attribute it to something he have eat but a it increase he call in the company 's nurse , who in turn arrange by wire to have a physician meet the magician in Detroit. Dr. Leo Kretzka , a prominent physician , make a hurried examination and tell the patient there be symptom of appendicitis. He leave it to Houdini to decide whether it would be advisable for him to appear that even at the Garrick Theatre for the opening night of the show. Houdini would not disappoint his admirers. Looking back on that last performance , the large audience now realize that the famous magician do his trick under a great strain. He felt the grip of bond he have never test , the snap of a lock not forge by human hands. He be worry for one of the few time in his career and be plainly not up to his best form in some of his tricks. Conscious Until Death At his hotel after the performance the pain increased. The house physician and the best Detroit could furnish be called. Houdini be take to Gray Hospital and the following afternoon undergo an operation for appendicitis. His removal from the hotel to the hospital be make at the suggestion of his family physician , William Stone of New York City , who have be notify by telephone of his friend 's condition. Until his death Houdini be conscious and his mind be keen and alert. The physician who attend him say he be the best patient they ever have , and he help them wonderfully. His mental attitude , combine with his unusual stamen , do much to prolong his life. According to statement make by the physician , the playful punch he receive in Montreal be the direct cause of Houdini 's death , for one of the blow cause the appendix to burst , saturate his system with poison. Streptococcus peritonitis , which develop soon after the operation last Monday , seriously complicate the case. This be a particularly virulent form of poisoning , and few case be know to the medical profession where person suffer from it have recovered. The body will leave Detroit for New York in a special car Monday evening , arrive in New York Tuesday morning about 9 o'clock. Houdini World Famous No Locks Could Hold Him -- Foe of Mediums Whatever the method by which Harry Houdini deceive a large part of the world for nearly four decade , his career stamp him a one of the great showman of modern times. In his special field of entertainment he stand alone. With a few minor exception , he invent all his trick and illusion , and in certain instance only his four intimate helper know the solution. In one or two very important case Houdini , himself , alone know the whole secret. Houdini be bear on March 24 , 1874. His name originally be Eric Weiss and he be the son of a rabbi. He do not take the name Harry Houdini until he have be a performer for many years. Legend have it that he open his first lock when he want a piece of pie in the kitchen closet. It be certain that when scarcely more than a baby he show skill a an acrobat and contortionist , and both these talent help his start in the show business and his later development a an `` escape king. '' Joined Circus at 9 At the age of 9 Houdini join a travel circus , tour Wisconsin a a contortionist and trapeze performer. The Davenport brother be then famous , do the first spiritualist work ever see in this country. They would ring bell while bound inside a cabinet and would agree to free themselves from any bonds. This inspire Houdini to a somewhat similar performance. Standing in the middle of the ring , he would invite any one to tie him with rope and would then free himself inside the cabinet. In the ring at Coffeyville , Kan. , a Sheriff tie him and then produce a pair of handcuff with the taunt : `` If I put these on you , you 'll never get loose. '' Houdini , still only a boy , tell him to go ahead. After a much long stay in the cabinet than usual , the performer emerge , carry the handcuff in his free hands. That be the beginning of his long series of escape from every know sort of manacle. For year he call himself the Handcuff King , a title discard a he extend and elevate the range of his performances. From 1885 to 1900 he play all over the United States , in museum , music hall , circus , and medicine show , gradually improve his technique and give up his purely contortionistic and acrobatic feats. In 1900 he make his first visit abroad , and in London his sensational escape from handcuff at Scotland Yard win him a six month engagement at the Alhambra. This be the first instance of his cleverly obtain notoriety by a public or semi-public exhibition outside the theatre. No other showman , unless it be Barnum , know well how to arouse the curiosity and amazement of the public in this manner. Escaped From Dozens of Prisons During a six-year tour of the Continent he escape from dozen of famous prisons. In the Krupp plant at Essen he meet the challenge of the workman and free himself from expertly construct shackle before 70,000 persons. He return to America to find his fame greatly increase and a newly organize vaudeville ready to pay him many time his old salary. He continue his prison escape over here and in January , 1902 , break from Cell 2 in the Federal prison at Washington , the cell in which Guiteau , President Garfield 's assassin , have be confined. In 1908 Houdini drop the handcuff trick for more dangerous and dramatic escape , include one from an air-tight galvanized vessel , fill with water , lock in an iron- bound chest. And he would free himself from the so-called torture cell , his own invention. In this he be suspend , head down , in a tank of water. To thrill the general public he would hang from the roof of a skyscraper , bound in a strait-jacket , from which he would wriggle free to the applause of the crowd in the street below. Thrown from a boat or bridge into a river , bound hand and foot and lock and nail in a box , doom to certain death by drown or suffocation , he would emerge in a minute or so , a free man , swim vigorously to safety. In the last twenty year Houdini make many long tour , play in nearly every important city in Europe , Asia , Africa and Australia. Occasionally others would attempt to imitate him , but his supremacy never be remotely threatened. An evidence of the deep impression his work make on the public mind be the fact that the Standard Dictionary now contain a verb , `` houdinize , '' mean `` to release or extricate oneself ( from confinement , bond , or the like ) , a by wriggle out. '' A slang dictionary probably would list the expression , `` do a Houdini , '' with a similar meaning. Owned Valuable Library During the last few year Houdini have become internationally know a a tireless enemy and exposer of fraudulent medium and all false claim in the field of spiritualism. He be a member of The Scientific American committee that investigate Margery , the Boston medium , whom he denounce in vigorous language. He be the author of `` Spooks and Spiritualism , '' `` The Unmasking of Robert Houdin , '' `` Handcuff Secrets , '' and `` Rope Ties and Escapes. '' At his home , 278 West 113th Street , he possess a remarkable library , chiefly devote to work on the theatre , to magic and the black arts. The collection have be value at $ 500,000 and be insure for $ 350,000. Most of it have be will to the National Museum at Washington. In July , 1926 , Houdini be elect for the ninth successive time President of the Society of American Magicians. He also be President of the Magicians ' Club of London and a life member of the Authors ' Club of London. He marry in 1894 Wilhelmina Rahner of Brooklyn. He be a member of St. Cecile Lodge No. 568 , F. & A. M. Bizarre Experiences Told by Houdini Tricked Roosevelt on River of Doubt -- Had Four `` Close-Ups With Death '' Few men could relate more interesting anecdote and experience than Harry Houdini. He be fond of tell how he beguile the late Theodore Roosevelt and the late Victor Herbert on a voyage to Europe aboard the Imperator. Colonel Roosevelt have just return from his exploration of the River of Doubt in Brazil. `` I be ask to give an entertainment , '' Houdini would relate , `` and the subject of spirit write come up. A number of other well-known men be present , all of them have intelligence of a high order. Certainly it be not a credulous audience. I offer to summon the spirit and have them answer any question that might be asked. `` Roosevelt want to know if they could tell him where he have spend Christmas Day. I have a slate with the usual covering and in a few moment bring forth a map , do in a dozen different color of chalk , which indicate the spot where he have be on the famous River of Doubt. That map be an exact duplicate of one that be to appear in his book which have not be published. I have never see the map and , to make my case strong , the name of W. T. Stead , the English spiritualist and writer who lose his life on the Titanic , be sign below the map in a handwriting which one man present instantly recognize a that of Stead. And I might add that I be unfamiliar with Stead 's signature. Colonel Roosevelt Dumfounded `` Roosevelt be dumfounded. `` 'Is it really spirit write ? ' he asked. `` 'Yes , ' I reply with a wink. '' Of course , Houdini never explain how the trick be do , at least to the public. The magician try his hand at the medium business in his early day in Kansas and use to tell in this wise how he prepare for one of his first seance : `` I have go around to the cemetery and read all of the inscription on tombstone , look over a few birth and death record and acquire a lot of information from the gossips. When the time arrive for my act I puzzle the crowd by give particular of birth and death in half of the family of the town. Gradually I work up to a climax , exclaiming : `` 'Now what do I see ? What be this come before me ? Why , it be a man -- a black man. He 's lame -- and his throat be cut from ear to ear. Who be this man ? -- why , I know him ; he be Efram -- Efram Alexander. ' The negro at the meeting desert in a body with shriek because they recognize a negro who have be kill recently. '' For thirty-three year Houdini try to solve the mystery of spiritism. He tell friend he be ready to believe , be anxious to believe , because he would find joy in proof that he could communicate with his father , mother and friend who have pass on. He have agree with friend and acquaintance , number hundred , that the first to die be to try to communicate from the spirit world to the world of reality. Fourteen of those friend have die , but none have ever give a sign , he said. Anxious for Spirit Messages `` One of those pledge , '' Houdini once tell , `` be with my secretary , John W. Sargent , one of those who expose Palladino in this city. Our relation be most intimate. He die and I have not hear from him. Such an agreement I make with both my parents. They die and I have not hear from them. I think once I saw my mother in a vision , but I now believe it be imagination. `` Another thing that seem almost supernatural to me occur at the death of William Berol , a mystifier and close friend of mine. We have work together on the stage and have a private telegraphic code for signal messages. We make a compact that the first who die should use that code to communicate with the other. At his deathbed I hold Berol 's hand. He have be unconscious for some time. He show no outward sign of a return to consciousness. His eye remain closed. But just a he pass away I could feel his hand make a faint pressure upon mine. That be repeat at interval and I could recognize that the man who seem unconscious and at death 's door be talk to me in code. I receive and understand his message. But I hold it sacred and have never repeat it. '' Houdini count that he have have `` four close-ups with death '' in his career of more than thirty year a a mystifier. The closest be in California , where he risk his life on a bet and not a a public performance. Seven year ago in Los Angeles he make a wager that he could free himself from a six-foot grave into which he be to be bury after be manacled. He have first accustom himself to the sensation of burial by more shallow interments. Scare Nearly Cost Life `` The knowledge that I be six foot under the sod give me the first thrill of horror I have ever experience , '' Houdini be wont to say in telling of his hair-raising escape. `` The momentary scare , the irretrievable mistake of all daredevil , nearly cost me my life , for it cause me to waste a fraction of breath when every fraction be need to pull through. I have keep the sand loose about my body so that I could work dexterously. I did. But a I claw and kneed the earth my strength begin to fail. Then I make another mistake. I yelled. Or , at least , I attempt to , and the last remnant of my self-possession leave me. Then instinct step in to the rescue. With my last reserve strength I fight through , more sand than air enter my nostrils. The sunlight come like a blinding blessing , and my friend about the grave say that , chalky pale and wild-eyed a I be , I present a perfect imitation of a dead man rising. `` The next time I be bury it will not be alive if I can help it. '' But Houdini do later permit himself to be `` bury alive '' in a hermetically seal casket of zinc which be submerge in a pool at a New York hotel. He remain there for more than an hour and a half , better the record of the Egyptian fakir , Rahmin Bey. When there be talk of a `` return '' submergence contest between the magician and the fakir , Houdini make preparation to defend his title with all the care that he be wont to exercise in work up his baffling feats. He begin to cancel engagement that conflict with a period of training he map out for himself. `` I ca n't dine with you this afternoon at 6 o'clock because I have to go down at 5 , '' say Houdini to a friend. Houdini go `` down '' or submerge in his sealed casket for half an hour daily. Friends of the showman say yesterday that he have develop a dislike for be call by his first name , Harry. He always wish to be call Houdini and dislike the prefix , Mr .