June 11 , 1927 OBITUARY Victoria Martin , Suffragist , Dies By THE NEW YORK TIMES LONDON , June 10 -- Mrs. Victoria Claflin Woodhull Martin , nominee for the United States Presidency in 1872 and donor of Sulgrave Manor , home of Washington 's ancestor in England , to the Anglo-American Association , die in her sleep here last night at her home , Norton Park , Tewksbury , at the age of 80. London newspaper all contain long obituary notice of Mrs. Martin , who have be know in this country chiefly a one of the donor of Sulgrave Manor. The Morning Post observe editorially : `` There go to her long rest a veteran who live to see the triumph of a cause for which she be one of the first to contend. Mrs. Martin clear the way for leader of agitation for equal political right alike in America , this country and elsewhere. The young generation know not the indomitable leader to whom their enfranchisement owe so much. She it be who blaze the trail for those more insurgent leader who finally win victory. Mrs. Martin have reside in England since her marriage to John Biddulph Martin , note banker and philanthropist. In her adopted country she continue the work in behalf of woman 's suffrage , for which she have become know throughout the United States. She also be one of the most active worker in England for the promotion of friendly relation between that country and her native land. Born in Homer , Ohio , Sept. 23 , 1838 , Mrs. Martin be the daughter of Reuben and Roxanna Claflin. Her sister , Tennie C. Claflin , who become Lady Cook , die in January , 1923. As a young woman Mrs. Martin engage in the banking business for a short time in New York and also be editor of Woodhull & Claflin 's Weekly. A Pioneer Suffragist Early in life she become an ardent advocate of woman suffrage , and her lecture favor the movement take her to all part of the United States. She also lecture on the scientific and religious improvement of the human race and be the author of work deal with both subjects. Mrs. Martin memorialize Congress in behalf of woman suffrage in 1870 and two year later be the candidate of the Equal Rights Party for the Presidency of the United States. She organize various convention for the discussion of social reform and carry on propaganda work in the interest of the working class both in the United States and Europe for more than thirty years. After the death in 1873 of her first husband , Dr. Canning Woodhull , Mrs. Martin go to Europe for a speaking tour. At one of her lecture in old St. James 's Hall she meet Mr. Martin , and their marriage followed. He die in 1897. Since then Mrs. Martin have devote much of her time and have spend liberally of her fortune in all project to cement the friendship between her native and adopt countries. A Leader in Sulgrave Movement Mrs. Martin be a move spirit in the purchase of Sulgrave Manor and be a generous contributor to the fund raise for it purchase. In recent year , especially since the granting of woman suffrage both in the United States and England , she have live in almost complete retirement. Her gift in 1922 of an ancient English manor to the British Sulgrave Institution bring Mrs. Martin before the public again , the occasion be take by newspaper on both side of the Atlantic to review the more important event of her active life. The manor , give by Mrs. Martin in recognition of the success attend the effort to promote Anglo-American friendship , be build in 1531 , and be on the Avon , forty mile from Sulgrave Manor. The relic contain in the house be say to be value at more than $ 80,000. Author of Several Works Some year ago Mrs. Martin establish in London the Humanitarian Magazine , which she edit in cooperation with her daughter , Zula Maud Woodhull , an author of note. Mrs. Martin be the author of `` The Origin , Tendencies and Principles of Government , '' `` Social Freedom , '' `` Pharmacy of the Soul , '' `` Aristocracy of Blood , '' `` Garden of Eden Stirpicultures , '' `` Rapid Multiplication of the Unfits '' and `` Arguments for Woman 's Electoral Rights. '' She be one of the organizer of the Women 's Aerial League of England. In February , 1914 , on behalf of the league she offer a prize of $ 5,000 and a trophy for the first aviator who would make a flight across the Atlantic in either direction between any point on the American continent and the British Isles .