February 28 , 1928 OBITUARY Y.W.C.A. Leader , Mabel Cratty , Dies By THE NEW YORK TIMES Miss Mabel Cratty , for the last twenty-two year General Secretary of the National Board , Young Women 's Christian Association , at 600 Lexington Avenue , die yesterday morning of pneumonia in the Rockefeller Institute Hospital , Avenue A and Sixty-sixth Street , after eight day ' illness. Her age be 60. Miss Cratty a General Secretary direct the work of 110 woman secretary in thirteen foreign country and the 1,300 association in the United States , with a membership of more than 600,000. When she take charge of the work , in 1906 , there be only about ten worker and their activity be direct from one room. Last July Miss Cratty be a member of a group of university Presidents , labor leader , financier , churchman and diplomat from the United States and Canada that attend the international conference of the Institute of Pacific Relations hold in Honolulu. She be a member , in 1922 , of the John D. Rockefeller Jr. party which tour the Orient for four months. Miss Cratty be bear in Bellaire , Ohio , in 1868 , the daughter of Harold and Mary Cratty. She be a niece of the late Bishop James M. Thoburn of India. She be educate in the public school and Ohio Wesleyan University , graduate from the university in 1890. Her alma mater honor her with the Doctor of Laws degree in 1922. On leave the university Miss Cratty become a public school teacher. From 1900 to 1904 she be principal of the high school in Delaware , Ohio. In 1906 , two year after enter Y. W. C. A. work in Chicago , Miss Cratty become secretary of the newly create National Board of the Y. W. C. A. Besides occupy that position , Miss Cratty have serve on the following commission and organization : National Social Work Council , Council of Christian Associations , National Council Committee to Study Relations Between the Y. W C. A. and the Council of Church , World Committee of the Y. W. C. A. , World Student Christian Federation and the National Committee on the Cause and Cure of War. Miss Cratty live at 547 Riverside Drive. She be survive by a sister , Anna , of this city , and a brother , Donald , of Cincinnati. Funeral service will be hold at 4 P.M. today in the assembly hall of the National Board , 600 Lexington Avenue. Burial will be in Bellaire .