PARIS , July 4. -- Mme. Marie Curie , whose work alone and with her husband on radium and radiology have be one of the great glory of modern science , die at 6 o'clock this morning in a sanitarium near Sallanches in Upper Savoy. Her death , which be cause by a form of pernicious anemia , be hasten by what her physician term `` a long accumulation of radiation '' which affect the bone and prevent her from react normally to the disease. Mme. Curie go to Sallanches last Friday after have be for five week in a Paris clinic. It be think at first that she have suffer a lung ailment and for that reason she be send to the mountains. Her death come a a surprise to all but her family and intimate friend , for the rare modesty of her character never desert her and she do not allow the public to know how ill she was. Her daughter , Eve , who be a dramatist and pianist of considerable talent , and Mme. Jolliot , who with her husband be carry on the family tradition at the radium institute over which her mother preside , be at the bedside when the end came. The funeral Thursday will be strictly private in accordance with Mme. Curie 's express wishes. However , it be possible that the government will , on the occasion of her burial in Paris Cemetery beside her husband , take advantage of the opportunity to pay France 's homage to her adopt daughter. Few person contribute more to the general welfare of mankind and to the advancement of science than the modest , self-effacing woman whom the world know a Mme. Curie. Her epoch-making discovery of polonium and radium , the subsequent honor that be bestow upon her -- she be the only person to receive two Nobel prize -- and the fortune that could have be hers have she want them do not change her mode of life. She remain a worker in the cause of science , prefer her laboratory to a great social place in the sun. The road which she and her husband have choose she follow throughout her life , disdain all pomp. And thus she not only conquered great secret of science but the heart of the people the world over. Mme. Curie be one of many illustrious person who come from Poland to settle elsewhere , such a Frederic Chopin , the Potockis and Joseph Conrad. Her father be a distinguished scientist and from him she receive her early training in Warsaw. She become involve in the student ' revolutionary organization , however , and find it advisable to leave the country. Years later she return to open the radioactivity laboratory in Warsaw ; she have always have the longing of the nostalgic for her native land , and she give the $ 50,000 which she have receive from American admirer in 1929 for research work in the city of her birth. Earnestness of purpose and total disregard of personal gain be two of her main characteristics. She sum up her biography in twenty-one word when interview some year ago. `` I be bear in Poland , '' she said. `` I marry Pierre Curie , and I have two daughters. I have do my work in France. '' Mme. Curie be engross in her research work. Her other great interest in life be her little family. The tragic death of her husband -- he be run over and kill by a heavy dray in Paris on April 19 , 1906 -- serve to make her even more of a recluse from the world. Their marriage have be happy and they have share the honor and glory of discover radium after year of patient research work. Of those year Paul Appell , president of the Academy of Paris , write a follow : `` M. and Mme. Curie , not be able to pursue their chemical experiment in a schoolroom which have be place at their disposal , arrange for these in a sort of abandon warehouse opposite their atelier. In this place , with it asphalt floor , it broken and patched glass roof , hot in Summer , heat by a cast-iron stove in Winter , they perform their wonderful work. `` The equipment consist of some old and worn deal table , upon which Mme. Curie prepare the material for the production of radium. She be laboratory chief assistant and handy boy at the same time. In addition to her intellectual labor it be frequently necessary for her to perform severe manual toil. On many an afternoon she stir in a great caldron with a heavy iron rod the molten mass of the radioactive product , reach home at even exhaust by fatigue but delight to see that her labor have lead to a luminous product of concentration. '' After the discovery of the radioactive property of uranium by Henri Becquerel in 1896 M. and Mme. Curie begin their research into radioactivity , and in 1898 obtained polonium and radium from pitchblende , which they have subject to a very laborious process of fractionation. The announcement come from that little ill-equipped laboratory on Dec. 26 , 1898. The Curies inform the Academy of Sciences that they have discover a new and remarkable substance to which they propose to give the name of radium. Today there stand in Paris the Curie Laboratory at the Radium Institute of the University of Paris. Today the many us of radium be known. Thousands have be cure of cancer and other disease by radium. Five year after their discovery of radium the Curies receive the Nobel Prize for physic , divide it with Becquerel. In 1911 Mme. Curie receive the Nobel Prize for chemistry. Honors be heap upon her , but she be indifferent to most. The money she receive from her prize be immediately use for purpose of scientific research. In 1919 one gram of radium , value at $ 100,000 , be present to Mme. Curie a the gift of the people of the United States. In 1929 she receive the money with which to purchase another gram of the precious substance , the presentation be make by President Hoover. Mme. Curie continue her frugal and active life , reside with her two daughter and shun notoriety of any form. Already a a child she have be extremely studious , and be the chief assistant of her father , Dr. Ladislas Sklodowski , scientist and teacher at the Lycee of Warsaw. Her mother , Bronsitawa Boguska , be principal of a girl ' school. Marie Sklodowska be bear on Nov. 7 , 1867. As a child she play with test tube and crucible and she be later a brilliant student. When she become involved in political difference she go first to Cracow , then under Austrian rule , and later to Paris , where she obtain a science degree at the university. At the Sorbonne she meet Pierre Curie , a young physic instructor. They work together , have common interest , and in 1895 they be married. Mme. Curie become a teacher of physic at a girl ' school at Sevres. The research work be pursue at night. So devote be these two to their work that they frequently forget to eat , and as often ate plain bread and wash it down with coffee in their laboratory. The discovery of X-rays by Dr. Roentgen in 1895 start many physicist and chemist on investigation to see whether phosphorescent body in general would not emit ray of a similar character. In 1896 Becquerel find that the salt of uranium emit radiation affect photographic plate and , like the X-ray , pass through many substance impervious to ordinary light. Later Mme. Curie discover that the salt of thorium emit similar rays. Searching for other radio-active material , M. and Mme. Curie , after long and tedious , but to them fascinate , trial , discover that pitchblende be much more active than uranium. Mme. Curie make up her mind to go still further. She would not stop short of find out what it be in pitchblende that produce the radio-active force that would pass through any substance except lead and steel. But at that time pitchblende be to be have only from a small deposit in Bohemia. Mme. Curie reduce ton of it and then , first by chemical separation and then by elimination , she finally isolate two fiercely energetic substances. One she call polonium after her native country , the other radium. The old laboratory on Rue Lhomond be describe by Henry Labouchere , editor of The London Truth , a `` a scientific Bethlehem. '' How each insist upon the other 's great share in the discovery be tell by M. Curie when he receive the Nobel Prize at Stockholm. `` Mme. Curie , '' he say on that occasion , `` prove in 1898 that of many of the chemical substance , those which contain uranium or thorium alone be capable of emit in notable quantity Becquerel rays. * * * Mme. Curie study the mineral which have in them uranium or thorium , and find these mineral be radio-active. In her experiment she find that some of them be more active than they would have be if they have contain only uranium or thorium. Mme. Curie then make the hypothesis that these substance contain radio-active chemical a yet unknown. Mme. Curie execute these experimental work and reach her momentous conclusion alone. '' But in 1911 , when she go to Stockholm to receive her second Nobel Prize , Mme. Curie say : `` First , I wish to recall that the discovery of radium be make by Pierre Curie in conjunction with me. We also owe to Pierre Curie fundamental experiment in the domain of radio-activity. The chemical work which have for it end the isolation of radium be my special work. '' Several year pass , however , before the general public knew of radium. A watch-case contain a speck of the rare element be exhibit a the Paris Exposition in 1900. It be label , `` Radium , discover by Mme. Curie. '' In 1901 the French Academy of Sciences award the La Caze Prize of 10,000 franc to the Curies. Soon afterward Mme. Curie put chemistry in possession of a relatively large quantity of radium , a she have by a crystallization process obtain a decigram of the pure chlorid , which allow her to obtain the atomic weight. In 1903 M. and Mme. Curie receive the Davy Medal of the Royal Society. That year Mme. Curie submit the result of her research in her doctorate thesis present to the University of Paris. She then become chef de travaux in the laboratory at the department of the Sorbonne create for her husband. M. Curie be elect to the Academy of Sciences in 1905. His widow succeed him a professor at the University of Paris. She write a good deal , among her work be `` Recherches sur les Proprietes Magnetiques de Aciers Trempes , '' `` Recherches sur le Substances Radioactives , '' `` L'Isotropie et les Elements Isotropes '' and `` Pierre Curie , '' the life and work of her husband. Her most celebrated work , however , which be regard a a classic in scientific literature , be her `` Traite de Radioactivite , '' which be publish in 1910. When the World War break out Mme. Curie offer her service to the Government of France. She close the Institut Curie and with her elder daughter , Irene , and a few student , she go to a hospital behind the front , employ her knowledge of radiography in aid the wounded. At her suggestion , automobile equip with radiographic apparatus be utilize along the front , and by this mean bullet and shell splinter be locate in the head of dangerously wound soldiers. Mme. Curie arrive in the United States for her first visit in the Spring of 1921. She be accompany by her two daughter , Irene and Eve , and she visit New York , Washington , Philadelphia , Pittsburgh , Chicago , Buffalo , Niagara Falls , the Grand Canyon and Boston. The frail little woman be overwhelm by honors. She be fete and laudatory speech be make everywhere she went. She receive honorary university degree from Columbia , the University of Pennsylvania , Woman 's Medical College , University of Pittsburgh , Yale , Wellesley , Northwestern and Smith. President Nicholas Murray Butler , in present the Columbia award , say it honor the woman `` to whose skill , scientific might and trained power of imagination it have be give to enrich mankind by the priceless gift of radium , win thereby a place on the immortal list of scientific discoverers. '' Dr. William Lyon Phelps of Yale say : `` There be one thing rarer than genius. That be radium. Mme. Curie illustrate the combination of both. '' On May 20 , 1921 , President Harding present the gift of the people of the United States , the gram of radium , which have be purchase for $ 100,000 and obtain from 500 ton of carnotite ore. In 1922 Mme. Curie be elect a member of the Academy of Medicine in Paris , and the next year the French Government unanimously vote her an annual pension of 40,000 francs. That be on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the discovery of radium. Mme. Curie be never eager to mix in political or social matters. She do , however , urge woman suffrage , and she advocate international scholarship in pure science. This latter plan be put before the League of Nations. As a Christmas present in 1921 a large group of American woman endow Mme. Irene Curie-Joliot , the daughter who have always help Mme. Curie in her work , enable her to pursue her scientific research , from the fund of $ 56,413.54 leave over after the gram of radium have be buy in 1921. In 1929 Mme. Curie return to the United States and receive $ 50,000 with which to purchase a second gram of radium. The presentation take place on Oct. 30 at the Academy of Sciences at Washington , President Hoover laud the life and work of the recipient. During this visit Mme. Curie receive an honorary degree from St. Lawrence University and dedicate Hepburn Hall of Chemistry there. She receive the gold medal of the New York City Federation of Women 's Clubs and many other mark of honor and esteem. As a guest of Henry Ford , Mme. Curie go to Dearborn , Mich. , for the Edison jubilee. In 1931 Mme. Curie attend the Congress of World Physicists at Rome. She be gravely injured when , in April , 1932 , she slip and fell in her laboratory , and an operation be necessary .