March 20 , 1930 OBITUARY Balfour a Leader for Half a Century By THE NEW YORK TIMES The death of the Earl of Balfour put an end to a career which for distinction and length of service have few equal in modern English history. At the Congress of 1878 in Berlin , he be already well know a a promising young statesman. Long after all the other participant in that congress be dead , Balfour be Lord President of the Privy Council and play tennis and golf in his seventy-ninth year. The one English statesman with whom his name be continuously link , and whose career cover the same period , be the late Earl of Oxford and Asquith. Again and again Lord Balfour 's political career seem to have ended. It start languidly enough when , a a bored semi-invalid , he sit in the House of Commons , suck a thermometer and take it out now and then to note his temperature. He be call `` Miss Nancy '' Balfour in those days. Later he be to be call `` Bloody '' Balfour. He show a hardihood in weather political storm that bring H. G. Wells to write in 1926 of `` that damn madonna lily ; he grow where he be planted. '' Lord Balfour be a statesman almost in spite of himself. By inclination he be the philosopher , the esthete , the thinker , the cultured gentleman of leisure , spend his life among the book and music he love and know so well. When at the height of his career a Prime Minister he say : `` Give me my book , my golf club and my leisure , and I would ask for nothing more. My ideal in life be to read a lot , write a little , play plenty of golf and have nothing to worry about. If I could give up politics without disorganize thing or neglect my duty , I would gladly do so. '' At another time he say : `` I would rather be know a have add something to our knowledge of truth and nature than for anything else I can imagine. '' The Philosopher in Politics That love of philosophy throw an aureole about his life that set him apart both from the ordinary statesman and from the great mass of people with whom , a a politician , he should have be in close contact. The background of his life be philosophy , and out of it his political conduct and theory emerge without ever lose contact. His mind be that of a subtle , analytical thinker meet each new problem a a trained logician deal with abstract idea , not with people. He be any man 's match in a debate , but many a less public figure could sway a crowd with oratory where Lord Balfour would have little effect. Although he be intimately connect with British politics for over half a century , he always give the impression of a man who have withdraw within himself. It be a case where appearance be deceptive , but because of that attitude he never really catch the public fancy , and there be no public figure in England of this century who arouse so little hatred or so little love. To most of the British people he be an abstraction , a paradox , an enigma that they could not solve. When they hear him speak it be only to feel more deeply puzzled. His voice be smooth and he could be eloquent , but it be say of him that `` you seldom know what Balfour means. '' The very keenness of his mind lead him into metaphysical subtleties. He saw , a his philosophic master Hegel do , the antithesis of every point that be be made. His sentence be involve and often trail off ungrammatically without a closing period. During his Premiership he make speech after speech on the tariff policy without ever commit himself to anything definite. `` As an intellectual feat it be unparalleled , '' one observer say at the time , but it do not serve to make him popular. He lack the fire and conviction that make so powerful an orator of Lloyd George. Like Asquith , he be too much the aristocrat and too undemocratic in his theory to appeal to the many. It be in debate that his oratorical ability be at their best. His probe mind , his caustic wit , his dialectical ingenuity , and with it all his polished , urbane temper and bearing , make him a dreaded opponent in Parliamentary strife. Sprang From Old Scottish Family Arthur James Balfour be mark for politics from birth , for he be one of `` the family. '' His mother be Lady Blanche Cecil , the sister of the third Marquess of Salisbury , who play so prominent a part in nineteenth century politics. His father be James Maitland Balfour , the head of the cadet branch of an old Scotch family , Balfour of Balfour , so call from the seat of the family at Balfour Castle in Fife. The future Earl be bear July 25 , 1848 , the old of eight child , five boy and three girls. His father die when he be 9 year old and his mother when he be 24. The family live at Whittingehame , in Haddingtonshire , Scotland. After receive his education at Eton , where he be `` fag '' to Lord Lansdowne , who be destine to be Foreign Minister in his Cabinet , and at Trinity College , Cambridge , he enter Parliament at the suggestion of his uncle , the Marquess of Salisbury , a representative of the family borough of Hertford. Already his languid air and apparent physical frailty have earn him the sort of raillery he be to suffer from all his life. In Cambridge they call him `` Miss Nancy. '' When he first enter Parliament he be `` Miss Balfour. '' His opponent make much of the fact that he have be one of `` The Souls , '' that exclusive group head by the late Lord Curzon. His health be so delicate that it be a question whether he would not have to spend his Winters in Egypt and forego any idea of a political career. As an M.P. he be not a particular success. His maiden speech be not deliver until his third session in the House , and then it be on the characteristically abstruse topic of bimetalism. His real career begin in 1878 , when his uncle succeed Lord Derby a Foreign Minister , and take the young man with him to Berlin a his secretary at the notable congress over which Prince Bismarck preside and which change the map of Europe. It be just after the conclusion of the Russo-Turkish War , which have involve most of the Balkan States and Asia Minor. Lord Beaconsfield , the Prime Minister , head the British delegation , with Lord Russell and Lord Salisbury a plenipotentiary , and it be under them that Balfour receive his first important lesson in diplomacy. He return to join in a half-hearted way the famous Fourth party , which be compose of four men : Lord Randolph Churchill , Sir Henry Drummond-Wolff , John Gorst and himself a the least important. Their chief political reason for existence be to form an opposition against Gladstone , and they spend most of their time in Parliament bait him. In 1884 the party break up , and two year later the Marquess of Salisbury make his nephew Chief Secretary for Scotland. As Chief Secretary for Ireland A year later come his first important political job , and the most hectic position he hold in his long career. In March , 1887 , he become Chief Secretary for Ireland. It be a critical period in imperial politics a regard Ireland. Parnell be then lead the violent force that be agitate for Home Rule , and the debate in the House be bitter. Balfour 's appointment be receive literally with guffaw of laughter. The `` silk-skinned sybarite , '' `` Pretty Fanny , '' `` Clara '' Balfour , be go to undertake a job at which the strong men have failed. A little later he give the order to shoot down rioter without hesitation , and the epithet be change to `` Bloody Balfour '' and `` Bomba Balfour. '' Impervious alike to the personal danger he run and the attack make upon him on the floor of the House , he go relentlessly on his way , employ the coercive measure of the typical Conservative of that day. He be an aristocrat who do not believe in popular government , and he consider the Irish politically inferior to the English. `` They have great gift , '' he say at the time. `` They have wit , imagination , eloquence , valor ; in many respect they be our superiors. But in one respect they be our inferior and no amount of Gladstonian rhetoric can make them otherwise. They be politically incapable of self- government. '' When he return to the House in 1891 it be to take up the leadership of the Unionist or Conservative party and to be First Lord of the Treasury. His party do not remain in power long , and Balfour find himself leader of the Opposition. In 1895 the Unionists again have a majority , and from then until 1902 Balfour lead them. In 1898 , when Lord Salisbury be ill , he take over the work of his uncle a Acting Secretary of Foreign Affairs , and when his uncle resign in 1902 while Prime Minister , Balfour succeed him in that position. Issues of His Premiership His Premiership be generally not consider a success. The one great accomplishment during his tenure of office be the negotiating of the alliance with Russia , Japan and France , the so-called `` iron ring '' around Germany , which she try to break in the World War. Balfour 's part in the negotiation be probably not as great a that of Delcasse in France , but it be generally believe to have be important. His government last three year , and much of the last half of that time be spend in try to avoid a break on the government 's tariff policy. Balfour 's Colonial Secretary be Joseph Chamberlain , who urge a policy of protection. Balfour have always be a free-trade advocate , and he be face with the necessity of dodge the tariff issue or repudiate Chamberlain. He choose the former policy and for fully a year his opponent be unable to get a definite expression of opinion out of him on tariff policy. The supporter of Chamberlain within the Unionist party and all the imperialistic `` die-hards '' finally form an opposition that put the Liberals in power. Their slogan be `` B. M. G. , '' mean `` Balfour must go. '' At the next general election the Unionist party be overwhelmingly defeat , and Balfour himself be hopelessly beat in North-East Manchester , a seat which he have hold for twenty years. He be subsequently elect for the City of London on the resignation of Sir Edward Clarke and regain his leadership of the Conservative force ; but his star remain in eclipse. The old slogan , `` B. M. G. , '' be still in force , and in 1911 he renounce the leadership of his party. He give a reason his advanced age and the increase need of leisure , not dream of the part he be still to play in his country 's history. Sought American Support in War More than any other man in England , with the notable exception of Lord Roberts , he have advocate preparation for an inevitable world conflict. Back in 1903 , while he be still Premier , he create the Commission of Imperial Defense , under which pre-war mobilization be carry out and plan make on the declaration of war to send expeditionary force to France. He early saw the necessity of gain American support for the Allies. He become First Lord of the Admiralty in the Coalition Cabinet of 1915 , and Foreign Secretary in 1916. In April , 1917 , he come to the United States a head of the British High Commission , just after this country have declare war. While the situation at the time give add vigor to his advocacy of friendship between the two country , Balfour could claim with justice that he have always believe in the necessity of Anglo- American cooperation. As far back a 1895 he have say : `` The time will come , must come , when some one , some statesman of authority more fortunate even than President Monroe , will lay down the doctrine that between English-speaking people war be impossible. '' After the war , Balfour be one of the British delegate to the peace conference , and a firm supporter of the League of Nations , which be soon formed. He play a secondary role to Lloyd George , and his name be prominently connect only with the negotiation by which Shantung be cede to Japan. The Chinese have always hold him responsible for that part of the treaty. In the post-bellum deliberation at San Remo , Hythe , Brussels , San Sebastian , Rome , London , Geneva and other place , Balfour play an important part , although not a very conspicuous one. In October , 1921 , he make a second notable visit to America a head of the British delegation to the Washington Arms Conference. He work hard to cooperate with the other delegation , and accept in principle Secretary Hughes 's proposal for curtail naval forces. His proposal to abolish submarine , however , be oppose by France and Italy. When he return to England he be offer a peerage for the third or fourth time , and again declined. But soon afterward he be make Knight of the Garter , and in March , 1922 , enter the House of Lords with the title of Earl of Balfour and Viscount Traprain of Whittingehame. Give Impetus to Zionist Plan In 1922 Lord Balfour formulate a plan for the payment of the French war debt to England , which be accept in principle three year later , by which the British Government would collect money to enable it to pay the war debt to the United States. He be President of the Commission on Trade and Industries of the League of Nations , and a member of the International Chamber of Commerce. He be the strong and most influential advocate of Zionism which that movement had. His interest in Zionism start in 1917 when he make a much-discussed speech which come to be know a the Balfour declaration , advocate a national home for Jews in Palestine. His political enemy say he make the declaration for it effect on America and her participation in the war. Whether that be true or not , his interest developed and his sincerity after the war be never questioned. The Balfour declaration soon become the recognize standard of Zionist ideal for Palestine , and it likewise be the basis of the organization of the Jewish Agency , compose of Zionists and non-Zionists , who meet at Zurich , Switzerland , in the Summer of 1929 to form a cooperative body to advance the Jewish homeland ideal. The twelfth anniversary of his speech be celebrate nationally by Zionists on Nov. 4 , 1929. In 1925 Lord Balfour visit Jerusalem to open the Hebrew University there. His attitude have arouse the ire of nationalist Arabs , and his trip to Palestine end by his be spirit out of Damascus after a furious outburst on the part of an Arabian mob. In the same year he succeed the late Lord Curzon a President of the Privy Council , under Prime Minister Baldwin. A year later come still another important post. When the Inter- Imperial Commission of the Imperial Conference in London be form to reorganize the British Empire , he be appoint chairman. The resolution draft by the commission in November , 1926 , by which the Dominions of the empire be place on a status of equality be sign by Balfour. In 1927 he act temporarily a Secretary of State for the Dominions , be Deputy Prime Minister while Mr. Baldwin make his visit to Canada , and fought hard , in London , to avert the failure of the Geneva Naval Conference. The famous statesman receive , on his eightieth birthday , July 26 , 1928 , honor such a be accord to few men. Party division and personal difference be put aside and the nation acclaim him a one of it favorite sons. The new building of the British Academy , of which he be president , be dedicate on the preceding day at a function , attend by Lord Balfour , where the Prince of Wales pay the principal tribute to him. On the following day Lord Balfour receive an expensive automobile a the gift of the member of Parliament. A sum that remain from the subscription also be set aside `` a a reservoir whence you can draw the fine you 'll undoubtedly have to pay. '' The cloud of ill health that soon be to force him to lessen his public activity have begin to settle over the venerable statesman several month before , when heart trouble have force him to cancel many engagements. He suffer also from laryngitis , and , a 1929 approach , his absence from the House of Lords become of long duration. In April of that year his complete retirement be foreshadow when it be learn that his famous town house be to be sold. This residence at 4 Carlton Gardens be probably second in political fame only to 10 Downing Street , official residence of the Prime Ministers of Great Britain. Built in 1825 by Adrian Hope , it be lease by Lord Palmerston , who live there until he died. It be purchase by Mr. Balfour , from Hope 's son , in 1871. Among it content be Lord Balfour 's collection of Chinese and Sevres porcelain , part of which also be catalogue for sale , and a series of painting execute for him by Burne-Jones. His last year be devote largely to the completion of his autobiography , deal with the great men and event with which he have be associate during his long life. Balfour Never Married The Earl of Balfour never married. Various reason have be given. He be engage in early life to Miss Mary Lyttleton , who die before they could marry , and , accord to one report , he remain faithful to her memory. Others have point to his attachment for his charming and brilliant mother. Still others assert that his emotional life be absorb in his intellectual pursuits. But these be all guesses. Very little of his private life be know to outsiders. In early life he arouse considerable discussion with a book call `` A Defense of Philosophic Doubt , '' publish in 1879 , of which it be say that everybody talk about it and nobody read it. It be an attempt to lead mankind into the path of faith by show the fallibility of human reasoning. However , Balfour be accuse of agnosticism , and be call a skeptic until his next book , `` The Foundations of Belief , '' be publish in 1895. He write two other book on philosophy , `` Criticism of Beauty '' in 1909 , and `` Theism and Humanism , '' in 1914. He be a gifted musician , and be say to have play the piano with professional skill. He once write an essay on the music of Handel , his favorite , and be the founder and President of the Handel Society. He be the first prominent Britisher to take up golf , and even write a book on the subject. His title of Captain of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St. Andrews be a proud possession. At tennis he be no less skillful. His interest in contemporary affair be always keen. He be the first public man in England to ride in an airplane. At that time some wit say of him : `` If they succeed in his lifetime in run a light railway to the moon , the first passenger in the guard 's van will be Earl Balfour . ''