June 17 , 1930 OBITUARY Elmer Sperry Dies ; Famous Inventor By THE NEW YORK TIMES Elmer A. Sperry , inventor , die yesterday morning at St. John 's Hospital , Brooklyn , from complication which set in after he have recover from an operation for gallstone six week ago. He be in his seventieth year. Funeral service will be hold at 10:30 o'clock Thursday morning at the Plymouth Church , Orange Street , Brooklyn. The Rev. S. Parkes Cadman will officiate. Burial will follow in Greenwood Cemetery. The name of the honorary pallbearer will be announce later. More than fifty year of Mr. Sperry 's life have be devote to invention. At his death , he be say to have take out nearly 400 patent , about double the number take out by Edison. He be best know for his utilization of the gyroscope for the stabilization of ship , airplane and aerial torpedoes. Only about two month ago a giant army bombing plane , equip with two Sperry gyroscope serve a automatic pilot , fly from Sacramento to San Francisco without the guidance of human hands. He Invented Gyro Compass He also invent the gyro compass , which eliminate the variation due to the earth 's magnetism. Next he invent `` metal mike , '' the automatic steersman , which keep a ship on a set course. Next he use it to stabilize ship and to keep them on an even keel in all kind of weather. Later , he apply the gyroscope to airplane , with device to give flier artificial horizon , enable them to fly `` blind '' in dense fogs. In addition , he invent new system of street lighting , new machinery for mining , electric device for trolley car , an electric automobile , a lighting system for motion picture projection , an electric arc light , a high-power searchlight and electrochemical processes. Elmer Ambrose Sperry be bear in Cortland , N.Y. , Oct. 12 , 1860 , son of Stephen Decatur and Mary ( Borst ) Sperry , and a descendant of Richard Sperry , who , in 1666 , secrete and maintain in the Judges Cave at New Haven Colony three of the judge who have condemn Charles I to death. He be educate in the State Normal School in Cortland and then attend Cornell University for one term , from 1879 to 1880. He also drive the first American-built automobile through the street of Paris in 1896. Inventions Are Manufactured Previous to 1910 there be already six industrial corporation found to manufacture Sperry 's invention , do then an aggregate annual business of over $ 5,000,000. In January , 1929 , he sell the Sperry Gyroscope Company , of which he be president , to the North American Aviation Company , and soon after start building up the Sperry Development Company , Inc. , and also the Sperry Rail Service Corporation. Just this year he have organize Sperry Products , Inc. , a successor to the two last-named companies. In 1914 , he be award first prize of the Aero Club of France or his airplane stabilizer ; he also be the winner of two Franklin Institute Medals in 1914 and 1929 ; Collier Trophies , 1915 , 1916 ; Holley Medal , 1927 ; John Fritz Medal , 1927 ; Albert Gary Medal , 1929 ; two decoration from the last Czar of Russia ; two decoration from the Emperor of Japan , the Order of the Rising Sun and the Order of the Sacred Treasure ; and the grand prize of the Panama Exposition. He be also award three honorary degree -- Doctor of Engineering from Stevens Institute and Lehigh University ; and Doctor of Science from Northwestern University. Member of Many Societies Mr. Sperry be founder and charter member of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers and of the American Electro-Chemical Society. He be also a member of the American Association for the Advancement of Science , American Physical Society , American Society of Mechanical Engineers , Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers , New York Electrical Society , American Petroleum Institute , Edison Pioneers , National Aeronautical Association , Aero Club of America , the Engineers Club , National Electric Light Association , Franklin Institute , Japan Society and director of the Museum of Peaceful Arts. Surviving him be two son , Edward G. Sperry and Elma A. Jr. ; one daughter , Mrs. Robert B. Lea , and five grandchild , all of whom live in Brooklyn. The inventor 's wife die a year ago in Havana. She be bear Zula A. Goodman , and the marriage take place in Chicago , June 28 , 1887. Another son , Lawrence B. , lose his life in 1925 while fly over the North Sea in a plane of his own design. Mr. Sperry be a Republican , a Baptist , very active in Y.M.C.A. work and a close friend and supporter of President Hoover. Last year when Professor Albert Michelson conduct his experiment at Mount Wilson , during which he obtain a much more accurate determination of the speed of light , Mr. Sperry finance the cost of the apparatus used. One of it essential feature be a Sperry superpower searchlight. Adam Praises E. A. Sperry Secretary Declares the Inventor Gave Invaluable Aid to Navy Special to The New York Times Washington , June 16. -- Elmer Ambrose Sperry , whose death occur in New York today , be praise by Secretary of the Navy Adams for his contribution to naval science. `` The United States naval service ashore and afloat , '' Secretary Adams say , `` will learn with deep regret of the loss of one from whom we have receive much. As a member of the naval consult board since 1915 , Mr. Sperry have render invaluable service a chairman of the committee on mine and torpedo and aid to navigation and a a committee member on aeronautics , internal combustion engine , and special problems. His numerous invention , include his gyrocompass , plane stabilizer , high intensity searchlight and his many refinement on apparatus for accurately control the fire of our gun , have assist materially in place the navy in first-class fighting trim. It be safe to say that no one American have contribute so much to our naval technical progress . ''