March 9 , 1930 OBITUARY Taft Gained Peaks In Unusual Career By THE NEW YORK TIMES Twenty-seventh President of the United States and it tenth Chief Justice , William Howard Taft be the only man in the history of the country to become the head of both the Executive and Judicial Departments of the Federal Government. Elected to the Presidency to succeed Theodore Roosevelt in 1908 by a tremendous majority , both popular and electoral , he meet overwhelming defeat four year later in the political catastrophe which wreck temporarily the Republican Party , rupture his long friendship with Roosevelt , who have bring about his first nomination for the Presidency , and result in the election of Woodrow Wilson. The bad beaten Republican candidate who ever run for the high office in the nation -- for he receive only the eight electoral vote of Utah and Vermont -- President Taft leave the White House with his Administration discredit , although personally he have lose little of the esteem in which he have be hold by his fellow countrymen. His appointment by President Harding a Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States , an office which by both temperament and training he be well fit to hold than that of President , come a a realization of a lifelong ambition , and be receive with every manifestation of popular approval. It be a `` come-back '' unprecedented in American political annals. Taft-Roosevelt Break The break between President Taft and Colonel Roosevelt , the cause of which never be fully explain , and which be follow by a reconciliation some time before the latter 's death , have far-reaching consequence , and the scar of the conflict that be cause by the formation of the National Progressive Party under the leadership of Roosevelt in 1912 still remain. Backed by Theodore Roosevelt , then President , Mr. Taft , then Secretary of War in the Roosevelt Cabinet , gain the Republican nomination for President in 1908 without difficulty. `` If they do n't take Taft , they will get me , '' the comment of Colonel Roosevelt when certain Republican leader demur at support Mr. Taft for the nomination , be sufficient to bring most of the recalcitrants into line. Justice Taft 's election follow by the overwhelming majority of 321 electoral vote out of a total of 488. Just how and when the split that be to break the long friendship between Taft and Roosevelt start never have be tell with certainty. They be still warm friend when Mr. Taft assume the Presidency , and Colonel Roosevelt leave soon afterward on his hunt trip to Africa , undertake partly with a view to remove himself temporarily from the situation and relieve the new President of embarrassment. It be know that some of Colonel Roosevelt 's friend at Washington do not fare a well under the new Administration a they have expect ; it also be know that Mr. Taft a President do not consult Colonel Roosevelt a he have when he be in his Cabinet. It also be report that Colonel Roosevelt felt that President Taft have not be a assiduous in develop and carry forward the `` Roosevelt policy '' a the former President have expected. Last to Acknowledge Change In any event , it develop that by the time Colonel Roosevelt emerge from the African jungle on his way back to civilization the `` break '' have become an established fact , that be , establish to the knowledge of everybody except President Taft. He be the last to acknowledge that Colonel Roosevelt 's feeling toward him have changed. Friends of Colonel Roosevelt meet him on his way back to this country and it be believe in Washington that they have much to do in influence him against Mr. Taft. These men later take a prominent part in form the Progressive Party. They have clash with President Taft almost from the day he go into the White House. The feud between Richard A. Ballinger , then Secretary of the Interior , and Gifford Pinchot , then Chief of the Forest Reserves and later Governor of Pennsylvania , over the governmental policy in regard to public land , be believe to have widen the breach between President Taft and the friend of Colonel Roosevelt. The President remove from office Mr. Pinchot , who have be one of the lead member of what be know a President Roosevelt 's `` kitchen cabinet. '' Then , too , a wave of so-called `` progressivism '' be sweep over the country , and it be allege that President Taft have yield too much to the counsel of the conservative leader of the Republican Party. Soon after his return to this country from Africa in 1910 , Colonel Roosevelt call on President Taft at the `` Summer White House '' at Beverly , Mass. According to those who witness the meeting , there be an attempt by both men to display the same old cordiality , but it be palpably on the surface only , and there be apparent a distinct feeling of constraint. There be few meeting after that and it become evident in the Spring of 1912 that President Roosevelt would be a candidate for President. Refused to Credit Reports Long after Colonel Roosevelt have inform his friend that he be oppose to the renomination and re-election of President Taft , the latter refuse to credit such reports. When the true state of affair become evident , Mr. Taft would reply to those who say to him `` I tell you so '' with one of his tolerant smiles. Never do he criticize Colonel Roosevelt and invariably refer to him a `` The President. '' `` I learn to call him that while I be in his Cabinet , '' Mr. Taft say on more than one occasion , `` and , somehow or other , I ca n't think of him in any other light. '' Colonel Roosevelt 's decision to try for the Republican nomination for President and to `` throw his hat into the ring '' in response to the request of seven Republican Governors be know to every reader of political history. The Republican National Convention at Chicago in 1912 , over which Elihu Root preside , balk Colonel Roosevelt 's ambition. Although the latter have show remarkable strength in the States then have direct primary , the majority of which he capture , the Republican national organization succeed in hold a majority of the delegate in line for President Taft and he receive 651 vote , 111 more than the majority necessary to nominate , to 107 for Colonel Roosevelt , with 344 Roosevelt supporter not voting. Supporters of Roosevelt charge that the National Committee have gain control of the convention for President Taft by manipulate the contests. Most of them bolt the convention and join in the formation of the National Progressive Party , the movement that split the Republican Party in two and bring about the election of Woodrow Wilson. Mr. Taft 's remarkable record in public office have lead to the expectation that he would make a great success of his Administration a President , and it be believe by many afterward that the reason he fail , at least on the political side of his Administration , be that his temperament be judicial rather than executive. Ohio Taft 's Native State Mr. Taft be bear Sept. 15 , 1857 , in Cincinnati , Ohio , the son of Alphonso Taft , Secretary of War and Attorney General in President Grant 's Cabinet , and Louisa Torrey Taft. After graduation from Woodward High School , Cincinnati , Mr. Taft enter Yale University , where his father have be a student. He graduate from Yale in 1878 , the second in a class of 121. Although athletically inclined -- he be stroke of his class crew and a famous wrestler -- he devote most of his time to study. His standing among his college mate be indicate by the fact that he be know by them while at Yale and forever afterward a `` Old Bill '' Taft. After college Mr. Taft immediately begin the study of law in connection with newspaper work on The Cincinnati Commercial , and on graduation from the Cincinnati Law School in 1880 he start the practice of law. The next year he be appoint Assistant Prosecutor of Hamilton County , and in 1882 be appoint Collector of Internal Revenue , a place pay $ 10,000 a year and a most lucrative position for a youth of 25. The young lawyer resign that place , for his desire never be for money , to resume the practice of law , and from 1887 to 1890 he be a Judge of the Superior Court of Ohio. In 1890 he be appoint Solicitor General of the United States by President Harrison. His argument and brief in the Bering Sea and tariff case bring him wide notice and a national reputation , and in 1892 he be appoint a Judge of the newly create Circuit Court of Appeals , Sixth Circuit , on which he serve until 1900. It be while he be hold this post that Mr. Taft first meet Theodore Roosevelt , the latter be a Civil Service Commissioner at the time. Decisions a Circuit Judge As a Circuit Court Judge , Mr. Taft have occasion to make certain decision concern railroad , corporation and organize labor that be of far-reaching importance. In the case of Moore vs. the Bricklayers ' Union he declare secondary boycott illegal and hold that , although labor have the right to organize into union , these union must refrain from act injurious to organize society. When Eugene V. Debs , many time Socialist candidate for President , try to tie up railroad traffic during a strike in 1894 , Mr. Taft grant an injunction to prevent this against Debs 's agent , F.W. Phelan. From 1896 to 1900 Mr. Taft be Dean and Professor of Law at the University of Cincinnati. In 1900 Mr. Taft resign his judgship to become the Chairman of a commission appoint by President McKinley to institute civil government in the Philippines , although he have be oppose to the annexation of the island a a result of the Spanish-American War. He take this appointment with reluctance , tell President McKinley , also an Ohioan , that his ambition be to become a Justice of the Supreme court of the United States. `` You will be the good judge for this experience , '' President McKinley reply , induce him to take the appointment. A short time later Mr. Taft become the first Civil Governor of the Philippines. In his four year ' residence in the island he attain a reputation a an able Colonial administrator. Order have be gradually effect , he begin to introduce the rudimentary form of civil government. The government be organize , good road build , postoffices establish , school and American teacher introduce , bank found and civic improvement made. Sanitation under American direction remove much of the danger of epidemic of contagious diseases. In 1902 Mr. Taft visit Rome to negotiate with Pope Leo XIII term for the purchase of the friar ' land in the Philippines. He induce Congress to appropriate $ 7,239,000 for this purpose , and then sell the land to tenant and inhabitant on easy terms. Won the Trust of Filipinos He regard the Filipinos a unprepared to govern themselves , and urge that they should be educate before the United States contemplate give them independence. He advocate free trade and the development of sympathy between them and the Americans. He win the trust of a large part of the native , who ask him to remain when he be offer a place on the Supreme Court bench in 1903. In 1904 Mr. Taft succeed Elihu Root a Secretary of War in President Roosevelt 's Cabinet. It be say the reason that he take the post be because the Philippines be under the jurisdiction of the War Department , and he felt he still would have opportunity to improve the condition of the inhabitant of the islands. It be a Secretary of War that Mr. Taft first gain his reputation a the `` great American traveler , '' which he sustain after his election to the Presidency. He become the spokesman and field representative of the Roosevelt Administration on practically every important matter that require the dispatch of a representative from Washington , go on many important trip to various American city and to foreign countries. In 1906 Mr. Taft be temporarily the Civil Governor of Cuba , after the intervention of the United States in that year to restore order. In 1907 he visit the Panama Canal Zone to familiarize himself with condition there , and it be under his general direction that the construction of the canal be carry on. In 1907 , also , he visit the Philippines to be present at the opening of the Legislative Assembly , the first step of the Filipinos toward self- government. He then go to Japan to confer with representative of the Government of that country in regard to the problem of the Japanese in the United States and settle it satisfactorily for the time. Then he proceed to China , where he undertake important negotiation relative to a Chinese boycott of American good , and visit Russia before return to the United States. The then Miss Alice Roosevelt and the man to whom she be marry later , Nicholas Longworth , be member of his party. Takes Office a President With a record of remarkable achievement in his own field Mr. Taft go into the Presidency after a long term of hold office , which be , for the most part , appointive. After he be instal in the White House many of his most loyal friend realize that perhaps his training have not be altogether of the right sort , from a political point of view. Mr. Taft have not be rear in the school of practical politics. He have not rub elbow with the party worker or fight his way up through the party ranks. Consequently , they felt , he lack that keen insight into the motif and method of practical politician which many of his predecessor have possess and use with effectiveness. Public office have always seek Mr. Taft up to his campaign for the Presidency. He could not understand the thirst for office and the demand for place on the public payroll. In all his previous career he have never hold an office that carry with it any political patronage of consequence , and so be unprepared to meet the rush for patronage that begin when he take office a President. Mr. Taft often say himself that he felt a lack of that character of political training which would have throw him into closer contact with the mass of the people. He have never be district leader , Alderman , Mayor or legislator. His training have be judicial and his circle of contact small. In the Philippines he have come in contact with the people there and exercise a wonderful influence for good over them. But he felt he do not know enough of his own people. When his extensive traveling be once criticize , Mr. Taft say to a friend : `` It seem to me that I ought to travel as much a I can. I have see very little of the people in spite of my long year in office , and the people have see very little of me. I think that by travel I could give them a chance to look me over and see what manner of man I am. Comparatively few people get to Washington , and yet I can not but feel that a majority of the people would like to see the man who for the time be be the head of their Government. '' In all his trip Mr. Taft insist that an automobile parade be part of the program. He want to be see by a many people a possible. In do this Mr. Taft break all Presidential record for travel and set a mark that will probably stand for some year to come. An account be keep by the White House staff of all his journey while President ; this computation show a total of 114,559 miles. He be the first President to introduce the automobile in official life at Washington and become very fond of motoring. Mr. Taft have no patience with office-seekers , and to his mind the fact that a man seek office seem to unfit him for that office. He turn many faithful party worker away empty-handed , and soon he be in the political hot water that bubble during most of his Administration. He take many of his trip just to get away from the office-seekers. He declare that this be the only way he could get a moment 's rest from them. The Secret Service men who accompany him be warn a much against office-seekers a they be against `` cranks. '' Mr. Taft 's judicial mind lead him to underestimate the value of publicity in the conduct of his Administration. He read few newspaper and do not appreciate their influence on public opinion. He have the objection of the judge and lawyer to discuss matter in the press. This lack of interest in newspaper and misunderstanding of the benefit of newspaper publicity frequently cause him to delay the preparation of message and State paper until it be too late to mail them throughout the country , and many of the small newspaper of the country carry only telegraphic summary of some of his most important utterances. Assailed by `` Muck-Rakers '' The so-called `` muck-raking '' magazine be in their heyday during the Taft Administration , and practically all of these at time find fault with Mr. Taft for his way of conduct public affairs. Mr. Taft seldom reply to them. `` Oh , what 's the use ? '' he would say. `` Whatever I say or do be sure to be misconstrue or twist around in such a manner that even I will not be able to recognize my own motives. '' The feeling that he be a party man and owe gratitude to the leader of the Republican party for nominate him for and elect him to the Presidency lead Mr. Taft to accept the counsel of the Republican leader at Washington , and he be criticize for too great intimacy with Senator Aldrich and Speaker Cannon , who be regard a reactionary by the progressives. Mr. Taft , it be report , be not particularly fond of Speaker Cannon , but consider the Speaker a the leader of the Republican majority in the House of Representatives. He sincerely admire Senator Aldrich and have great confidence in him. Mr. Taft , however , believe in the sacredness of the three department of the Government -- executive , legislative and judicial -- a establish by the Constitution. He do not believe that he have a right to interfere with the prerogative of the legislative branch by dictate what Congress should do , although precedent for such interference have be set at the White House. An illustration of this attitude of Mr. Taft be find in his approval of the Payne-Aldrich tariff bill. Mr. Taft , it be report , do not believe the bill be all it should be , but consider it good than the exist tariff law and believe it meet in large degree the platform promise of his party to reduce the tariff. Opposed by Progressives Mr. Taft be bitterly assail by the `` Progressives '' for his defense of this bill , and particularly for his Winona speech on it. The controversy which follow this speech and the `` reading out '' of the Republican party of those who oppose Mr. Taft on the tariff , undoubtedly have a part in bring about the break in the party which develop in 1912. Scandals connect with the Department of Agriculture bring the administration into further disfavor and encourage the `` progressive '' movement. Mr. Taft 's championship of the propose reciprocity treaty with Canada in 1910 and the adoption of it by the aid of Democratic vote be nullify in the public mind by the refusal of Canada to accept it. His veto of so-called tariff reform bill in 1911 be seize upon by his opponent in the Republican party a give further evidence that he have become a `` reactionary , '' and be fail to keep the party platform pledges. In 1910 and 1911 he make a notable effort to secure the ratification of arbitration treaty which have be negotiate with Great Britain and France , and be thereafter know a one of the foremost advocate of world peace and arbitration. Turning Point in Political Career Perhaps the most try time in Mr. Taft 's political career be in September , 1909. In the middle of that month he leave Washington for a tour of the West , although his sciatica at that time be particularly bad. He arrive in Winona , Minn. , on Sept. 17 , when that district be seethe over the Aldrich- Payne tariff bill favor downward revision. Undeterred by popular sentiment there he openly defend the measure and announce that he would support Representative James A. Tawney , Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee , then on the defensive because he have not vote against the bill. `` I be not here to defend those who vote for the Payne bill , but to support them , '' the President say in his speech : `` On the whole I think that the Payne bill be the best tariff bill that the Republican party have ever pass ; that in it the party have concede the necessity for follow the change condition and tariff rate accordingly. `` This be a substantial achievement in the direction of low tariff and downward revision and it ought to be accept a such. '' The speech create an uproar all over the country. Newspapers be bitter in their attack on it and their comment open the way for the split in the Republican party , result in the Bull Moose organization head by former President Roosevelt. It shatter Mr. Taft 's hope for re-election. Asks Prayers to Carry Him Through He do all he could to keep the party in a solid unit , but when his effort fail he prove his courage by boldly reassert his stand on the tariff question while campaign in the West in 1911. At Waterloo , on Sept. 28 , he say : `` There be many , I among them , who believe that protection in the past have be too high and that it be possible to lower the tariff without interfere with business. '' At Des Moines and at Ottumwa he again stanchly defend his tariff view and boldly reassert that he favor a low wool duty. The criticism level against him begin to tell and he show sign of weariness. Just before continue his tour he say in a talk to newspaper men : `` I be start on a long trip , gentleman , and I ask your prayer for both my mental and physical well-being. Sometimes when I contemplate this trip I hold my breath , but be in I be go through with it. '' One of Mr. Taft 's close friend once say of him : `` He be so clean in his own mind that he can not see anything unclean in another. His refusal to employ the usual petty trick of the professional politician , the big-hearted indulgence with which he treat those who deliberately misrepresent him , his willingness to suffer himself rather than use the great power of his office against an individual -- to rest under a false light rather than strike back in the heat of passion and thus risk the chance of commit an act of injustice -- have win for him the distinction of be a poor politician. Mr. Taft will never understand that in politics it be often necessary to be unfair , unjust and to bring into play the ruthless rule of the survival of the fittest. '' Along this line Mr. Taft once say : `` To be a successful latter-day politician it seem one must be a hypocrite. I do not understand how some of the 'practical politician ' can come to my office and tell me just what they feel at heart and then get up on the floor of Congress and prate about something exactly to the contrary. That sort of thing be not for me. I detest hypocrisy , cant and subterfuge. If I have get to think every time I say a thing what effect it be go to have on the public mind ; if I have get to refrain from do justice to a square and honest man because what I may say may have an injurious effect upon my own fortune , I have rather not be President. When I have a thing to say of particular interest to a particular people , and I be quite sure they wo n't agree with me , I like to say it face to face and fight it out right then and there. '' Mr. Taft be often call the most human President who ever sit in the White House. The mantle of office do not hide his win personality in any way. He be always the same to his friends. Not quick to make friend in a general way , Mr. Taft become extremely fond of those with whom he be more intimately associated. He love company. He and Mrs. Taft entertain liberally at the White House. Under the Taft regime the State reception become new things. Formerly , the guest have form into line , hurry through the reception and left. Mr. Taft do not like this. He felt that the reception guest be his guests. So he order supper serve at the State reception and there be always dance afterward. On his retirement from the Presidency in 1913 Mr. Taft become Kent Professor of Law at Yale University , and the same year be elect President of the American Bar Association. During the eight year of his retirement in private life Mr. Taft live in New Haven. Although a President he have fail to profit by newspaper publicity , he find the press a valuable medium of present to the people his view on question of national importance and return to write for the newspaper , his first serious work have be a a newspaper reporter. Mr. Taft do not confine his advocacy of arbitration a a method of settle international dispute to write but go upon the lecture platform , and in the heat of the debate over the League of Nations he appear on the same platform with President Wilson to urge approval of the Versailles Treaty. His Work in the War While at New Haven Mr. Taft be President of the League to Enforce Peace. He be a member of the National War Labor Board during the war. Although an advocate of peace , he strongly favor conscription , once the United States have enter the world conflict , and plead that this country should fight no `` finicky '' war. He fear the war would be long , but be for fight it out to a finish , or until the Kaiser lose his throne. In a speech in May , 1917 , Mr. Taft say : `` We be in this war to say to Mr. Hohenzollern and Mr. Hapsburg , 'You 've get to get out , the same a Mr. Romanoff. ' If Emperors Charles and William abdicate tomorrow we would have peace in two weeks. That be what we be in the war for. We have nothing to do with the politics of Europe , but we be go over there because we be for the right and be willing to fight for it. '' In a speech in Indianapolis in August of the same year Mr. Taft say : `` In vindicate the right of our citizen against Germany 's brutality it may cost u million of life , and there be those who would emphasize the discrepancy between the loss of two hundred American life by Germany 's act and the sacrifice of a million in resent it. This be to ignore principle and make a nation 's conduct in defend it right and uphold it honor and protect it citizen dependent upon the question of how much it costs. '' Mr. Taft 's lifelong ambition to become a Supreme Court Justice , realize by his appointment a Chief Justice by President Harding , be indicate by an incident long before he be mention a a candidate for President. The incident occur at one of the reception in the White House during the Roosevelt Administration , in the course of a talk in which Mr. and Mrs. Roosevelt and Mr. and Mrs. Taft take part. Colonel Roosevelt , in predict what the future held for Mr. Taft , declare that eventually he would be call to one of the two high position in the country. `` Make it Chief Justice , '' say Mr. Taft. `` Make it President , '' say Mrs. Taft. More than once during the four year he serve a Secretary of War he waver between accept a place on the Supreme Court bench and continue in politics , with the Presidency practically assure to him. It be generally understood that President Roosevelt , while offer Secretary Taft a place on the bench , advise him not to accept it in view of his chance for the White House. Once when such a position be offer to him he go from Washington to New York and hold a consultation with a brother who persuade `` Brother Will '' that he should stand in line for the Presidency. It come to pass that when Mr. Taft become President he have the duty practically of reorganize the Supreme Court. He make six appointment in a court of nine. One of these appointment be the elevation of Justice White , a Southern Democrat , to the Chief Justiceship. He appoint also Justices Lurton , Hughes , Lamar , Van Devanter and Pitney. Politics have nothing to do with Mr. Taft 's selection for membership on the Supreme Court bench. At Work on the Bench From the time he become Chief Justice Mr. Taft strive to improve the machinery of the court to expedite the vast amount of litigation constantly before it and to lessen the law 's delays. With this end in view he mace a trip to England in 1922 go study the English court and learn how they dispose of a large number of case expeditiously. This trip be in response to an invitation from Sir John A. Simon , then head of the English bar and a former Attorney General of Great Britain. While make his study of the English court Mr. Taft sit on the bench with the Judges and be make an Honorary Bencher of the Middle Temple , an honor that have be confer previously on two American Ambassadors , Joseph H. Choate and John W. Davis. Mr. and Mrs. Taft be receive by King George and Queen Mary and member of their family in the picture gallery of Buckingham Palace half an hour before their formal court reception. At this reception Mr. Taft receive the honor accord to former Chiefs of State of European power , and sit in his judicial robe at the right side of the King , and Mrs. Taft sit at the left side of the Queen. A Hard-Working Chief Justice After his return from England the Chief Justice set himself to the task of clear up court congestion , and each session of the Supreme Court since then have dispose of an unusually large number of cases. The 1926-27 session handle 1,100 case , more than a hundred of which entail decision by the court. Mr. Taft , wear by ill health and the pressure of his judicial duty , resign from the Supreme Court bench Feb. 3 , 1930 , and be succeed a Chief Justice by Charles Evans Hughes. Both a President and Chief Justice Mr. Taft 's personality endear him to all , even those who oppose him politically. His infectious chuckle and good nature make him a delightful companion. He keep himself fit by daily exercise , walk whenever possible. He enjoy golf , and play when not prevent by his duties. Mr. Taft marry Miss Helen Herron of Cincinnati and have three child -- Robert , Helen and Charles. His brother be Henry W. Taft , a lead lawyer of New York City , and Horace Dutton Taft , headmaster of the Taft School at Watertown , Conn. Charles P. Taft , editor and publisher of The Cincinnati Times-Star , who die in 1929 , be a half-brother. Mr. Taft 's Last Illness It become know on Jan. 6 that Chief Justice Taft have be force to suspend his work in the Supreme Court because of illness which have be aggravate by an accident during the Summer at his home in Murray Bay , Canada. The next day he enter the Garfield Hospital at Washington for rest and treatment till Jan. 14 , when he entrain for Asheville , N.C. He stride to his car with his old-time easy swing and seem to be on the way to recovery. On Jan. 24 he be report a much improve in health , and it be disclose that he be take brisk walk as well a long ride in the country about Asheville. Three week later , however , a change for the bad occur , and on Feb. 3 , a few hour after his resignation a Chief Justice be announce , he be place on a train for Washington. Upon his arrival at the capital the next day he be carry from the train and borne in an automobile to his home. A bulletin issue by his physician that night reveal the seriousness of his condition. After a few day the patient make a little progress , but toward the end of the month he fail to maintain gain and gradually lose ground. On Wednesday , Feb. 26 , a decided turn for the bad take place. Mr. Taft become weak a the hour pass , and by noon of the next day the physician give up hope for his recovery. Since then he have be slowly sink toward the end .