July 8 , 1930 OBITUARY Conan Doyle Dead From Heart Attack Wireless to The New York Times LONDON , July 7. -- Sir Arthur Conan Doyle , creator of Sherlock Holmes and a noted spiritist , die today at his home , Windlesham , in Crowborough , Sussex. He be 71 year old. Sir Arthur have be ill from heart trouble for two month , but be make good progress against the malady until last Saturday , when a return of the heart attack prostrate him. At his bedside when he die be Lady Doyle , his two son and one daughter. Sir Arthur 's illness be attribute to his work in Scandinavia last October , when he give a series of lecture on spiritism. Although Sir Arthur have be in fail health for some time , that do not deter him from his work. Up to the end his enthusiasm for psychic investigation be unflagging. Only last March he cause a sensation by resign from the Society for Psychical Research , of which he have be a leading member for thirty-six years. His letter of resignation be write from his sickbed. Told of Spirit Talks Sir Arthur claim to have have conversation with the spirit of many great men , include Cecil Rhodes , Earl Haig , Joseph Conrad and others. Adrian Conan Doyle , the novelist 's son , say today the whole family believe Sir Arthur would continue to keep in touch with them. `` I know perfectly well I be go to have conversation with my father , '' he said. In his late year Sir Arthur often express a wish that he should be remember for his psychic work rather than for his novels. When he celebrate his seventy-first birthday on May 22 he confess he be tire of hear about his celebrated character , Sherlock Holmes. `` Holmes be dead , '' he said. `` I have do with him. '' Ten of Sir Arthur 's sixty book be about spiritism. For year Lady Doyle be his constant companion , accompany him on all his travels. It be to her the die novelist speak his last words. `` You be wonderful , '' he say with a smile. He die peacefully. Lady Doyle have nurse him through his illness to the end. Family Awaits a Message LONDON , July 7 ( AP ) . -- The family of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle today express the belief he would communicate with them from the spirit world a he have promised. Adrian Conan Doyle , a son of the novelist and spiritist , ask if his father have speak of communicate with his family after his death , say : `` Why , of course , my father fully believe that when he pass over he would continue to keep in touch with us. All his family believe so , too. `` There be no question that my father will often speak to u , just a he do before he pass over. We will always know when he be speak , but one have to be careful because there be practical joker on the other side , a there be here. `` It be quite possible that these joker may attempt to impersonate him. But there be test which my mother know , such a little mannerism of speech which can not be impersonate and which will tell u it be my father himself who be speaking. '' Adrian pay tribute to his celebrated father. He say : `` He be a great man and a splendid father and he be love -- and be happy because he know it -- by all of us. `` My mother 's and father 's devotion to each other at all time be one of the most wonderful thing I have ever known. She nurse him right through his illness to the end. Smiled in His Suffering `` His last word be to her , and they show just how much he think of her. He simply smile up at her and say , 'You be wonderful. ' He be in too much pain to say a lot. His breathing be very bad , and what he say be during a brief flash of consciousness. I never have see any one take anything more gamely in all my life. Even when we all know he be suffer great pain he always manage during time when he be conscious to keep a smile on his face for us. '' Sir Arthur during the latter part of his life present an heroic and at the same time somewhat tragic figure. For the past few year he have devote virtually all his time to the propagation of spiritism , and be recognize a one of the great leader of the world in that belief. Because of his association with this crusade which he himself characterize a an unpopular one , he gradually lose some of his old-time literary friend who saw no virtue in spiritism and be incline to look upon him a an eccentric. Sir Arthur be grieve because his friend could not see eye to eye with him , but he never waver in his pursuit of the cause in which he believed. He even open a `` psychic bookshop '' and spiritist museum in Victoria Street in the shadow of Westminster Abbey. Here he create a centre for spiritistic literature and distribute much of it throughout the world. Spent Thousands on Venture Sir Arthur once tell the writer that he spend thousand of dollar of his own money to keep the shop and the museum open. Still this adventure do not worry him. `` I be in a position to do it , '' he say with a smile. `` I might play with a steam yacht or own race horses. I prefer to do this. '' There be no doubt in Sir Arthur 's mind about the existence of spirits. One of his proof that spirit exist be a huge photograph of himself which depict the face of his dead son look over his shoulder. He show this picture to the correspondent and remark , simply : `` I handle the plate for that picture myself. Nobody else touch it. How can people doubt when they have such proof a that ? '' Not long ago Sir Arthur say : `` I pledge my honor that spiritism be true , and I know that spiritism be infinitely more important than literature , art , politics , or in fact anything in the world. '' Twice Revived Sherlock Holmes Sir Arthur Conan Doyle gain universal fame a one of the great writer of detective story through the criminological feat of his master sleuth , Sherlock Holmes. Perhaps Holmes himself be even good know than his creator and the fictional address of the former 's chamber on Baker Street in London have be seek out by countless visitor to London who be bitterly disappoint when they be inform that Sherlock Holmes have never exist in the flesh. Twice after his career have be definitely terminate by his author , Sherlock Holmes be bring back to fictional life , so avid be the appetite of the public for the narrative of the solution of crime by minute deductive reasoning. The first time be in 1904 , with `` The Return of Sherlock Holmes , '' after he have apparently be kill in the last preceding tale ; and the second be with the publication of `` The Case Book of Sherlock Holmes , '' in 1927. On the latter occasion Sir Arthur announce that under no circumstance would the great detective ever appear again. Although Sherlock Holmes be the source of Sir Arthur 's world-wide fame and the name of the detective become a by-word throughout the world , these story , of which there be a total of sixty-eight , be never consider the most important part of his work by the author himself. Furthermore , they do not win immediate recognition , and although the first Sherlock Holmes volume appear in 1887 , it be through `` Micah Clarke , '' a historical novel which appear the following year , that he gain his first literary recognition. Historical novel Sir Arthur always regard a a more serous part of his work , and he be the author of several others , include `` Sir Nigel '' and `` The White Company , '' the latter consider his fine work of the kind. He also devote much energy to work of a journalistic character , include two book explain England 's position in the Boer War , for which he receive his knighthood , and a quantity of work of similar character during the World War. But of all his varied labor , Sir Arthur himself regard his devotion to spiritism , which occupy most of his time after the war , a the most important effort of his life. Sir Arthur be bear in Edinburgh in 1859. His father , grandfather , and uncle be all artist and caricaturist of considerable note. He be interested in write almost from infancy , despite the fact that he be educate a a physician and practice for several years. First Book at Age of Six His first book be write at the age of six and illustrate by the author. After that there be apparently less write material , but throughout his school year he be know among his fellow a a great story teller. He would invent a character at the beginning of a term , and keep up a marvelous list of adventure which would hold his character on the stage until vacation arrived. His first publish story be during his year a a medical student , and the three guinea he receive for it give him the necessary conviction that he could write thing which people would pay for. With such a promising background a a narrator , his youth pass with little more direct development in that direction. It be not until he be a practicing physician at Southsea that he turn seriously and industriously to write in the unwelcome leisure of a young physician at the outset of his practice. But the half dozen precede year have produce much experience which be to prove valuable to him a an author. In the first place , they have bring him into close contact with the man who become the prototype of Sherlock Holmes. This be Dr. Joseph Bell , a distinguish Scotch surgeon and Sir Arthur 's professor in the Edinburgh University medical school. Dr. Bell have remarkable power of observation and deduction , through which he be able to diagnose almost on sight. It be these same ability , turn to crime , that later produce Sherlock Holmes. Sir Arthur 's family do not have abundant fund , and the young medical student work a an assistant during his Summers to help defray the cost of his professional medical education. Work in the slum of large city bring diversified contact which all prove fodder for the author 's imagination later. A trip a surgeon on a whaling ship during one Summer and a trip to Africa a a ship 's surgeon after he have take his medical degree , contribute far broadening. Began Writing in Spare Time Settled at Southsea , with few patient in his first day of practice , Sir Arthur go at write seriously. Short story anonymously publish prove no royal road to literary fame , but keep all his leisure well occupied. This period produce the first Sherlock Holmes story , publish in book form a `` A Study in Scarlet , '' in 1887. It culminate the following year with the publication of `` Micah Clarke , '' which be refuse by several publisher before Andrew Lang read it a reader for Longmans. The career of a physician , in which he be gain some success , be abandon for the next two year , which be devote to the writing of `` The White Company. '' After it completion he turn around and abandon literature for medicine , devote some time to far study to equip himself a an eye specialist , and establish himself in London. Leisure time , however , find him write again and his health soon begin to suffer under the severe regimen of morning of private practice , afternoon of hospital work , and night , or a good part of them , devote to writing. Accordingly , he be again face with the dilemma of choose between two promise career , and he definitely abandon medicine. His only return thereafter be during the Boer War , when he serve a the head of a British hospital. On two occasion Sir Arthur carry his proclivity for crime detection into the world of realities. In both case his purpose be to right a miscarriage of justice , and in both instance he succeed in exonerate a man who have be convict and sentence to a long term at hard labor. The beneficiary be Adolph Beck , a Swede by birth , whose conviction for swindle result from mistaken identity , and George Edalji , a young lawyer whose father be an East Indian , whose conviction for maim animal be apparently bring about through manufactured evidence inspire by the local unpopularity of the victim. Sir Arthur be first marry to Louise Hawkins of Minsterworth in 1885. She die in 1906 , leave a son and a daughter. He be marry again to Miss Jean Leckie of Blackheath in 1907 and the couple have three children. His son by his first wife be kill in the World War , and it be this tragedy which be largely responsible for Sir Arthur 's almost exclusive interest in spiritism during his late year .