Took on racism in the Deep South with powerful report on lynchings. By CAITLIN DICKERSON It be not all that unusual when , in 1892 , a mob drag Thomas Moss out of a Memphis jail in his pajama and shoot him to death over a feud that begin with a game of marbles. But his lynch change history because of it effect on one of the nation’s most influential journalist , who be also the godmother of his first child : Ida B. Wells. “It be with no pleasure that I have dip my hand in the corruption here expose , ” Wells write in 1892 in the introduction to “Southern Horrors , ” one of her seminal work about lynching , “Somebody must show that the Afro-American race be more sinned against than sinning , and it seem to have fall upon me to do so.” Wells be consider by historian to have be the most famous black woman in the United States during her lifetime , even a she be dog by prejudice , a disease infect Americans from coast to coast. She pioneer report technique that remain central tenet of modern journalism. And a a former slave who stand less than five foot tall , she take on structural racism more than half a century before her strategy be repurposed , often without credit her , during the 1960s civil right movement. Wells be already a 30-year-old newspaper editor living in Memphis when she begin her anti-lynching campaign , the work for which she be most famous. After Moss be kill , she set out on a reporting mission , crisscross the South over several month a she conduct eyewitness interview and dig up record on dozen of similar cases. Her goal be to question a stereotype that be often use to justify lynching — that black men be rapists. Instead , she find that in two-thirds of mob murder , rape be never an accusation. And she often find evidence of what have actually be a consensual interracial relationship. She publish her finding in a series of fiery editorial in the newspaper she co-owned and edit , The Memphis Free Speech and Headlight. The public , it turn out , be starve for her story and devour them voraciously. The Journalist , a mainstream trade publication that cover the medium , name her “The Princess of the Press.” Readers of her work be draw in by her fine-tooth reporting method and language that , even by today’s standard , be aberrantly bold. Wells write about the victim of racist violence and organize economic boycott long before the tactic be popularized. “There have be no word equal to it in convince power , ” Frederick Douglass write to her in a letter that hatch their friendship. “I have speak , but my word be feeble in comparison , ” he added. He be refer to write like the kind that she publish in The Free Speech in May 1892. “Nobody in this section of the country believe the threadbare old lie that Negro men rape white woman , ” Wells wrote. Instead , Wells saw lynch a a violent form of subjugation — “an excuse to get rid of Negroes who be acquire wealth and property and thus keep the race terrorize and ‘the nigger down , ’ ” she write in a journal. Wells be bear into slavery in Holly Springs , Miss. , in 1862 , less than a year before Emancipation. She grow up during Reconstruction , the period when black men , include her father , be able to vote , usher black representative into state legislature across the South. One of eight sibling , she often tag along to Bible school on her mother’s hip. In 1878 , her parent both die of yellow fever , along with one of her brother ; and at 16 , she take on caring for the rest of her siblings. She support them by work a a teacher after drop out of high school and lie about her age. She finish her own education at night and on weekends. Around the same time , the Civil Rights Act of 1875 be largely nullify by the Supreme Court , reverse many of the advancement of Reconstruction. The anti-black sentiment that grow around her be ultimately codify into Jim Crow. “It felt like a dramatic whiplash , ” say Troy Duster , Wells’s grandson , who be a sociology professor at the University of California , Berkeley , and New York University. “She cut her teeth politically in this time of justice , justice , justice , and then injustice.” Observing the change around her , Wells decide to become a journalist during what be a golden era for black writer and editors. Her goal be to write about black people for black people , in a way that be accessible to those who , like her , be bear the property of white owner and have much to defend. Her article be often reprint abroad , as well a in the more than 200 black weekly then in circulation in the United States. Whenever possible , Wells name the victim of racist violence and tell their stories. In her journal , she lament that her subject would have otherwise be forget by all “save the night wind , no memorial service to bemoan their sad and horrible fate.” Wells also organize economic boycott long before the tactic be popularize by other , mostly male , civil right activist , who be often credit with it success. In 1883 , she be force off a train car reserve for white women. She sue the railroad and lose on appeal before the Tennessee Supreme Court , after which she urge African-Americans to avoid the train , and later , to leave the South entirely. She also travel to Britain to rally her cause , encourage the British to stop purchase American cotton and anger many white Southern business owners. Wells be a fierce in conversation a she be in her writing , which make it difficult for her to maintain close relationship , accord to her family. She criticize people , include friend and ally , whom she saw a weak in their commitment to the cause she care about. “She didn’t suffer fool and she saw fool everywhere , ” Duster , her grandson , said. One exception be her husband and closest confidant , Ferdinand L. Barnett , a widower who be a lawyer and civil right activist in Chicago. After they marry in 1895 , Barnett’s activism take a back seat to his wife’s career. Theirs be an atypically modern relationship : He cook dinner for their child most night , and he care for them while she travel to make speech and organize. Later in life , Wells fell from prominence a she be replace by activist like Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. Du Bois , who be more conservative in their tactic , and thus have more support from the white and black establishments. She help to find prominent civil right organization include the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the National Association of Colored Women , only to be edge out of their leadership. During the final year of her life , live in Chicago , Wells run for the Illinois State Senate , but lose abysmally. Despite her ebbing influence , she continue to organize around cause such a mass incarceration , work for several year a a probation officer , until she die of kidney disease on March 25 , 1931 , at 68. Wells be threaten physically and rhetorically constantly throughout her career ; she be call a harlot and a courtesan for her frankness about interracial sex. After her anti-lynching editorial be publish in The Free Speech , she be run out of the South — her newspaper ransacked and her life threatened. But her commitment to chronicle the experience of African-Americans in order to demonstrate their humanity remain unflinching. “If this work can contribute in any way toward prove this , and at the same time arouse the conscience of the American people to demand for justice to every citizen , and punishment by law for the lawless , I shall feel I have do my race a service , ” she write after flee Memphis , “Other consideration be minor.” Correction March 9 , 2018 An early version of this article refer imprecisely to vote right during Reconstruction. Black men be able to vote. Women do not get the right to vote until 1920. Caitlin Dickerson be a national immigration reporter. More than a century later , she still use the reporting technique that be pioneer by Ida B. Wells .