December 27 , 1931 OBITUARY Dr. Melvil Dewey Dead In Florida By THE NEW YORK TIMES LAKE PLACID , Fla. , Dec. 26 ( AP ) -- Dr. Melvil Dewey , internationally know educator , inventor of the decimal classification system use in library , and spell reform advocate , die here today of a cerebral hemorrhage. He celebrate his eightieth birthday on Dec. 10. His wife be with him at his death. A son , Dr. Godfrey Dewey of New York , also survives. Dr. Dewey come to Florida in 1926 and establish a southern branch of the famous Lake Placid Club of New York , of which he be the founder. Dr. Dewey a a boy split wood , pastured cow and do other chore for the penny and nickel offer by farmers. The meagre earnings he save , until he have enough for an unabridged dictionary , and he walk ten mile to Watertown , N.Y. to buy it. Before he be 15 he give up his intention to enter the ministry , in order to devote himself to popular education. This ambition lead him to devise the Dewey decimal system of library classification , which carry his name throughout the world , and to battle for the metric system of weight and measure and for simplify spelling. Then it make him head of the University of the State of New York , and finally take him into an entirely different field , with the establishment of the Lake Placid club a a resort for worker in education. Eager for Labor Saving Dr. Dewey have a passion for efficiency , for time and labor save methods. He be bear at Adams Centre , Jefferson County , N.Y. on Dec. 10 , 1851. He be graduate from Amherst College in 1874 and receive a Master 's degree there in 1877. While in college he be honorary assistant in the library , desire to learn it technique. He decide that much could be do in education by build up the library system and set about to apply his ideas. The college library drift into his management , and at the end of his junior year he be ask by the trustee to become acting librarian. It be here that he develop the system of classify and catalogue book by decimal number , a system now know by his name and use in practically all library in this country. In 1876 Dr. Dewey leave Amherst for Boston , where he start and manage organization to further the three `` simplify '' cause he be urging. These be the American Library Association , the American Metric Bureau and the Spelling Reform Association. Library work claim most of his attention , and he start The Library Journal to publicize his library movement , and the Library Bureau to sell the necessity for library catalogues. Nearly fifty year later the bureau be sell for several million dollar , but Dr. Dewey say he receive little of this , a he have dispose of his stock a little at a time to pull the Lake Placid Club through it early years. Chief Librarian at Columbia Dr. Dewey have these project well under way by 1883. For the next five year he be chief librarian at Columbia University. All of it library be combine under his direction , and he add more book than in the previous 130 year of the university 's history , incorporate his idea of library management , start free lecture , and open the library to women. At Columbia Dr. Dewey start his library school , which he take with him to Albany when he become secretary and executive officer of the University of the State of New York in 1889. When he go to Albany , he say later , he be a welcome among the politician there `` a a thorn would be in a sore thumb. '' They vow to be rid of him in a year , but he stay seventeen -- until 1900 -- a secretary of the State University and until 1906 a director of the State Library and Library School. Founds Lake Placid Club In the meantime , Dr. Dewey have found in 1895 the Lake Placid Club at Lake Placid , N.Y. He and his wife have be search for a resort where they might be free from hay fever and rise cold , and at Lake Placid they find it. `` We want to devote our life to the cause of education , '' he explain later , `` and one way of do this be to help the educators. If we could give them an opportunity to find health , strength and inspiration at moderate cost , we know we would be help them. '' So he buy land and start the club , despite the scorn heap upon `` that darn literary fellow '' who think he could run a Summer resort with no bar , no cigar stand , no gambling and no late hours. Instead of go broke , he build up an institution with 1,500 guest in Summer and 1,200 in Winter , 390 building and forty-three farm , a general store , a library of 10,000 volume , sport facility for all and a reputation a the centre of Winter sport in America. When he first provide room for guest for Winter sport , he be think crazy. Dr. Dewey and his son , Godfrey , have be active in arrange the Winter Olympics , which will take place at Lake Placid in February. Dr. Dewey be chairman of the New York State Winter Olympics Committee. Even a a club manager , Dr. Dewey retain his early enthusiasm , and his club guest read their menu in simplified spelling and write their meal order because Dr. Dewey find that this reduce food bill by $ 50,000 a year. In 1926 Dr. Dewey go South and start a branch of his club at Lake Placid , Fla. The club eventually go beyond it original purpose , and many wealthy person become member , but rate be vary to suit the purse of those of small means. He found also the Lake Placid Club Education Foundation in 1922 and the Adirondack Music Festival in 1925. He be a trustee of the Chautauqua Institution. Dr. Dewey marry twice. In 1878 he marry Annie R. Godfrey of Milford , Mass. , and in 1924 Mrs. Emily McKay Beal , vice president and manager of the Lake Placid Club .