October 18 , 1931 OBITUARY Human Qualities of the Inventor and Varied Aspects of His Busy Life Recalled By BRUCE RAE Thomas Alva Edison make the world a good place in which to live and bring comparative luxury into the life of the workingman. No one in the long roll of those who have benefit humanity have do more to make existence easy and comfortable. Through his invention of electric light he give the world a new brilliance ; when the cylinder of his first phonograph record sound he put the great music of the age within reach of every one ; when he invent the motion picture it be a gift to mankind of a new theatre , a new form of amusement. His invention give work as well a light and recreation to millions. His inventive genius brood over a world which at nightfall be engulf in darkness , pierce only by the feeble beam of kerosene lamp , by gas light or , in some of the large city , by the uncertainty of the old-time arc lights. To Edison , with the dream of the incandescent lamp in his mind , it seem that people still live in the Dark Ages. But his ferreting finger grope in the darkness until they evoke the glow that tell him the incandescent lamp be a success , and that light for all have be achieved. That significant moment occur more than fifty year ago- -on Oct. 21 , 1879. The Miracles of Menlo Park A blustering wind beat gustily on the unpainted board of a small laboratory in Menlo Park , N.J. A tall , lean figure stoop over a shaky table , his steel-blue eye fill with the impassioned light of discovery. Beside him be a thin , nervous assistant. The dull golden glow of kerosene lamp , puff off an oily odor , cast grotesque shadow on the wall , a every chance gust of air down the lamp chimney twist the erratic flame. Straining weary eye in the dim and uneven light , the assistant flutter the page of a notebook- -jottings on a miracle about to be performed. The corner of the laboratory be deep in shadow and the outside world be a waste of darkness , shoot by occasional rift of light. A few mile away be New York , with gas light in some of it home , but table lamp still a household necessity. The hoofbeats of it leisurely traffic pass along street brighten only by the pale yellow pool of light that circle the wide-spaced lamp posts. On Broadway the fabled midnight supper of the Victorian era be serve under crystal chandelier and gas globe ; there be no spotlight in the theatre and the footlights be feeble gesture at illumination. The two men in the laboratory be look from a dim present into a dazzling future , from darkness to Broadway 's bright display. Gravely Francis Jehl tell Mr. Edison that the lamp on the table have a good vacuum. An organ pump in a corner be start to force the air from the lamp. A minute or two go by in breathless silence. Then the inventor test the vacuum. It be right , and he tell Jehl to seal the lamp. The great moment be at hand. They move to the dynamo and start it. Light sprang from the lamp like a newly create world to the watch men. Edison put on more power. He think the makeshift filament would burst. Instead it grow bright. More power and more light. At last it broke. But the incandescent lamp have be invented. Tribute of a World Aglow Fifty year later the fruition of that night 's work be dramatize in the golden anniversary of the electric light. Broadway , Piccadilly , the Champs Elysees , Unter den Linden flash in golden brilliance. Cape Town , Rio de Janeiro , Peiping , Bangkok , Melbourne , Moscow -- city the world over , blaze an unconscious tribute , and at Dearborn , Mich. , Edison feebly re-lived that memorable night in the history of scientific progress. In a reconstructed Menlo Park , with President Hoover and Henry Ford look on , he and his faithful aide re-enacted the discovery of a half a century before , but with a different climax. The original scene at Menlo Park have be faithfully reproduce and every light extinguish , except the oil burner in the laboratory itself. At the second that the filament burn and Mr. Edison turn with a smile to the President , the dim yellow flame of the oil lamp leap to a golden spray of ampere a a Ford foreman pull a master switch. Dearborn leap from the darkness , and powerful light turn the night into noontime. Buildings emerge in twinkle frame , and airplane , with their wing and fuselage outline in electric light , dip and circle a the inventor , now grow feeble and silver-haired , return to the din hall to hear the President hail him a the benefactor of all mankind. He count this the best of his gift to humanity. The Magic Release of Music Then , in 1877 , Edison invent the cylinder phonograph , a crude affair which be not perfect until 1890 , and which be still undergoing refinement when World War break out in 1914. The average parlor music up to that time be provide by the harmonium , or the piano on which some musical maid practice her scale or laboriously pick out tune like `` Hearts and Flowers. '' There be a monotony and a tameness to the household melody , even in the city , and the fiddle held undisputed sway in rural districts. Then come the phonograph -- at first a novelty , then a luxury and , finally , a commonplace. It bring the great aria of opera into the tenements. Caruso 's voice soar for flat-faced Tibetans in the hill villages near Darjeeling. Traders saw to it that the spear-carrying native of Central Africa have a chance to hear crack orchestra from Broadway and Piccadilly grind out jazz , with a faintly reminiscent note. And , fifty year from now , the voice of Caruso and all his contemporary will be hear by those not yet born. Edison have a hand even in the perfection of the radio , that invention which have give his phonograph a back seat in the march of progress. In 1876 he perfect the carbon telephone transmitter , which , in turn , help in the evolution of the microphone. To complete his contribution to radio , it should be point out that in 1883 , while study the flow of current , he evolve what be know a the Edison Effect. This , in principle , be the basis for the De Forest radio lamp or tube. Stilled Images Brought to Life He first produce a motion picture camera in 1887 , but it be not until 1891 that he perfect it. Curiously enough , this historic machine do not interest him to any great extent. He fail utterly to envision Hollywood and the huge industry that his genius make possible. To Edison a succession of flash throw on a screen so rapidly that they make a continuous picture have possibility only a peep show in penny arcades. When some one suggest that the picture be show in theatre he demur , on the ground that to do so would interfere with the arcades. He do harbor the idea , however , that the picture might be synchronize with the phonograph. This he never work out , because of the failure of his early attempt to link conversation to move pictures. Thus he permit others to carry on his pioneering in this fertile field , but it be because of his early discovery that America lead the world in screen effect , and that the penny arcade , with it shoot gallery and knockout fight film , have yield to the cathedral of the screen. Also , because of Edison , it be possible for the native of Kamchatka to sit impassively , row upon row , and see how the high school champion dive team of Rural Centre , Ill. , put on a water carnival and raise money to pay the church mortgage. And vice versa , for the student of Rural Centre to see what the well-controlled native of Bengal do when a hungry tiger charge him. Edison do more than light the lamp at Menlo Park .