April 1 , 1931 OBITUARY Knute Rocke Dies with Seven Others in Mail Plane Dive By ROBERT F. KELLEY From his day a a player Knute Rockne make his influence felt on the trend of football. As captain of the 1913 Notre Dame team , he figure at end in the most successful exhibition of forward pass the game have see up to that time ; and from that date on the forward pas grow steadily to it present importance in the game. As a coach he bring the shift play to it high state of perfection and make it such an important factor in offensive football that the rule committee finally pass legislation design to take some of it power away. That shift development , the back field hop , be the most important of his contribution to the coaching of the game , but he add others , notably the reshaping of the line. Prior to Rockne , linemen be big men inevitably. Rockne bring the idea of use linemen , particularly guard , in interference , and demonstrate that the small , fast lineman could hold his own with the big man and outplay him where the big man be not a fast. Changed Strategy of Touchdown He work for the perfection of a team a a whole and his last two team win game after game through the successful application of what come to be call `` the perfect plays. '' In these every individual carry out a part of the blocking , and when no man fail to carry out his job the play often go for a touchdown. This perfect play do a great deal to wipe away the idea of aim first for score territory and then the score. Rockne always say that every play , if perfectly carry out , would go for a touchdown from wherever it be started. His last two team usually start their scoring with long run from scrimmage. In coach he try always for perfection and spent hour in teach the art of blocking. Simple play , well execute , be his idea of the way to win football games. He have small use for any so-called trick plays. There be only seven place in a line to send a man with a ball , he say , and there ought not to be many more than seven plays. Hard work be another of his slogans. `` The best thing I ever learn in life , '' he say last June during a visit to Poughkeepsie for the intercollegiate boat race there , `` be that thing have to be work for. A lot of people seem to think there be some sort of magic in make a win football team. There be n't , but there 's plenty of work. '' Suddenly Developed the Pass As a player and captain of the 1913 Notre Dame team , the first to ever beat the Army , Rockne begin his shaping of football 's destiny by bring the forward pas suddenly and dramatically into the front of the game. Army that season have schedule Notre Dame a a `` breather '' game on it schedule. Only a small crowd turn out , and they stand amaze a Notre Dame defeat Army , 35 to 13. Gus Dorais , now coach at Detroit , throw seventeen pass in that game and thirteen be complete , and a great majority of these go to the short , chunky end , Knute Rockne. The forward pas have be more or less of a haphazard thing until that time. The success of this Western team with it amaze the football world. Dorais and Rockne remain behind at West Point for a few day after that game to show the Army how it be done. One of the result of that be the famous Pritchard to Merrillat combination of Army teams. In that first success be an indication of the capacity for take pain which Rockne owned. That game be the direct result of the Summer before. Dorais and Rockne have obtain vacation job together at a mid-West beach and include a football in their baggage. All that Summer they get out on the beach and throw passes. The success against Army be no accident. It have be carefully planned. Remarkable Record as Coach As a coach , of course , Rockne 's record be one of the most remarkable that any coach of any sport have ever pile up. Nearly all of his team have be in the front rank of the game , despite the fact that they always play hard schedules. Five of them be undefeated. Taking over the head coach job , after help instruct in the chemistry department of Notre Dame , in 1918 , Rockne have almost immediate success. His 1919 team be undefeated and his 1920 team be one of the great that he had. To the game in general Rockne bring the high development of the backfield shift and a new conception of line play. He never claim the invention of the shift play. But there can be small argument with the idea that under him Notre Dame 's player bring it to it high perfection. So successful be his team with the shift that three year ago the football rule committee , fear the offense of the game would overbalance the defense , begin rule against it and this last year finally insist that a full second , in which an official might count five , must come between the close of the shift and the start of the ball. Rockne never be reconcile to this and never lose an opportunity to defend his favorite style of play. Legislating against the shift , he say , be like take the feint out of box and leave in only the slugging. Rockne organize coaching school in which coach might gather during the off season and study the method of others. He assist with Summer school all over the country and in 1928 even conduct one at sea when he charter a ship and take a party of coach and athlete to the Olympic Games of that year. Developed Famous Players Perhaps his great team come in 1920 , 1924 , 1929 and 1930. On the first be George Gipp , who be name by Rockne a the great player he ever had. The coach tell the story of see Gipp , who be not try for the team , throw a ball and kick on the campus and of induce him to join the squad. Gipp die a few week after the close of the 1920 season of a throat infection , with Rockne at his bedside. The 1924 team be the one of the famous Four Horsemen , Harry Stuhldreher , Jimmy Crowley , Don Miller and Elmer Layden. As a combination , they have not be excel in modern back field and they have a great line in front of them , lead by the famous Adam Walsh at centre , who be now assist with the coaching at Yale. That team of the Four Horsemen win all over the country , beat Princeton at Princeton with a temperature of 10 above zero , and several week later journey to the Coast to defeat Stanford in a temperature of 70 degrees. The record and name of the member of the two recent team be still fresh in memory , Frank Carideo , Marchmont Schwartz , Marty Brill , Joe Savoldi , Bucky O'Connor , Moon Mullins. And the 1930 team come very near to be the best. Northwestern , Army and Southern California be play on successive Saturdays. One Saturday , in Chicago , Army be turn back in ice and cold rain and the following week the highly regarded Southern California team be badly beat on the Coast. Provided Coaches for Nation If there be any doubt of the influence of Rockne on football , the list of head coach for the past year might remove it. There be , throughout the country , North , South , East and West , twenty-three head coach of football from Notre Dame without name the assistant here and there. Notable among them be Walsh and Rip Miller , who have this year be elevate to head coach at Navy. The mere record of his work fails to bring out for those who do not know him the biting , incisive , clear-cut character and personality of the man. Dramatic in everything he do , even to his death , Rockne become a sort of god to the boy who play for him. A great talker , a keen wit , he have a balance , sane philosophy of life and a keen knowledge of psychology. There be numerous instance in the near legend which have spring up about him of his use of the latter element in deal with his boys. The year that Army and Navy play in Chicago , in 1926 , he go to Chicago to watch the game , confident his strong team would beat Carnegie Tech without too much trouble in his absence. They do not. Used the Delayed Criticism The coach return to South Bend. The next week the team be to play on the Pacific Coast. All week , Rockne coach without mention the defeat. The player keep wait for him to say something. He do not. But when they board the train and open their baggage , each player find a carefully clipped account of the lost game in his baggage. They win on the Coast. This year , before the Army game , Rockne sit in the dressing room with his player , wait for the time to go out on the field. The player sit silently , wait for him to say something. The minute tick off in the quiet room , and finally an official come to tell them to come out. Rockne nod , stand up and say , `` Come on , boys. '' That be all. He have give word to the vocabulary of the sport as well , some of which fit exactly the army of people who criticize the player and coach after a defeat , wait until the day after to display their wisdom. `` Sunday morning coach '' be Rockne 's name for this class. A polished story-teller and a constantly interesting companion , Rockne make friend wherever he go , and be almost as much at home at the college he play against on his numerous visit a he be at his own. At these place he will be greatly miss a a friend .