March 6 , 1932 OBITUARY John Philip Sousa , Band Leader , Dies in Hotel at Reading Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES READING , Pa. , Sunday , March 6. -- John Philip Sousa , famous American band conductor and march king of a generation ago , die unexpectedly early this morning in his room in the Abraham Lincoln Hotel from an attack of heart disease. He come to Reading to lead the local Ringgold Band today in it 80th Anniversary concert a it guest conductor. He rehearse the band yesterday afternoon and at that time show no sign of illness. Last night he attend a civic dinner at the hotel in his honor at which 100 lead citizen and all the member of the Lincoln Band be present. In response to laudatory address he make a brief speech , ask to be excuse from say more in order that he might save his strength for the concert ahead of him. He tell two or three funny story , reminiscence of his long career , and sit down amid great applause. On Nov. 6 , his seventy-seventh birthday , Mr. Sousa stand before the WJZ microphone , lead a large band in `` The Stars and Stripes Forever '' on a nation-wide network , cut a birthday cake give by five noted conductor and tell the radio audience he want to live to be 100 so that he could write many more marches. On Feb. 11 he be the guest of honor at a dinner of the American Legion Post of the New York Athletic Club give at the club. Five hundred Legion member applaud a Mr. Sousa receive an honorary American Legion citation a the old and most distinguished Legionnaire. On Feb. 6 Representative Norton , Democrat , of Nebraska , introduce a Congressional resolution to designate `` The Stars and Stripes Forever '' a the national march. Conductor Since 1878 John Philip Sousa have be a conductor since 1878 and have be a musician since about 1861. The Famous Sousa Band , his own organization , have be in existence for nearly forty year and for the twenty year immediately precede he be the conductor of the Marine Band attach to the President 's household. Throughout his career a a conductor he have also be a composer , and it be an open question which of his two activity bring him the great renown. It would be difficult to segregate the two , however , for his march , his band and his personality serve a a single unit in create his unique reputation. Mr. Sousa be bear in Washington in 1854. The fact that his father be a musician and a member of the Marine Band which his son be later to lead , combine with the marital spirit of Civil War day of his youth in Washington , serve to give his talent the bent which make him the `` march king '' to all the world for a quarter of a century. His musical education begin at 7. He have already make up his mind that he want to be a musician , and four year later he win all the medal at the conservatory , the beginning of his collection of decoration , which be say to be the large in his field in the world. That same year he become a violin soloist , and two year later his father enrol him a an apprentice with the Marine Band. After several year with that organization he leave it to join a theatrical orchestra , and early in this period of his career he have an opportunity to substitute for the conductor. He be a conductor from that day on , and in 1880 he be appoint to head the Marine Band at the White House. Three year earlier , at 23 , he have be first violinist in the orchestra conduct by Jacques Offenbach during the latter 's tour of this country. His service at the White House cover the term of Presidents Hayes , Garfield , Arthur , Cleveland and Harrison. Many of his most famous musical work be compose during this period. One of these , `` The Washington Post March , '' be adopt by many dance master for use in teach the two-step , which be just be introduce at the time. He sell that composition , which be still widely play , for $ 35. Organized Band in 1892 Mr. Sousa organize his own band in 1892. It be not long before he attain world fame. It have be estimate that the band cover an aggregate itinerary of a million and a quarter mile , visit nearly every city in this country , a great many in Europe and others in all part of the world. The wide travel of the band throughout the United States on the semi-annual tour which be it customary program be consider to have contribute toward the furtherance of musical education in the nation. At the Paris Exposition in 1900 Sousa 's Band represent the United States a the official band from this country and be warmly acclaimed. After the exposition the band tour Europe , be the first musical organization from this country in a quarter of a century to undertake a tour of the Continent. Enthusiastic appearance be make in France , Germany , Belgium and Holland. Five tour of Europe be make by Sousa 's Band. Appearances by royal command be make before Queen Victoria and later before King Edward , the first at Sandringham and the second at Windsor. Started on Tour of World Mr. Sousa start out with his band in 1910 on a world tour which occupy fourteen month , conclude with a concert in New York. The leader and his 100 musician cover 60,000 mile , visit Europe , Africa , Australia , Tasmania , New Zealand , Honolulu and the Fiji Islands. Four year later they remain the entire season at the Hippodrome here , play to 60,000 person each week. After have repeatedly refuse to conduct his band over the radio , Mr. Sousa be at last persuade to lead a select group of fifty-two of his 100 musician in a series of one- hour concert , largely of his own composition , in 1929. At the time it be report he be receive `` more than $ 50,000 '' for his fee. The famous bandmaster have be fearful that he would not `` go over '' on the radio because of a lack of personal contact with his audience , but within a few hour of his initial appearance on May 6 , 1929 , he be overwhelm with congratulatory message , include one from Commander Richard E. Byrd at Little America , in the Antarctic Region. Wrote Welsh Fusiliers March Mr. Sousa lead the Marine Band in a new composition , the `` Royal Welsh Fusiliers March , '' at the dinner of the Gridiron Club in Washington on April 26 , 1930 , before President Hoover and a distinguish audience. The march be compose in honor of the cooperation of the famous Welsh regiment with the American marine in the relief of Tientsin in the Boxer uprising. He later conduct the Fusiliers ' own band in the march and be entertain at their barrack in London. In January , 1931 , Mr. Sousa reveal that he be set Edgar Allan Poe 's poem `` Annabel Lee '' to music. His last public appearance in this city be on April 20 , 1931 , when he conduct the orchestra in `` The Stars and Stripes Forever '' at the annual Lambs Gambol at the Metropolitan Opera House. One thing on which Mr. Sousa pride himself be his service record , it be his boast that he have see service with the army , the navy and the Marine Corps. The latter be represent by his service at the head of the White House Band. During the Spanish- American War he serve a musical director for the Sixth Army Corps. In the World War he organize band at the Naval Training Station at Great Lakes , Ill. Composed Many Stirring Marches Mr. Sousa compose more than 300 musical work , about a third of which be stir marches. `` The Stars and Stripes Forever , '' compose on the homeward voyage after a tour of Europe , have be frequently report to have be his own favorite. Others which have enjoy wide popularity include `` Semper Fidelis , '' `` The High School Cadets , '' `` King Cotton , '' `` El Capitan , '' `` Liberty Bell , '' `` Manhattan Beach , '' `` The Fairest of the Fair , '' `` The Invincible Eagle '' and `` The Thunderer. '' His musical work also include ten opera and a number of suite , as well a `` The Last Crusade , '' for orchestra , choir and organ , frequently consider his major work. He be also the author of several novel , as well a verse and magazine article , and a compiler of volume of musical pieces. Mr. Sousa be a member of the Sons of the Revolution , a Mason , and a member of the Society of Authors and Composers. His club include the Salmagundi , Players , Musicians , New York Athletic , Lambs , Army and Navy and the Gridiron of Washington. He be an enthusiastic trapshooter , and be also interested in horseback riding and boxing .