January 6 , 1933 OBITUARY Unusual Political Career of Calvin Coolidge , Never Defeated for an Office By THE NEW YORK TIMES Calvin Coolidge begin his career a a small-town lawyer , the first of his line to leave the soil after three century in New England. The Coolidges have always be farmer , frugal in their living , Puritan in spirit , and honorable in their dealing with their neighbors. When Calvin finally leave the rocky farm in Vermont , from which a living be so laboriously wrung , it be simply a change of circumstance , not of principle of conduct. He propose simply to lead a disciplined life and do the day 's work the best he could. He become the thirtieth President of the United States ; and , at the end of his second term , he share with the first President , George Washington , the distinction of retire before the nation be willing to let him go. All during his life he never change his character or methods. He listen , he assimilate , and he wait until there appear what seem to be the sound course. He do not try to make circumstance ; but , when they appear in the right configuration , he acted. Otherwise he waited. His distinguish characteristic be his ability to wait in silence. At first it make him a subject of ridicule. His opponent offer his career a a proof that if a man keep his mouth shut long enough , something fortunate be likely to happen to him. Eventually his silence be regard a a heroic manifestation and become a legend. Two situation which Calvin Coolidge do not create open the way to the Presidency. The first be the Boston police strike of 1919 , which bring him national prominence and the nomination for the Vice Presidency. The second be the death in 1923 of President Harding , which place him in the White House. His own political initiative obtain for him the nomination to succeed himself in 1924 and the confidence which the country felt after fifteen month of his administration be express in the vote that return him to the Presidency. The prestige of Coolidge be so great at the end of his second term that the leader of his party wish to override the tradition that no President should have a third term. It be with difficulty that President Coolidge prevent his enthusiastic renomination by the Republican National Convention in 1928. `` I Do Not Choose to Run '' As early a the Spring of 1927 the opinion that he could be re-elected be so generally express that President Coolidge attempt to dispose of it on the fourth anniversary of his accession to the office. On Aug. 2 , 1927 , he issue his famous statement : `` I do not choose to run for President in 1928. '' It be variously interpret throughout the country. Many saw in it a sincere wish for retirement , but still a willingness to accept the nomination should an insistent demand arise. Others look upon it a a final decision that he would not be a candidate for re-election. There be many , too , who regard it a a shrewd attempt to avoid the third term issue by have himself `` draft for office. '' The `` draft Coolidge '' movement assume such proportion , moreover , that Mr. Coolidge undertake to clarify the situation once more , in an address before the Republican National Committee the following December. In six sentence which be add at the last minute to a prepared speech , the President declare that he have eliminate himself entirely and advise the party to continue `` the serious task of select another candidate. '' `` This decision , '' he say , `` must be respected. '' But the `` draft Coolidge '' movement could not be stopped. When the Republican National Convention meet in Kansas City in June , 1928 , so many influential leader of State delegation be prepare to vote for him that the President send his secretary , Everett Sanders , from his Summer camp in Wisconsin to Kansas City to notify those leader to vote for anybody else. It be not his do , he write after leave the Presidency , that they turn to Mr. Hoover. `` Had I not send Mr. Sanders to Kansas City , '' Mr. Coolidge write after enter private life , `` I be told , I should have be nominated. I never state or formulate in my own mind what I should do under such circumstance , but I be determine not to have that contingency arise. My election seem assured. Nevertheless I felt it be not best for the country that I should succeed myself. It be therefore my privilege , after see my administration so strongly endorse by the country , to retire voluntarily from the great experience that can come to mortal man. In that way I believe I can best serve the people who have honor me and the country which I love. '' The account of his reason for decline a third term , a he present them in a magazine article in May , 1929 , be regard a a much good revelation of his character than the conventionalize autobiography which he also published. `` Irrespective of the third-term policy , '' he write , `` the Presidential office be of such a nature that it be difficult to conceive how one man can successfully serve the country for a term of more than eight years. Views on a Third Term `` While I be in favor of continue the long-established custom of the country in relation to a third term for a President , yet I do not think that the practice applies to one who have succeed to part of a term a Vice President. Others might argue that it do , but I doubt if the country would so consider it. `` Although my own health have be practically perfect , yet the duty be very great and ten year would be a very heavy strain. It would be especially long for the mistress of the White House. Mrs. Coolidge have be in more than usual good health , but I doubt if she could have stay there for ten year without some danger of impairment of her strength. `` A President should not only not be selfish but he ought to avoid the appearance of selfishness. The people would not have confidence in a man that appear to be grasp for office. `` It be difficult for men in high office to avoid the malady of self-delusion. They be always surround by worshipers. They be constantly and for the most part sincerely assure of their greatness. They live in an artificial atmosphere of adulation and exaltation which sooner or later impair their judgment. They be in grave danger of become careless and arrogant. `` The chance of have wise and faithful public service be increase by a change in the Presidential office after a moderate length of time. `` It be necessary for the head of the nation to differ with many people who be honest in their opinions. As his term progress , the number who be disappointed accumulates. Finally there be so large a body who have lose confidence in him that he meet a rise opposition which make his effort less effective. `` An examination of the record of those Presidents who have serve eight year will disclose that in almost every instance the latter part of their term have show very little in the way of constructive accomplishment. They have often be cloud with grave disappointments. `` While I have a desire to be relieve of the pretension and delusion of public life , it be not because of any attraction of pleasure or idleness. We draw our Presidents from the people. It be a wholesome thing for them to return to the people. I come from them. I wish to be one of them. '' Regarded Office a Stewardship In his administration of six year , President Coolidge be an outstanding example of a President who regard his office , the most powerful in the world , a a stewardship -- rather than a an opportunity to remake civilization. He proceed from practical consideration of government , politics and popularity , apply his life-long experience a an elect office-holder. His decision be usually compromise , make after long consideration of the conflicting interest involved. He announce them in a few word a possible and commit himself only so far ahead a might be necessary. During his administration the advance of the United States into the future be distinctly experimental -- always in search of the sound course. In a world where economics after the war have more influence than popular politics in develop animosity , he have to deal with the American attitude toward the League of Nations , the World Court , the tariff , farm relief , taxation , national defense and armament limitation. He believe that the American people saw in the covenant of the League , whether intend or not , a diminution of it independence , and in it provision the final recourse not to conscience but to force. In his first address to Congress after President Harding 's death President Coolidge set down these beliefs. His Views on the League `` Our country have definitely refuse to adopt and ratify the covenant of the League of Nations , '' he said. `` We have not felt warrant in assume the responsibility which it member have assumed. I be not propose any change in this policy ; neither be the Senate. The incident , so far a we be concerned , be closed. The League exist a a foreign agency. We hope that it will be helpful. But the United States see no reason to limit it own freedom and independence of action by join it. We shall do well to recognize this basic fact in all international affair and govern ourselves accordingly. '' `` Our country have one cardinal principle to maintain in it foreign policy , '' he write further. `` It be an American principle. It must be an American policy. We attend to our own affair , conserve our own strength and protect the interest of our own citizen ; but we recognize thoroughly our obligation to help others , reserve to the decision of our own judgment the time , the place and the method. We realize the common bond of humanity. We know the inescapable law of service. That principle lay at the bottom of all Washington 's statesmanship. It be this truly American view which not only save the Revolution but after it conclusion save all it have won. '' President Coolidge distrust the League of Nations on the practical ground that it be difficult enough to keep conflicting interest in balance in a government as large a the United States ; and it would be virtually impossible in a League of Nations to maintain a world balance which would command sufficient prestige to deal with a crisis. He favor the World Court of International Justice , however , a a mean of establish international law on an enduring basis and preserve peace by assure the judicial settlement of international controversies. He be not able to obtain an adherence to the World Court , however , before his administration come to an end. Meanwhile , he advocate a strong system of national defense while further the cause of armament reduction and the elimination of war in international relations. One of the last accomplishment of his administration , and one which give him the great satisfaction , be the international ratification of the Kellogg-Briand pact whereby the great nation of the world pledge themselves never again to have recourse to war a an instrument of national policy. Favored a High Tariff He maintain the traditional high tariff of the Republican party , regard it a essential to keep the United States as self-contained a possible in a world where the recent experience of the German Empire have demonstrate the difficulty of isolation. When he take office , however , after the death of President Harding , his attitude on all these question be unknown. All that the people know of him be that he have make a declaration which dispose of the Boston police strike in 1919 and bring him dramatically to the attention of the nation ; and that he have spend his life in elective office of increase importance and that he be 51 year of age when he become President of the United States. His record then be : Born on July 4 , 1872 , at Plymouth , Vt. , where he receive his preliminary education in an ungraded school ; secondary education at Black River Academy at Ludlow and St. Johnsbury Academy ; be graduate at Amherst College , 1895 ; thereafter study law in the office of Hammond & Field at Northampton , Mass. , for two year until admit to the bar. Offices : 1899 , City Councilman ; 1900 , City Solicitor ; 1906 , State Representative ; 1907 , re-elected ; 1909 , Mayor ; 1910 , re-elected ; 1911 , State Senator ; 1912 , re-elected ; 1913 , re-elected and chosen President of the Massachusetts Senate ; 1915 , Lieutenant Governor ; 1916 , re-elected ; 1918 , Governor ; 1919 , re- elect ; 1920 , Vice President of the United States , succeed President Harding in 1923 ; 1924 , elect President of the United States. Holding Office His Hobby `` What be your hobby ? '' a woman ask him at a Washington dinner party. `` Holding office , '' he say seriously. Fifteen time he be nominate for public office and never fail of election. After he retire from the Presidency , he write of his career : `` There be only one form of political strategy in which I have any confidence , and that be to try to do the right thing. '' He give his first resound illustration of this principle in August , 1919 , when strike and radicalism be indistinguishably confound in the uneasy period after the war and when the Boston police force , in opposition to the order of the Police Commissioner , form a union and obtain a charter from the American Federation of Labor. The Police Commissioner , the late Edward U. Curtis , suspend nineteen policeman who be official of the police union and a strike threatened. Mayor Andrew J. Peters appoint a citizen ' committee to adjust the controversy and this committee propose to recognize the right of the policeman to organize for good wage and work condition , but recommend that they remain independent of the American Federation of Labor , l they be involve in sympathetic strike and in partisanship in police strikes. Police Commissioner Curtis , however , take the position that his order forbid the formation of the union have be deliberately disobey and that it be now a matter of discipline and not of negotiation. The citizen ' committee appeal to Governor Calvin Coolidge , who , under the law of Massachusetts , have a right which have never be exercise , to remove the Police Commissioner of Boston. Governor Coolidge refuse to interfere with the conduct of the Police Department. A committee represent more than 1,000 of the unionized policeman call on him and complain about Commissioner Curtis 's concept of discipline and about their wage and live conditions. Governor Coolidge 's position be that he could not interfere in municipal police discipline ; and that , a to wage and live condition , the policeman be proceed by a wrong method. They tell him they intend to strike. `` Law and order will be maintain in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts , '' he said. Police Strike Impresses Nation On Sept. 9 , 1919 , at 5 o'clock in the afternoon the police leave their posts. The country , which have pay little attention to the development of the controversy , be electrify by the news that the police of old , conservative Boston have strike , leave the city at the mercy of the lawless. Bulletin follow bulletin across the country. A boy throw a brick through the plate-glass window of a Boston department store , and rioting and loot started. Hoodlums play crap on Boston Common and bully citizens. Boston be report in a state of anarchy. Next day Mayor Peters ask for troop and Governor Coolidge , who have order them hold in readiness , supply them forthwith. During the disturbance that day in the restoration of order there be at least one fatal shooting and a number of serious injuries. Public opinion , which have be divide a to the right of the Boston police to have some sort of organization , turn violently against the strikers. By the morning of Aug. 11 , thirty-six hour after the walkout , the State troop have completely re- establish security in Boston. Next morning Samuel Gompers , president of the American Federation of Labor , telegraph to the striking member of the police union to return to work. Police Commissioner Curtis , however , declare their post vacant and begin to recruit an entirely new police force for Boston , principally among returned war veterans. Mr. Gompers appeal to Coolidge for a recognition of the policeman 's right , and it be then that Calvin Coolidge write out his momentous reply : `` There be no right to strike against the public safety by anybody , anywhere , any time. '' His friend tell him this declaration would end his political career. `` Very likely , '' he say ; and sign it. Country Stirred by Declaration Throughout the country , however , it have a galvanic effect. Its directness seem to reduce what have be a hotly dispute question to a single indisputable point. To the rest of the United States the issue be definite. Either you stand for public safety or you stand against it. Coolidge become the hero of Americanism. Three month later , when Calvin Coolidge run for Governor of Massachusetts again , his plurality , which have be 17,000 the previous year , rise to 125,000. At the Republican National Convention of 1920 he be boom for the Presidency , but with the field occupy in force and fund by Wood , Lowden and others , Calvin Coolidge refuse to allow himself to be enter a a candidate for the nomination. After Warren G. Harding have finally be select for the Presidential nomination Senator Lenroot be slat for the Vice Presidency , and all that remain be for the convention to go through the motion of name him. Suddenly through the great hall a lone voice , not from Vermont or Massachusetts , but from Oregon , where the State have fight a bitter fight against radicalism , bellow `` Coolidge ! Coolidge ! '' The convention awake to a demonstration. Leaders and politics be forget among the delegate on the floor and the visitor in the gallery. They know why they be shouting. In a burst of enthusiasm for the hero of Americanism , the Vice Presidency go to Calvin Coolidge. When he succeed to the Presidency , in August , 1923 , on the death of President Harding , President Coolidge have the advantage of have sit in the Cabinet meeting regularly since the inauguration. It be one of President Harding 's innovation , which leave his successor thoroughly familiar with all the circumstance attend the policy which he now declare his intention of carry on. Early Days a President President Coolidge 's sureness and coolness from the outset impress those who come in contact with the new President. Within a few month after his accession he find himself in the most try situation that have ever face a President. Under a drive by the Senate that be perhaps without precedent , revelation of scandal in high place rock the nation. First be the disclosure a to the conduct of the Veterans Bureau , follow quickly by a series of sensation in the investigation of the naval oil lease and the administration of the Department of Justice and the office of the Alien Property Custodian. Refusing to be stampede even by his own political adviser , President Coolidge meet each situation with deliberation , take such action a he consider best in the public interest. He order prosecution , retire Cabinet member , but pass no judgments. The President 's enemy insist that his hand be force in every action that he take in connection with the Senate 's revelation and that the thought of his own political future dominated. On the other hand , his friend be equally positive that he meet these situation with the same courage that he show in the Boston police strike. President Coolidge emerge from the welter of investigation strongly entrench in popular regard. The conviction become general that he be a man of high integrity , insist on honesty in government , and that the scandal which have be ventilate could reflect no discredit on his administration , since they have happen before his accession to the Presidency. He face from the outset , however , a Congress plainly hostile , in which he encounter the most serious difficulty in put through any of the major proposal on his legislative program. Republican insurgent wield the balance of power by line up repeatedly with the Democrats in direct opposition to the President. He receive little material support , moreover , from the constituted leader of his party in the two house during his first term. He be therefore oblige to look elsewhere for champion of his re- nomination. The result be that , at the Republican National Convention in Cleveland in 1924 , the Congressional leader who have dominate party affair for so many year become mere cog in the party machinery. Calvin Coolidge be nominate for the Presidency on the first ballot , with Charles G. Dawes. By that time the country have take his measure. His major interest be honesty and economy in government , and on that he go to the country. He have veto a soldier ' bonus bill. He have veto the McNary-Haugen farm-relief bill with the equalization fee , which he characterize a `` economic folly. '' He advocate reduce surtax on the high income bracket , for the reason that a less confiscatory tax rate would in the long run be more productive of revenue. His policy a to prohibition be to enforce the law as long a it be on the statute books. Opposed in the campaign by John W. Davis a Democratic nominee and by the insurgent Senator Robert M. La Follette a an independent candidate , Mr. Coolidge be sweep back into office with Mr. Dawes by a popular vote of 15,000,000 -- nearly twice that give the Democratic nominee and more than three time as great a Senator La Follette 's total. During his term of office from 1925 to 1929 President Coolidge achieve more of his program. He be imperturbable under criticism of his administration , for he have usually foresee the criticism and it be part of his calculations. He be somewhat disturbed , however , by the legend which have grow up about the silence -- that he be a cold , inhuman political machine. He attempt to be more friendly , but his attempt be awkward with all but his most intimate associates. His natural taciturnity , his distaste for emotionalism , the disciplined life he have lead , and finally the dignity of his high office , all combine to keep him so apart from the rest of mankind that there be little out manifestation of any inner stir. Not Prominent at College He be so when he arrive at Amherst to go to college , a raw country boy with his pant tuck into his boot-tops and the mark of rural Vermont plain upon him. To the majority at college he remain unknown throughout the four year ; and with the exception of certain scholastic honor , attain no prominence. Only a few of the more thoughtful men remember later that they saw in him something unusual. He make no effort whatever to be popular ; often hardly a word would pass his lip for a day at a time , except such a be absolutely necessary to keep him supply with food and to report his presence in the classroom. So much silence , such concentrated silence , might savor of a pose , but Calvin Coolidge come by it naturally enough. His grandfather be a notorious hoarder of word ; and his father , whose common sense and straight think make his neighbor turn to him a a sort of unofficial magistrate in matter of neighborhood policy or dispute , manage life with a mere fraction of the ordinary allotment of conversation. Silent and unobtrusive a young Coolidge be at college , he be graduate with high honor and , in his senior year , in competition with the undergraduate of all American college , he win first prize , a gold medal offer by the Sons of the Revolution , for the best essay on `` The Principles of the War for American Independence. '' The Coolidge Romance Six year after his graduation he decide to marry Grace Goodhue as soon a he have earn enough money. That be in 1901. He say nothing to her about it until he be ready , in 1905. She be a teacher in the deaf and dumb school at Northampton. In the Summer of 1905 she go to Burlington , Vt. , for her annual vacation. The next day Calvin Coolidge arrived. Her parent imagine his law business have bring him there. When several day pass and Calvin the Silent appear to be untrammeled by business , inquiry reveal that he have no affair in Burlington. `` Just come over to be marry to Grace , '' he tell Mr. Goodhue. `` Have you speak to Grace yet ? '' the astonished father asked. `` No , '' he say , `` but I think I will in a couple of days. '' He return to Northampton that week with Grace Goodhue his wife. They live in half of a two- story house at 21 Massasoit Street , Northampton , where their son John and Calvin Jr. be bear , until they go to Washington after his election to the Vice Presidency. Calvin Coolidge have manage , by limit his want strictly , to stay in public life twenty year with only a private law practice that never amount to more than a few thousand dollar a year. Paid Dollar a Day for Room As Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts he live in a room at the Adams House that cost him a dollar a day. After his election a Governor his friend wait upon him with a suggestion : `` You ought to take a furnished house on Beacon Hill , where you can entertain influential men and live like a Governor. '' He listen without comment , but the only change he make be to take one more room at the Adams House. The old white paint on the two-family house in Northampton blister and peel , but when a well-to-do Boston friend ask him why he do n't ask his landlord to paint the place , he reply : `` Might raise the rent on me. '' The rise of Calvin Coolidge have never cease to puzzle politician , showman and other practitioner of the art of self-exploitation. His method seem doom to failure. He be not a mixer or a joiner of societies. He never slap a man on the back in his life. He be not an orator. His accent be pronounce by Boston a `` impossible. '' His expression of face be most often describe a vinegary. Neighbors who live in the same street at Northampton for more than twenty year never pretend to know him `` except by sight. '' `` I do n't vote for you , '' say one of them in exasperation , one day. `` Some do , '' he reply and pass on. Calvin Coolidge 's only analysis of his success on record after his retirement be : `` Fate bestow it reward on those who put themselves in proper attitude to receive them. '' In one of his article , in 1929 , Mr. Coolidge tell of `` the price which Providence exact for occupy the White House. '' Tragedy of His Son 's Death `` We do not know what might have happen to my son Calvin Jr. under other circumstance , but if I have not be President he would not have raise a blister on his toe , which result in blood poisoning , play lawn tennis in the south grounds. In his suffering he be ask me to make him well. I could not. When he go , the power and glory of the Presidency go with him. `` The way of Providence be often beyond our understanding. It seem to me that the world have need of the work that it be probable he could do. I do not know why such a price be exact for occupy the White House. `` Sustained by the great outpouring of sympathy from all over the nation , my wife and I bow to the Supreme Will , and with such courage a we have go on in the discharge of our duties. `` In less than two year my father follow him. `` At his advanced age he have overtax his strength receive the thousand of visitor who go to my old home at Plymouth. It be all a great satisfaction to him , and he would not have have it otherwise. `` When I be there and visitor be keep from the house for a short period , he would be really distress in the thought that they could not see all they wish , and he would go out where they be himself and mingle among them. `` I know for some week that he be pass his last days. I send to bring him to Washington , but he cling to his old house. `` It be a sore trial not to be able to be with him , but I have to leave him where he most wish to be. When his doctor advise me that he could survive only a short time , I start to visit him , but he sink to rest while I be on my way. `` For my personal contact with him during his last month I have to resort to the poor substitute of the telephone. `` It cost a great deal to be President. '' Crowds Forced Him From Home When he attempt to return to private life , former President Coolidge find the cost of the Presidency still pursue him. He move back into the two-family house in Northampton and resume his favorite relaxation of porch sitting , but find the street jam with tourist who come to stare at him. In self-protection he be force to buy a house and eight acre in another part of Northampton for $ 40,000. There he write his first article for publication , tell what it mean to be President and what sort of life he have led. For a time , he supply a daily comment of 200 word to a syndicate of papers. It be widely follow by a public which apparently find satisfaction in his presentation of the common verities. He write in one of them about the pleasantness of Springtime : `` the open country , the unhurried silence , the refreshing leisure be a stimulation to the body and a benediction to the soul. '' He also improve the ancestral Coolidge farm and homestead at Plymouth , where his father administer to him the oath of office on the death of President Harding. Here Mr. Coolidge be a frequent visitor after his retirement from the White House , stroll about the farm or go off into the wood with a gun to shoot partridges. The farm attract at one time as many a 300 visitor a day , even when Mr. and Mrs. Coolidge be absent. These be show about the place by a guide report to be a economical of word a Mr. Coolidge himself. While write frequent article for magazine , which he continue to do until a few month before his death , Mr. Coolidge be mention often for important business and educational posts. On Oct. 27 , 1932 , upon publication of report that he be consider for the chancellorship of New York University to succeed Elmer Ellsworth Brown , Mr. Coolidge be finally compel to write a statement advise newspaper to discount a untrue any report mention him for some position. Became Director of New York Life Posts which he accept after retirement from the Presidency be those of president of the American Antiquarian Society , to which he be re-elected in October , 1932 ; a directorship on the board of the New York Life Insurance Company , to which he be elect on April 10 , 1929 , and the chairmanship of the National Transportation Committee , form by a group of bank , insurance company and other organization interested in railway security , for the purpose of study the situation of the railroad and present for public approval recommendation a to what step be desirable to improve their position. Announcement of the formation of this committee be make on Sept. 27 , 1932. Serving with Mr. Coolidge be Bernard M. Baruch , Alfred E. Smith , Clark Howell Sr. , publisher of The Atlanta Constitution , and Alexander Legge , president of the International Harvester Company and former chairman of the Farm Board. Mr. Coolidge be also a trustee of the Conrad Hubert Foundation of Chicago. Mr. Coolidge 's duty a a director of the New York Life Insurance Company and chairman of the National Transportation Committee bring him to New York from Northampton at various times. These visit be always quiet and unobtrusive. His last visit to New York be in connection with a meeting of the transportation committee in December. Campaign Speeches for Hoover Last Oct. 2 , Mr. Coolidge make his first public address in four year , when he appear in Madison Square Garden at a Republican campaign rally. He assail Governor Roosevelt and the Democratic party and argue for the re-election of President Hoover. His last speech be on the evening of Nov. 7 , another appeal for the President 's re-election , deliver in a radio broadcast from Northampton. During the month precede the renomination of President Hoover , many Republicans look again toward Mr. Coolidge a a candidate , but he turn a deaf ear to any suggestion of a return to politics. Nevertheless , he be regard in some circle a the Republican hope for 1936. Mr. Coolidge 's last message to the American people be voice in a New Year 's symposium broadcast from Station WINS in New York on Jan. 1 , in which he say : `` For the year 1933 it seem to me that we need cooperation and charity. The resource of our country be sufficient to meet our requirement if we use them to help each other. We should cooperate to promote all kind of business activity. We should do what we can in the way of charity. If all that be imply in these two word could be put into operation , not only would our economic condition begin steadily to improve but our destitute would secure ample relief. I can think of no good resolution for the new year than to work in these directions. '' Mr. and Mrs. Coolidge spend New Year 's and Christmas quietly at their home in Northampton. On Christmas Day they attend morning service at the Edwards Congregational Church .