September 26 , 1933 OBITUARY Ring Lardner Dies ; Noted a Writer Special to The New York Times EAST HAMPTON , L. I. , Sept. 25. -- Ring W. Lardner , sport writer , author and playwright , die at his home here tonight of a heart ailment at the age of 48. Mr. Lardner succumb in his sleep. He have not be conscious since early in the afternoon. Mrs. Lardner and two of their son , with Dr. Cornelius Tyson , Mr. Lardner 's physician , be at the bedside when the end came. The two son be John Abbott Lardner , a reporter on The New York Herald Tribune , and Ring W. , Jr. , a student at Princeton University. The other son , James Phillips , a student at Harvard University , and David Ellis Lardner , a student at Andover , be at school. Mr. Lardner have suffer from a heart ailment for several years. In 1931 , he go to Arizona to seek relief , and return greatly improved. Last Spring a recurrence of the illness send him to California , where he spend several months. He return some week ago to his home here , and have spend much of the time since confine to his bed. Besides his wife and son , Mr. Lardner leave two sister , Mrs. R. G. Tobin of Douglaston , L. I. , and Miss Lena Lardner of Niles , Mich. , and three brother , Rex Lardner , a member of the staff of The New York Times ; Henry Lardner of Niles , Mich. , and William Lardner of Duluth , Minn. Had Cherished Three Ambitions In a moment of whimsical autobiography some year back Ring Lardner explain that at various time in his life he have cherish three great ambitions. As a youth he wonder whether he would ever see enough baseball. Then , a little late and in a new period , he want to write story for the magazine -- and have them printed. Finally , in a more recent phase , he worry about whether he would ever have a play produced. He be successful in each of the three. As a newspaper man and sport reporter he saw all the baseball he like -- and , indeed , a he say afterward , more than that. But baseball lead him into the field of magazine , and ultimately to the writing of the story collect under such title a `` The Love Nest , '' `` How to Write Short Stories '' and all the rest. Then the stage follow a a matter of course. `` June Moon , '' on which he collaborate two season ago , give a happy proof of his ability in that field. In 1905 he close the prelude to his career , for in that year he cease keep book for the gas company at Niles , Mich. , and go to South Bend , Ind. , to reporting and baseball. He have be bear twenty year before , duly educate at the local high school and then send , for an attempt at the lore of the engineer , to the Armour Institute in Chicago. He `` have no more desire to be an engineer than to be a sheep herder , '' he say , and -- his mark prove it -- the authority suggest the gas company. Started a Sporting Editor As he sit on his bookkeeper 's stool his interest in baseball be get stronger. Then his chance came. His brother , who also have desert engineering for newspaper work , be the correspondent for a Sound Bend paper. He be a good one and the paper like his work so well that a man be send to offer him a staff job. The emissary stop at the gas plant to inquire when the elder Lardner might be found. He go no further. Ring Lardner explain that the brother have `` a contract he ca n't get out of , but I would make you a good man. '' He be hired. For two year he be sport editor of The South Bend Times , a position that carry with it the dubious corollary of be the local team 's official scorer. He saw plenty of baseball , and the argument due all official scorers. Then , in 1907 , the world 's series be play in Chicago , and Mr. Lardner , take his vacation , went. He be introduce to Hugh Fullerton , the sport writer , who be the mean of find him a vacancy on the staff of The Chicago Inter Ocean. In the Spring he go on the road with the White Sox. One ambition be realized. For the next six year he write sport in Chicago , Boston and St. Louis. In 1911 he marry Miss Ellis Abbott of Goshen , Ind. , and he be just pay for the furniture when his Boston paper be swept away. He borrow the money for a return to Chicago from the owner of the Red Sox and the Braves. He pay them back , `` to their astonishment , '' a he later explained. In 1913 Hugh E. Keogh , whose sport column , call `` By Hek , '' be consider the best thing of it kind in the country , die and Mr. Lardner be give the difficult task of fill it. At first twenty letter a day to The Tribune tell him how he failed. Ventured on Use of Dialogue It be in an effort to turn out seven column a week that Lardner hit upon the method which be to make him famous. In hotel lobby , clubhouse , dugout , he have be listen to talk among the ball player -- use slang and singular noun and plural verb mixed together. One day in an effort to fill out his piece he write a short dialogue supposedly between two player engage in a Pullman car poker game. It be the mixture a note above , with shrewd touch of character and the natural speech of the lowbrow. The innovation be favorable received. In the world 's series he invent a left-handed pitcher of the Giants , who report the game in the Lardner style. Fans begin ask who the author be , and a friend , the late Charles E. Van Loan , advise him to send some of his work to The Saturday Evening Post. He do so , and a check and a call for more come back. He be on his way to the fulfillment of the second ambition -- and friend `` Al '' be create to delight a nation. For the next six year Lardner continue to fill his column on The Chicago Tribune and to write magazine stories. In 1919 he leave the paper to join a newspaper syndicate and move to Great Neck , L. I. In the period before come East , he publish a number of book -- '' Bib Ballads , '' 1915 ; `` You Know Me , Al , '' 1915 ; `` Gullible 's Travels , '' 1917 ; `` Own Your Own Home , '' 1917 ; `` Treat 'Em Rough , '' 1918 ; `` The Real Dope , '' 1918 ; `` My Four Weeks in France , '' 1918 , and `` The Young Immigrants , '' 1919. Later come `` Symptoms of Being 35 , '' `` The Big Town , '' `` How to Write Short Stories , '' `` What of It ? '' `` The Love Nest , '' `` The Story of a Wonder Man '' and `` Round Up. '' Mr. Lardner 's most recent fiction story be write for The American Magazine and The Delineator. His First Play Produced His come to New York be the beginning of his third period. He admit that he move for no other reason than to be near the headquarters of the theatre. His weekly sketch for the syndicate could be write in Chicago as easily a in New York. Morris Gest , on a visit West , have `` gamble '' and have give him a five-year contract -- but that impresario do not like Ring Lardner 's plays. Other manager refuse them , also. In 1928 Walter Huston appear in `` Elmer the Great. '' This be satire , make the thick- head pitcher the butt of more than a passing joke. And then , a year later , come the bounding `` June Moon , '' which be suggest to George S. Kaufman and Mr. Lardner by one of the latter 's short stories. He write the song for it , also. Also in his period of the theatre belong Mr. Lardner 's sketch and lyrics. Back in 1922 , in the Ziegfeld Follies of that year , be a Lardner baseball scene , with none other than Will Rogers a the veteran pitcher. A bit later in the season he be represent in `` The 49ers , '' his contribution be an epic of three fisherman well out beyond the three-mile limit. There be several sketch by him in `` The Nine Fifteen Revue '' of 1930 , and a number of lyric in `` Smiles '' of the same year. In the preface to `` The American Language '' occur the following , by H. J. Mencken and George Jean Nathan : `` Its discovery [ the speech of the mass a it be speak ] have to wait until Ring W. Lardner , a Chicago newspaper reporter. In his grotesque tale of baseball player , so immediately and so deservedly successful , Lardner report the common speech not only with humor but with the utmost accuracy. His writing be a mine of authentic Americana ; his service to etymology incomparable . ''