January 18 , 1933 OBITUARY Louis C. Tiffany , Noted Artist , Dies By THE NEW YORK TIMES Louis Comfort Tiffany , artist and philanthropist , president of the Tiffany Studios , 46 West Twenty-third Street , and son of the founder of Tiffany & Co. , jeweler , of which he be , himself , a vice president and director , die at 6:45 o'clock last night at his residence , 27 East Seventy- second Street , an apartment house which he designed. He have be ill for ten day with pneumonia. He be 84 year old. Surviving be a son , Charles L. Tiffany , and four daughter , Mrs. Graham Lusk , Mrs. Rodman Gilder , Mrs. Frank Weld , all of this city , and Mrs. Dorothy T. Burlingham of Vienna. The funeral service will be hold privately at the convenience of the family. Louis Comfort Tiffany be among the best known of American artists. He be bear in New York on Feb. 18 , 1848 , a son of Charles Lewis Tiffany , the jeweler , and Mrs. Harriet Olivia Young Tiffany. He study art under George Inness and Samuel Coleman in New York and under Leon Bailly in Paris. Yale University confer an honorary A. M. degree on him in 1903. Mr. Tiffany 's painting in oil and water-color be chiefly of Oriental scenes. He also execute decorative work and be best know for his work in glass. He devise new formula for decorative design in this medium know a `` Tiffany Favrile glass. '' It be produce by the Tiffany Studios , of which he be president and art director. Mr. Tiffany also be vice president and director of Tiffany & Co. , jeweler , and vice president and director of Tiffany & Co. Safe Deposit Company. Honors Won at Expositions A gold medal be award to him and he be make Chevalier of the Legion of Honor in Paris in 1900. In 1893 , at the World 's Columbian Exposition in Chicago , he receive fifty-four medals. Other honor include the grand prix at the Paris Exposition in 1900 and at St. Petersburg the next year ; gold medal , Buffalo Exposition in 1901 and the Dresden Exposition the same year ; grand prix and special diploma at the Turin Exposition in 1902 ; gold medal at the St. Louis Exposition in 1904 and the Jamestown Exposition in 1907 ; grand prize at the Seattle Exposition in 1909 , and gold medal at the Panama Exposition in 1915 and at the Sesquicentennial Exposition at Philadelphia in 1926. He be a member of the Century Club , American Water Color Society , New York Society of Fine Arts , Architectural League , Imperial Society of Fine Arts of Tokyo , Japan , and the Societe National des Beaux-Arts in Paris. In 1919 he establish the Louis Comfort Tiffany Foundation for art student at Oyster Bay and deeded to it his entire collection of painting , glass and other art object , together with a fund of $ 1,000,000 , the income from which be use to maintain the institution. Its purpose , a outline by Mr. Tiffany , be `` art education , direct both to art appreciation and production within the scope of the industrial as well a the fine art , and , a one mean toward these educational purpose , the establishment and maintenance of a museum to contain object of art. '' Mr. Tiffany give his Oyster Bay home , Laurelton Hall , to the foundation , together with eighty acre of land. He build studio and luxurious living quarter and every Summer invite fifty artist , from all part of the country to work there at his expense. The twelfth annual exhibit of the work of member of the foundation at the American-Anderson Galleries represent the work of more than 300 artists. The 500 piece exhibit included painting , sculpture , lithograph , metal work and jewelry. His Art Much Discussed Mr. Tiffany be reckon a one of the first exponent of modern art in the United States. His own painting , architectural design and glass bring about much discussion. When recognition come to him , however , it be overwhelming. During his late year he lean rather toward the conservative in art , although he be greatly interested in the work of all member of the foundation , however modern. His own home anticipate by twenty year the modern trend in furniture. He have design the house , ground , furniture , carpet , textile , silver and china. There be studio for painting and sculpture and workshop for metal jewelry design , all connect with the house by a long , glass- cover passageway. He live there alone , except for servant and two train nurses. Mr. Tiffany marry Miss Mary Woodbridge Goddard on May 15 , 1872. Two year after her death in 1884 he marry Miss Louise Wakeman Knox , a daughter of the Rev. J. H. Mason Knox of Philadelphia , who die several year ago. On Jan. 8 , 1931 , in celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of his election to the National Academy of Design , member of the council of the organization call on him at his home to present to him an illuminated parchment extol his service to art. Cass Gilbert , president of the academy , head the delegation. On the parchment be inscribe : `` The officer and council of the National Academy of Design send greeting to our fellow- member , Louis Comfort Tiffany , and congratulate him on his fifty year a an academician. During this time , inspire by a vision of the future , his creative genius have open new field , add great beauty to the world of art and bring much honor to his profession. `` It also desire to express it appreciation for his help and encouragement to many worker in the art who have take advantage of his splendid generosity in found the Louis Comfort Tiffany Foundation . ''