December 15 , 1934 OBITUARY T. A. Watson Dead ; Made First Phone By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS ST. PETERSBURG , FLA. , Dec. 14 -- Thomas A. Watson , manufacturer of the first telephone instrument and first to hear a human voice over the device , that of it inventor , Alexander Graham Bell , die suddenly of heart disease here last night at his Winter home on Pass-Grille Key. He be 80 year old. Mr. Watson come here three week ago from his home on Beacon Street , Boston. He have be a Winter visitor here since 1918. In an interview here several year ago Mr. Watson describe how an accident , involve spill acid , result in the first actual reception of a human voice over a wire on March 10 , 1876. Professor Bell and Mr. Watson have arrange wire lead from a room on the top floor of a Boston boarding house to a room on the floor below. The apparatus be arrange for transmission of the voice in one direction only. A Historic Shout. Watson be wait tensely in the room below , with the reception apparatus hold against his ear. Suddenly he hear Dr. Bell shout excitedly : `` Mr. Watson ! Come here ; I want -- ! '' Struck with the realization that he have actually hear Professor Bell over the wire , Watson dash jubilantly upstairs. `` I hear you ! I hear you ! '' he gasped. Then he notice Professor Bell brush frantically at his arm and clothing. He have accidentally spill a bottle of acid upon himself. His summons over the wire , make with little hope it would be hear , be really one for assistance. Mr. Watson say Professor Bell forget about the acid when he learn his voice have be hear over the wire by his associate. Partner of Bell. Bell and Watson become acquaint during the apprenticeship of Watson in a machine shop at Boston , where experimental machinery be be make for Professor Bell. The latter at that time be a teacher of deaf mute in Boston. It be while experiment with the vibration of the drum of a deaf man 's ear that he first become convinced of the possibility of convey the human voice by wire. After two year ' employment in the machine shop Mr. Watson form a partnership with Professor Bell. They rig up a secret laboratory in a cellar at Salem , Mass. , and Watson agree to devote all his time to perfect the Bell invention in consideration of a share in the Bell patents. On Oct. 9 , 1876 , they have so perfect the telephone that they hold a conversation between Boston and Cambridge over a two-mile wire. Nearly forty year after their first telephone conversation , Dr. Bell and Mr. Watson have the honor of be the first person to talk by telephone across the American continent. Meanwhile , they have see their invention grow steadily until more than 13,000,000 telephone be in use throughout the world. In 1920 Mr. Watson visioned telephone conversation across the Atlantic Ocean a `` only the beginning of modern development in this method of communication. '' Six year later he predict that in the future `` man will speak to man by mental telepathy . ''