March 6 , 1935 OBITUARY Washington Holds Bright Memories of Justice Holmes 's Long and Useful Life By THE NEW YORK TIMES As Justice Holmes grow old he become a figure for legend. Eager young student of history and the law , with no possibility of an introduction to him , make pilgrimage to Washington merely that they might remember at least the sight of him on the bench of the Supreme Court. Others so fortunate a to be invite to his home be apt to consider themselves thereafter a men set apart. Their elder , far from discourage this attitude , strengthen it. A group of lead jurist and liberal fill a volume of essay in praise of him , and on the occasion of it presentation Chief Justice Hughes say : `` The most beautiful and the rare thing in the world be a complete human life , unmarred , unify by intelligent purpose and uninterrupted accomplishment , bless by great talent employ in the worthy activity , with a deserving fame never dim and always growing. Such a rarely beautiful life be that of Mr. Justice Holmes. '' Born in Boston in 1841 He be bear on March 8 , 1841 , in Boston. The cultural dominance of New England be at it height. The West be raw , great part of it wilderness a yet only sketchily explored. A majority of the nation 's citizen still consider the enslavement of Negroes a the operation of a law of God , and Darwin have not yet publish his `` Origin of Species. '' The circumstance of his birth be fortunate. His father , Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes , be of New England 's ruling caste and the atmosphere of his home be at once brahminical , scientific and literary. They boy be to start each day at that `` autocratic '' breakfast table where a bright say win a child a second help of marmalade. The boy be prepare for Harvard by E. S. Dixwell of Cambridge. He be fortunate again in this. Well-tutored , he make an excellent record in college. His intimacy with Mr. Dixwell 's household be very close. His tutor 's daughter , Fanny Dixwell , and he fell in love with each other and later they be married. Fort Sumter be fire on and President Lincoln call for 75,000 volunteers. Young Holmes , 20 year old and shortly to be graduate from Harvard with the class of '61 , walk down Beacon Hill with an open Hobbe 's `` Leviathan '' in his hand and learn that he be commission in the Twentieth Massachusetts Volunteers. The regiment , largely officer by young Harvard men and later to be know a the `` Harvard Regiment , '' be order South and into action at Ball 's Bluff. There be grave tactical error and the Union troop be drive down the cliff on the Virginia shore and into the Potomac. Men try to swim to safety be kill and wound men be drowned. Lieutenant Holmes , with a bullet through his breast , be place in a boat with die men and ferry through save darkness to the Maryland shore. His wound be serious , but the sufferer be young and storng. For convalescence he be return to Boston. On his recovery he return to the front. At Antietam a bullet pierce his neck and again his condition be critical. Dr. Holmes , on learn the news , set out to search for his son. The search last many worried day and bring the father close to the line at several points. He find his son already convalescent and bring him back to Boston , where he write his experience under the title , `` My Hunt for the Captain , '' an article that be enthusiastically receive a bring home to Boston a first-hand picture of the trial of war directly behind the lines. Wounded a Third Time Back at the front , the young officer be again wounded. A bullet cut through tendon and lodge in his heel. This wound be long in healing and Holmes be retire to Boston with the brevet rank of Colonel and Major. The emergency of war over , his life be his own again. There be the question , then , of what to do with it. Writing appeal to him. He have be class poet and prize essayist in college. But he finally turn to law , although it be long before he be sure that he have take the best course. `` It cost me some year of doubt and unhappiness , '' he say later , `` before I could say to myself : 'The law be part of the universe -- if the universe can be think about , one part must reveal it as much a another to one who can see that part. It be only a question if you have the eyes. ' '' Philosophy and William James help him find his legal eye while he study in Harvard Law School and James , a year younger , be study medicine. Through long night they discuss their `` dilapidate old friend the Kosmos. '' James later be to write in affectionate reminiscence of `` your whitely lit-up room , drink in your profound wisdom , your golden jibe , your costly imagery , listen to your shudder laughter. '' But while James go on , continue in Germany his search for the meaning of the universe , Holmes decide that `` maybe the universe be too great a swell to have a meaning , '' that his task be to `` make his own universe livable , '' and he drive deep into the study of the law. He take his LL. B. in 1866 and go to Europe to climb some mountains. Early in 1867 he be admit to the bar and James note that `` Wendell be work too hard. '' The hard work bring results. In 1870 he be make editor of the American Law Review. Two year later , on June 17 , 1872 , he marry Fanny Bowditch Dixwell and in March of the next year become a member of the law firm of Shattuck , Homes & Munroe , resign his editorship but continue to write article for The Review. In that same year , 1873 , his important edition of Kent 's Commentaries appeared. His paper , particularly one on English equity , which bristle with citation in Latin and German , show that he be a master scholar where mastery mean labor and penetration. It be into these early paper that he put the fundamental of an exposition of the law that he be later to deliver in Lowell Lectures at Harvard and to publish under the title , `` The Common Law. '' In this book , to quote Benjamin N. Cardozo , he `` pack a whole philosophy of legal method into a fragment of a paragraph. '' The part to which Judge Cardozo refer read : `` The life of the law have not be logic ; it have be experience. The felt necessity of the time , the prevalent moral and political theory , intuition of public policy avow or unconscious , even with the prejudice which judge share with their follow-men , have have a great deal more to do than the syllogism in determine the rule by which men should be governed. The law embody the story of a nation 's development through many century , and it can not be dealt with a if it contain only the axiom and corollary of a book of mathematics. '' Judge Cardozo , comment on this , write : `` The student of juristic method , bewilder in a maze of precedent , feel the thrill of a new apocalypse in the flash of this revealing insight. Here be the text to be unfolded. All that be to come will be development and commentary. Flashes there be like this in his early manner a in his late , yet the flash grow more frequent , the thunder peal more resonant , with the movement of the years. '' Makes His Debut a Judge Holmes be only 39 year old when Harvard call him back to teach in her Law School and 41 when he become an Associate Justice on the Massachusetts Supreme Court bench. So in that great period when Joseph H. Choate could call a Federal income tax `` sheer communism , '' the young Massachusetts justice could , with no bias , write dozen of dissent opinion in which he express view that since have be mold into law. He be Chief Justice on the Commonwealth bench when , in 1901 , Theodore Roosevelt note that Holmes 's `` labor decision '' be criticize by `` some of the big railroad men and other member of large corporations. '' Oddly enough the successor of William McKinley think that be `` a strong point in Judge Holmes 's favor. '' In reference to this the President write to Henry Cabot Lodge : `` The able lawyer and great judge be men whose past have naturally bring them into close relationship with the wealthy and most powerful client and I be glad when I can find a judge who have be able to preserve his aloofness of mind so a to keep his broad humanity of feeling and his sympathy for the class from which he have not draw clients. '' In further expression of this approval he in 1902 appoint Judge Holmes to the Supreme Court of the United States , an appointment that be confirm by the Senate immediately and unanimously. In a dissenting opinion write early in his career on the Supreme bench Justice Holmes bluntly tell his associate that the case in hand have be decide by the majority on an economic theory which a large part of the country do not entertain , that general principle do not decide concrete case , that the outcome depend on a judgment or institution more subtle than any articulate major premise. A great struggle between the force of Theodore Roosevelt and the elder J. P. Morgan begin on March 10 , 1902 , when the government file suit in the United States Circuit Court for the district of Minnesota charge that the Great Northern Securities Company be `` a virtual consolidation of two compete transcontinental line '' whereby not only would `` monopoly of the interstate and foreign commerce , formerly carry on by them a competitor , be create , '' but , through use of the same machinery , `` the entire railway system of the country may be absorb , merge , and consolidated. '' In April , 1903 , the low court decide for the government and 8,000 page of record and brief go to the United States Supreme Court for final review. On March 14 , 1904 , the high court find for the government , with Justice Holmes write in dissent. He hold that the Sherman act do not prescribe the rule of `` free competition among those engage in interstate commerce , '' a the majority held. It merely forbid `` restraint of trade or commerce. '' He assert that the phrase `` restraint of competition '' and `` restraint of trade '' do not have the same meaning ; that `` restraint of trade , '' which have `` a definite and well-established significance in the common law , mean and have always be understand to mean , a combination make by men engage in a certain business for the purpose of keep other men out of that business * * *. '' The objection to trust be not the union of former competitor , but the sinister power exercise , or suppose to be exercise , by the combination in keep rival out of the business , he said. It be the ferocious extreme of competition with others , not the cessation of competition among the partner , which be the evil feared. `` Much trouble , '' he continue , `` be make by substitute other phrase , assume to be equivalent , which be then argued from a if they be in the act. The court below argue a if maintain competition be the express purpose of the act. The act say nothing about competition. '' It be at this time that John Morley visit America and return to England with the affirmation that in Justice Homes America possess the great judge of the English- speaking world. Time have reinforce the emphasis. In his year on the Supreme Court bench he have do more to mold the texture of the Constitution than any man since John Marshall reveal to the American people what their new Constitution might imply. Matthew Arnold , in his essay on the study of poetry , say that the best way to separate the gold from the alloy in the coinage of the poet be by the test of a few line carry in the thoughts. Excerpts From Holmes 's Writings From the opinion and other writing of Justice Holmes the following line be some that might be use for this test : `` When men have realize that time have upset many fight faith , they may come to believe even more than they believe the very foundation of their own conduct that the ultimate good desire be well reach by free trade in idea -- that the best test of truth be the power of the thought to get itself accept in the competition of the market , and that truth be the only ground upon which their wish can be carry out. That , at any rate , be the theory of our Constitution. It be an experiment , a all life be an experiment. '' `` In the organic relation of modern society it may sometimes be hard to draw the line that be suppose to limit the authority of the Legislature to exercise or delegate the power of eminent domain. But to gather the stream from waste and to draw from them energy , labor without brain , and so to save mankind from toil that it can be spar , be to supply what , next to intellect , be the very foundation of all our achievement and all our welfare. If that purpose be not public , we should be at a loss to say what is. '' `` The Fourteenth Amendment do not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer 's social statics. '' `` While the court must exercise a judgment of their own , it by no mean be true that every law be void which may seem to the judge who pass upon it , excessive , unsuited to it ostensible end , or base upon conception of morality with which they disagree. Considerable latitude must be allow for difference of view as well a for possible peculiar condition which this court can know but imperfectly , if at all. Otherwise a Constitution , instead of embody only relatively fundamental rule of right , a generally understand by all English-speaking community , would become the partisan of a particular set of ethical or economic opinion , which by no mean be hold semper ubique et ab omnibus. '' His contribution to American life be not limit to the law. He live a he advise others to live , in the `` grand manner. '' He seek quality rather than quantity of experience and knowledge of his success in living help others to find it , too. On his ninetieth birthday he deliver a short radio speech in reply to tribute from Chief Justice Hughes and other leader of the American bar. From a Latin poet he quote the word : `` Death pluck my ear and say , 'Live -- I be coming. ' '' And in one line he give the core of a life philosophy : `` To live be to function ; that be all there be to living. '' Left Bench Jan. 12 , 1932 Justice Holmes resign on Jan. 12 , 1932. `` The time have now come and I bow to the inevitable , '' he write to the President. He leave , amid national regret , almost thirty year after he have be appoint to the Supreme Court bench. Soon after that , in a message to the Federal Bar Association , Justice Holmes write : `` I can not say farewell to life and you in formal words. Life seem to me like a Japanese picture which our imagination do not allow to end with the margin. We aim at the infinite , and when our arrow fall to earth it be in flames. `` At time the ambitious end of life have make it seem to me lonely , but it have not been. You have give me the companionship of dear friend who have help to keep alive the fire in my heart. If I could think that I have send a spark to those who come after , I should be ready to say good-bye. '' Justice Holmes be an honorary member of the Honourable Society of Lincoln 's Inn , London , to which also belong such men a Oliver Cromwell , William Pitt , Benjamin Disraeli and William Ewart Gladstone. Soon after retire , his salary be cut in two by reason of the economy law. It be restore to $ 20,000 a year a few month later , however , by special action of the Senate. In the Fall of 1931 appear the `` Representative Opinions of Mr. Justice Holmes. '' Mrs. Holmes die on April 30 , 1929 .