May 22 , 1935 OBITUARY Jane Addams A Foe of War and Need By THE NEW YORK TIMES At Hull House , in the squalid slum of Chicago 's West Side , Jane Addams , a priestess of understand among neighbor and of peace among nation , keep open hour for prince and pauper alike. It be her shrine and it will remain her monument. This pioneer settlement house , which she found forty-six year ago , blaze the trail for a scientific approach to the relief of poverty and suffering and be the parent of much of the social legislation of the last four decades. Its founder and director , despite poor health , be the inspiration and fight force behind a score of movement for reform and the betterment of mankind. Of all the cause she espouse , the dearest to her heart be the cause of disarmament and peace. For her life-long devotion to this ideal , she , with Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler , president of Columbia University , receive the Nobel Peace Prize , her share of which she characteristically turn over to further the cause of peace. Honored by Many Universities More than a dozen university , include Smith , Yale , Wisconsin and Chicago , recognize her achievement with honorary degree and in May , 1931 , Bryn Mawr bestow upon her the M. Carey Thomas Prize of $ 5,000 , award intermittently `` to an American woman in recognition of eminent achievements. '' On that occasion appreciation of her work come from President Hoover , President Masaryk of Czechoslovakia and Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald , who have be a visitor at Hull House on one of his trip to the United States. On May 2 , only a few week before her death , Miss Addams be the guest of honor at a dinner in Washington , at which she be hail a one of the great living woman by Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt and Secretary Ickes. `` Mother of Social Service '' Miss Addams have be call `` the great woman in the world , '' the `` mother of social service , '' `` the great woman internationalist '' and the `` first citizen of Chicago. '' With her idealism , serene , unafraid , militant , be always paramount. Devoted to the cause of social and political reform , to the betterment of the economic condition of the mass , to world peace and to internationalism , Miss Addams 's influence be world-wide. She be , perhaps , the world 's best-known and best-loved woman. She make enemies. Her view be sometimes consider dangerously radical. Socialists and other radical meet at Hull House , and her opponent sometimes forget that her liberal attitude in permit such meeting do not include a membership in the group she tolerated. In the World War her effort for peace be unabated even when the United States enter the struggle and the wartime hysteria which ensue obscure for a time the American public 's realization of Miss Addams 's purity of purpose and character. World peace be forever dear to her heart , and from the time of the war she become more and more active in it behalf. But she do not ignore other causes. Lavishly she give of herself to fight child labor , to lead political cause such a those of Colonel Roosevelt and the Progressive Party in 1912 and of Senator La Follette and his Progressives of 1924 , to battle for disarmament , for insurance against unemployment , old age and poverty , for woman suffrage and for equal right of women. But she never leave Hull House , her start place , and remain a it resident head until her death. She lecture from end to end of the United States. All over Europe and Asia she travel , everywhere strive to alleviate the suffering of the mass , everywhere serene , helpful , capable , dauntless. She write many books. In each she pledge herself anew to fight for justice a she saw it. Of Quaker Ancestry Miss Addams be bear in Cedarville , Ill. , on Sept. 6 , 1860 , of Quaker ancestry. Had she choose it , this woman who give herself so unselfishly to the cause of the poor , the ignorant and the oppress , could have enjoy wealth and social position. Her father , John H. Addams , a friend of Abraham Lincoln , be a banker who serve from 1854 to 1870 in the Illinois Senate. Lincoln 's creed of the equality of men become Miss Addams 's ideal a a child. In one of her book Miss Addams write : `` My father always speak of the martyred President a Mr. Lincoln , and I never hear the great name without a thrill. I remember the day -- it must have be one of comparative leisure , perhaps a Sunday -- when at my request my father take out of his desk a thin packet mark 'Mr. Lincoln 's Letters , ' the short one of which bore unmistakable trace of that remarkable personality. These letter begin 'My Dear Double D-'ed Addams , ' and to the inquiry a to how the person thus address be about to vote on a certain measure then before the Legislature be add the assurance that he know this Addams 'would vote accord to his conscience. ' '' She write also that the first exciting suggestion `` of the great world of moral enterprise and serious undertaking '' come when she be 12 and she find her father mourning over the death of Giuseppe Mazzini , the Italian patriot. Her father explain how Mazzini have strive all his life for the freedom of his country. `` I obtain , '' she write , `` a sense of the genuine relationship which may exist between men who share large hope and like desire , even though they differ in nationality , language and creed ; that those thing count for absolutely nothing between group for men who be try to abolish slavery in America or to throw off Hapsburg oppression in Italy. '' As a child Miss Addams regard herself a an ugly duckling. She say she be pigeon-toed and twist in the back so that her head lean slightly to one side and she do n't want to have any one know she be the daughter of so fine a man a her father. But surgery cure her deformity and she become a young woman describe a `` beautiful , not pretty , '' `` beautiful because of her remarkable expression. '' She become , too , graceful , erect , with a fine carriage. After she be graduate from Rockford College in 1881 , Miss Addams go abroad to complete her education. It be not the Alps , the art gallery or the cathedral that impress her , but rather the slum of the great cities. More than ever she be determine to dedicate her life to the service of the poor. She go to London and there saw Toynbee Hall , the first settlement house in the world. She be greatly impressed a she be by the European slum she visited. Returning to the United States , she be ill for some month and then , in 1888 , she study for a time in Philadelphia. In 1889 , when she be 29 year old , Miss Addams and Miss Ellen Gates Starr , her friend , found Hull House at 800 South Halsted Street , Chicago , `` in the midst of horrid little house '' of the slums. Four year previously the stately red brick mansion have be build by Charles J. Hull on the outskirt of the city. By 1889 , however , it stand in the heart of one of the most miserable neighborhood of the city. The owner , Miss Helen Culver , give the two woman a free leasehold to the house and later to the land about it , on which twelve additional building be built. Hull House Opened in 1889 Miss Addams move into Hull House in September , 1889 , and it be her home thereafter. It be then between a saloon and an undertaking shop , and there be an annex to a factory in it rear. Thousands of the foreign born -- Miss Addams always hold welcome arm to the stranger -- include Poles , Jews , Russians , Italians , Greeks , Germans , Irish and Bohemians be welcome there. Negroes be also cordially received. Persons later to be famous live there in those early days. Among them be Mr. and Mrs. Gerald Swope , who be marry there , Mackenzie King , later Premier of Canada , Francis Hackett , and Professor John Dewey , dean of American philosopher , and his family. Hull House grow to be know a one of the large and best-known of the nation 's settlements. It commence with the ordinary activity of child 's club and free kindergarten and later it sponsor course in language , literature , music , painting , history , mathematics , elocution , dance , wood-carving , pottery , metal work , bookbindery , dressmaking , lacework , cooking and basketwork. A labor museum be also establish at Hull House. Dozens of club be organize to aid work women. A lunch room be open , a be a nursery for the child of employed women. There be also a gymnasium , a natatorium , a penny saving bank , a lodging house , as well a a circulating library and an employment bureau. Miss Addams personally direct all these activity , which be model for hundred of others throughout the world. Was Named Garbage Inspector She also become known for her work in the neighborhood , the Nineteenth Ward. So disturb be she by the condition of the street in the ward that she obtain the post of garbage inspector , which she fill with her characteristic successful thoroughness for three year , until , a she later explain , a politician covet it for one of his henchmen. She be early concern with the welfare of young woman who have be lead astray or abandoned. She care for them , for their child , and fought for good condition for all unfortunate women. The social evil , she once say , make a $ 15,000,000 yearly profit for vice panderer and she blame much of this evil on the cold attitude of the church , the `` good '' woman and on the law which , she say , often be unfair to woman and far too lenient toward their male oppressors. In 1909 Miss Addams become president of the National Conference of Charities and Corrections and serve in that post with distinction. Her fight for world peace begin early. She have an abhorrence for bloodshed and violence. In January , 1915 , when the Woman 's Peace Party be organize , she be choose president. Helped to Form Peace Congress In April , 1915 , she help to organize and become president of the Woman 's International League for Peace and Freedom , then call the Woman 's International Peace Congress , which she head until 1929 , when she become honorary international president. The first meeting , hold in April , 1915 , at The Hague , be , in many respect , a stormy one , a it be attend by woman from all of the warring country , as well a most of the neutral ones. After the conference Miss Addams tour Europe in an effort to persuade the head of the belligerent nation to make peace. But she find that the war spirit be dominant. The movement for a conference to offer continuous mediation , which she back , be check by the refusal of President Wilson to move in the matter. Henry Ford then offer to convey several hundred Americans to Europe on a peace mission. Miss Addams intend to sail , but could not , a she be desperately ill in Chicago at the time the Oscar II sailed. The Lusitania have be sink by this time and American patriotism become so vehement a to cause resentment against Miss Addams. She be horrify at the sinking , but say that `` talk of reprisal and aggression can only increase the spirit of bitterness. '' She oppose go to war over the case and continue to cooperate with those who want to stop the war. After the war declaration in April , 1917 , she meet measure for strengthening of the blockade of the Central Powers with the declaration that the United States `` should not allow the woman and child of any nation to starve. '' She declare later that `` the feeling of German-born Americans should have be consider before the United States enter the war. '' She be never accuse of be pro-German , but be much criticize for her pacifism. After the war she preside at international conference of the league in Zurich in 1919 , in Vienna in 1921 , in The Hague in 1922 , in Washington in 1924 , in Dublin in 1926 and at Prague in 1929. Always in her peace work she be forward looking. It be note that in the resolution adopt at the first conference in 1915 many of President Wilson 's Fourteen Points be forecast. In 1924 much opposition be manifest in this country to the conference , to which Miss Addams reply gracefully , without rancor. In politics she be always liberal. She second the nomination of Theodore Roosevelt in 1912 for the Presidency by the Progressive party and in 1924 be a member of the Committee of 100 which support La Follette and his party. In 1916 she cast her first vote for Wilson , regret that she be too ill to campaign for him , a she have for Roosevelt four year before. Endorsed Progressives of 1912 The 1912 Progressive fight , she say , be the fight for humankind and for human welfare. The social justice plank of the party that year appeal strongly to her. Then , a at all other time , she keep on fight for the cause she stand for. She support Hoover in 1928. Miss Addams be a dry , but say in 1930 that the Eighteenth Amendment be `` only two- third enforced. '' She oppose violence by prohibition agents. She view with equanimity the shortening of woman 's dress in 1921 and hold that there be no objection to cigarette smoking by women. She declare that it be `` all nonsense about woman degenerate '' and that they be merely follow the fashion. In 1922 she say that girl , in her opinion , be grow morally better. She continue to fight for her ideal a the year progress and often intercede for political prisoner or for person bar from entry into the United States because of their political or social views. In 1920 she say that a `` modification of our ideal of private property be at hand , '' add that `` nothing be more certain than the imminence of social change. '' Aided in Feeding Germans She have previously ask for liberal peace term for Germany and , in 1919-20 , have work in Germany to fee starve children. She oppose also secret treaty and advocate entrance of the United States into the League of Nations and endorse the Pact of Paris and the principle of disarmament. She write two book on Hull House , the first , publish in 1919 , entitle `` Twenty Years at Hull-House '' and the second , in 1930 , entitle `` The Second Twenty Years at Hull-House. '' She always use a hyphen in describe Hull House. In the first she tell of the development of the settlement and in the second of her life outside , of her fight for peace , her expulsion from the D.A.R. , the progress of woman in India , of juvenile court and of hundred of other matter close to her heart. She be the author , also , of `` Democracy and Social Ethics , '' in 1902 ; `` Newer Ideals of Peace , '' 1907 ; `` The Spirit of Youth and the City Streets , '' 1910 ; `` The Long Road of Women 's Memory , '' 1916 , and `` Peace and Bread in Time of War , '' 1922. She also write article on social and political reform. While visit Japan in 1923 , Miss Addams undergo a serious operation. She never fully recover her strength and on the very day of the announcement that she and Dr. Butler have win the Nobel Prize she enter Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore for another operation. Of Miss Addams , Professor Halfdan Kort of the Nobel Prize committee say : `` In honor Miss Addams we also pay homage to the work which woman can do for the cause of peace and fraternity among nations. Miss Addams do not speak much , but her quiet , kind-hearted personality create an atmosphere of good-will , which instinctively call forth the best in all. '' Mrs. Carrie Chapman Catt once say that her list of the country 's great woman would be head by Miss Addams. `` I do not base her greatness on Hull House , '' she explain , `` important a that contribution is. Far more remarkable be the human trait of stick to that project all her life. She make it a success. She stick through when it be a success. That be a rare thing to do -- to stick to a success . ''