August 17 , 1935 OBITUARY Adventure Marked Life of Humorist By THE NEW YORK TIMES Will Rogers have what it take to tickle the national funny bone. His wry countenance , with it occasionally wistful expression , be comical to see , and his consciously cultivate drawl lent a rustic savor to his sophisticated quips. Most important of all , he have the knack of translate into trenchant phrase the inchoate thought of mass of `` average '' Americans. He razz Congress unmercifully , twit Presidents and Kings , kid the American public for fall for the blandishment of European borrower , and he echo the generally hold impression that politician should do more and talk less. He could be serious , too -- put into word the national pride that be stir by the Paris flight of Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh and the public indignation that be felt over the murder of the aviator 's infant son. Characteristically , a few year ago he suggest the following epitaph for his tombstone : `` I joke about every prominent man in my lifetime , but I never meet one I do n't like. '' Follows Own Advice America 's foremost comedian , he have become , in recent year , one of it leading booster of air travel. He write thousand of word in defense of the argument that it be safer to travel by plane than by train and demonstrate that he mean it by follow his own advice. As a passenger he fly back and forth across the continent , cover most of South America and get a birds-eye view of Europe and some of Asia. It have be estimate by aviation expert that he fly more than 500,000 mile in the past seven years. He be in one crack-up before the one in which he lose his life , but that do not diminish his enthusiasm for the new mean of transportation. The accident occur at Las Vegas in June , 1928 , when the rope-twirling raconteur be en route to the Republican National Convention. Rogers tell the story of the crash in one of the brief dispatch he send daily to The New York Times. `` Wheel break when she come down and turn over and light on her head , '' he wrote. `` Am the first candidate to land on his head , but be a candidate it do n't hurt the head. '' William Penn Adair Rogers -- to use all of it -- have be call the lineal descendant of Artemus Ward. For year he watch the shifting American scene , note it movement with flippancy and wisdom. While it be easy to call a spade a spade , he do so and yet make the spade like it -- which be something else. His comment on life be widely follow and almost universally quoted. One of the most used American expression be `` Did you see what Will Rogers say ? '' Before settle down a a philosophic jester , he have be almost everything else. He be a cowboy , a circus performer and an actor. Sometimes he deny this last , on the ground that he be `` not smart enough to act. '' He star in vaudeville and on the stage and in the movie after they become vocal. His attempt with the screen before it become audible be not overly successful. Finally , he be a lecturer and a writer , have to his credit an enormous output of pithy comment on the daily events. He be once Mayor of Beverly Hills , Acting Mayor of New Orleans and Ambassador to the World -- the last without portfolio. His name be mention for the Governorship of Oklahoma and for the Presidency of the United States a couple of times. Voting for Will Rogers become a habit with people ; it be one of the best way to file a protest without go Socialist. Amassed Wealth in Work He have a tremendous financial success , and never mention it. When his friend , Fred Stone , be injure some year ago he drop all his contract -- total some half-million dollar -- in order to take his place until Stone recovered. He tour the country raise money for drought and flood relief and take part in hundred of benefits. In his quiet way , he give thousand of dollar of his private fortune to charity. He be bear at Oolagah , in Indian Territory , on Nov. 4 , 1879 , but he call Claremore , Okla. , his `` home town. '' He have some Indian blood , and one of his more famous remark come when , in a discussion of ancestry , he remark that his ancestor have not come over in the Mayflower ; they have `` meet the boat. '' He go to school at the Willow Hassel School at Neosho , Mo. , and Kemper Military Academy at Booneville. Difficult to interview at all time , he once reply to a question about education by say : `` I study the Fourth Reader for ten years. '' At all event , his mother saw in him a Methodist preacher , but she saw that quite alone. Will Rogers develop a passion for horse and he learn the use of the lariat. The chewing gum come later , when he be established. Talking about the day that follow the death of the Methodist dream , he once say : `` I be a kid in Oklahoma and have me a buddy and a little cattle ranch and I sell my cow for about $ 7,000 and take my buddy and go to New Orleans , figure on catch a boat for the Argentine , because I have see a map or read a dime novel or something. Well , there be n't any boat , so we take a boat for New York , figure to catch one there. `` But New York do n't have any Argentine line either , so my buddy say I ought go to England ; and we go to England and catch a boat there , and by the time we get to Rio I be just about broke and my buddy be homesick , so I pay his way back and get me a job on a ranch , thinkin ' I could rope. `` Well , those gauchos down there taught me different , swishin ' a lasso over my head from twenty foot behind and downin ' a cow well than I can shoot a guy with a Winchester. So I work awhile and then work my way to South Africa on a cattle boat , and there I join up with a little Wild West show , do a roping act. `` From South Africa I go to Australia , where I work with the Wirth show , own by Mae Wirth 's daddy. Then I go to Japan and China , and then to San Francisco , and from there I bum my way back home , and a feller tell my dad he do n't think I have do so well because he hear I come home wear overall for underdrawers. `` Well , that only go to show the success magazine be full of bunk when they write about a fellow winning fame and fortune by work hard and stick to one job. All of you know , as well a I do , it be some accident start you off on the right track , but you ai n't go to tell the reporter that , the next time they interview you. '' How He Won First Fame The `` accident '' seem to have be a cow. The tradition be that one day , while Mr. Rogers be play in the Wild West show in New York , one of the animal get free. He capture it with the rope , get into the public eye and so be hire for a turn on the Hammerstein Roof. This be in 1905. He go from the roof to vaudeville , back to the roof and then to Ziegfeld , and be there almost ever after , at least as long a he remain on Broadway. A legend have grow up on Broadway about the transition from pantomime to monologue in the early Rogers vaudeville act. One of his most difficult trick be the double lassoing of a horse and rider. Two rope and a good deal of concentration and hope be require , but the finer nuance of the job be lose on the drug store cowboy in the balcony. He Finds His Voice Some one tell Rogers that he ought to explain what he be get at. He do and these be hand down a the first word ever speak by the national commentator before an audience : `` Ladies and gentleman , I want to call your sho nuff attention to this next little stunt I 'm agoing to pull on you , a I be go to throw these two rope at once , catch the horse with one and the rider with the other. I do n't have any idea that I 'll get in , but here goes. '' The audience laugh and Rogers be angry. He have not mean to be funny. He be just be himself. For a long time afterward he could not be induce to say another word , but finally he do , and he say later it be `` the lucky thing '' he ever did. For a while he confine himself to comment on the other act in the show , but finally he begin search for other material. He turn naturally to the newspaper , scan the late edition of the evening paper and sometimes the early edition of the morning paper just before go on for his act , often manage to get off a pithy comment on some occurrence in the day 's news before his audience knew of the event itself. This be the origin of one of his first widely quote wisecrack : `` All I know be what I read in the papers. '' In a little while Rogers be twirl his rope and amuse the patron at Hammerstein 's Roof with his comment on personality and events. He appear in Ziegfeld 's `` Follies '' and the `` Frolics '' for more than six year and at the opening of one of them remark : `` Yes , a first night at the Follies be quite a function. Every one bring his new wife to see the old one act. '' Made Many Silent Films In 1919 Will Rogers abandon the stage and go to Hollywood to make some silent pictures. Not unqualified success , some of them be : `` Two Wagons , Both Covered , '' `` Doubling for Romeo , '' `` Boys Will Be Boys , '' `` Family Fits , '' `` Jubilo , '' `` Our Congressman , '' `` Going to Congress , '' `` Gee Whiz , Genevieve '' and a series of short call `` Strolling Through Europe With Will Rogers. '' In 1922 he return to the `` Follies '' and remain on Broadway until the talkie came. Then he make `` They Had to See Paris. '' When Fred Stone be hurt , Mr. Rogers take his friend 's place in `` Three Cheers. '' Charles Dillingham , it producer , use to send the comedian his salary in the form of a signed check , permit Mr. Rogers to fill in the amount. When the show go on the road he return to Hollywood and appear in `` So This Is London , '' `` Lightnin ' , '' `` A Connecticut Yankee , '' `` Ambassador Bill , '' `` Young a You Feel , '' `` Business and Pleasure '' and other pictures. Other item , besides the usual collection of story about him , be various. He be marry in 1908 to Betty Blake of Oolagah and they have three children. Will Rogers get up a family polo team which do pretty well for a time. `` Had to give it up , '' he say finally. `` Mary ( a daughter ) go society on us. '' And then there be the undoubted fact that in Claremore be a hotel -- '' with more bathroom than Buckingham Palace '' -- call The Will Rogers. When he go to Hollywood his studio build him a place. There be a garden and adobe hut and cactus and an electric stove. He look in , say it be `` swell '' and never go back until former President Coolidge and Mrs. Coolidge come later in the year to call. `` Well , '' he explain after he have see them there , `` they have to sit somewhere , do n't they ? '' He play dangerous polo , `` because you could n't make my mug look any bad no matter how much I hurt it. '' He own a hurdy-gurdy , the only instrument he could play. In 1927 Mr. Rogers go to Mexico at the same time a Colonel Lindbergh and be the guest of Ambassador Dwight Morrow. When the drought strike the West in 1931 he start a campaign for money and barnstorm over the country raise it. It be he who in 1930 make the suggestion that a silver cup be award by the American people to the `` world 's most cheerful loser , '' Sir Thomas Lipton. This last be done. He go to Europe at least a half dozen time , receive the welcome accord mostly to crown heads. He contribute widely to magazine and newspaper and the `` box '' publish daily The New York Times be syndicate to about 500 newspaper in the United States and Canada , a be a weekly article of comment. He write several book , among them , `` Rogerisms , '' a collection of his wisecrack ; `` The Cowboy Philosopher on Prohibition , 1919 , '' `` The Cowboy Philosopher on the Peace Conference , '' and `` What We Laugh At , 1920. '' In 1924 his `` Illiterate Digest '' be greet a one of the funny book of the year. Once an interviewer ask him for his recipe for humor and Rogers reply : `` A gag to be any good have to be fashion about some truth. The rest you get by your slant on it and perhaps by a wee bit of exaggeration , so 's people wo n't miss the point. '' A few year ago Mr. Rogers come one evening to The Times office and be show around by the publisher. They reach the composing room , where the comedian be recognized. A small crowd group around. Suddenly take his hat in his hand and waving it , he yell : `` We want more pay and less work ! '' It be that sort of scene he do best .