April 9 , 1935 OBITUARY Adolph S. Ochs Dead at 77 ; Publisher of Times Since 1896 By THE NEW YORK TIMES The story of Adolph S. Ochs be one of a career which , in poverty and wealth , in obscurity and eminence , be all of one piece. The quality that his employer and associate note when he begin his newspaper career a office boy and printer 's devil in Knoxville , Tenn. , be the quality he manifest throughout his life. The principle he announce and put into practice when at the age of 20 he take charge of a bankrupt small-town newspaper be the principle he announce and put into practice eighteen year later when he take charge of the bankrupt New York Times and carry it to influence and prosperity. He know how to publish , he believe in publishing , only one single kind of paper ; and his great achievement be the proof that the publishing of that kind of paper -- '' clean , dignified , trustworthy and impartial , '' a he phrase it in his announcement in The Times on Aug. 18 , 1896 -- be practically possible ; be not an exercise in altruism , but could be make economically as well a ethically successful. That he make it successful be due no doubt to native ability , to a mind which , strong in it grasp of organization , also be unusually intuitional and , in flash of inspiration , cover in an instant ground that slow-thinking men might labor over for month ; but also very largely to the fact that he learn the newspaper business from the ground up , be in it all his life , and never waste his time or his ambition on outside enterprise or on the political aspiration that have prove a curse to so many other newspaper maker ( not least to his predecessor , Henry J. Raymond , founder of The New York Times ) . The poverty of his parent cut short his formal schooling ; but , a he tell the National Editorial Association in it convention of 1916 , the printing office be his high school and university , and something of the impress of the old-time printing shop and of that unique and salty breed , the old-school printer , stay with him all his life. Principles Learned at Home But the principle be his before he learn how to put them into practice ; he learn them at home. He be bear in Cincinnati , March 12 , 1858 , eldest of the six child of Julius and Bertha Levy Ochs. Both his parent belong to the group of German liberal and intellectual who have be drive from home by the repressive measure of autocratic government , against which the revolution of 1848 be an ineffectual protest. Julius Ochs , bear in Furth , Bavaria , in 1826 , come to the United States at the age of 18 , possessor of an excellent education and fluent in six language -- German , French , English , Spanish , Italian and Hebrew. He teach language in various Southern school , a career only briefly interrupt by his volunteering for the Mexican War , a his regiment be never call into active service. In Natchez , in 1853 , he meet Miss Levy , and they be marry in Nashville two year later. Adolph Ochs 's mother , bear in Rhenish Bavaria of a family with distinguished connection in France and Alsace , have have to leave Germany in haste in 1848 to escape arrest for her connection with revolutionary committees. She travel by sail ship to New Orleans , where an uncle lived. The influence of this brilliant and culture woman on her son be immense and lasting. At the age of 70 his telegram of congratulation to Alfred E. Smith on his nomination to the Presidency take this characteristic form : `` Every good mother 's son be inspire and encourage by this well-earned climax to an extraordinary career. '' Until she move to Cincinnati after her marriage Mrs. Ochs 's American residence have be in the South ; her sympathy be with the South in the Civil War that presently break out , and her brother serve in the Confederate Army. Julius Ochs , however , despite his Southern connection and his residence in Kentucky and Tennessee , be a Union man ; he enlist in an Ohio regiment in 1861 and serve throughout the war , rise to the rank of Captain. The division in politics do not affect the harmony of the family ; but when Captain Ochs die in Chattanooga in 1888 the Grand Army of the Republic be prominent at his funeral ; when his wife die in New York in 1910 a similar part be play by the Daughters of the Confederacy. Family Moves to Knoxville After the war Captain Ochs find himself in the position of a good many demobilized soldier ; he have to start again from the beginning. With his grow family he move to Knoxville , Tenn. , a town that have be somewhat batter in the war but seem to have bright prospect for future growth. That expectation be justify ; but Julius Ochs , scholar and idealist , lack the talent for material success that would have enable him to share in the town 's prosperity. He serve a Justice of the Peace and United States Commissioner , and later for a short time a Probate Judge ; his continue enthusiasm for clean and progressive politics , in an age when such idea have fall out of favor , carry him a a delegate to the Liberal Republican Convention which nominate Greeley in Cincinnati in 1872. Active in lodge work , he be universally popular and respect ; deeply pious and a student of the religious writing of the Hebrew faith , he serve his unorganized co-religionists in Knoxville a what one of the Tennessee friend later call `` a first-class emergency rabbi. '' But his material fortune do not prosper , and his son grow up in the realization that as soon a possible they must begin to contribute to the family income. Adolph , the old boy , go to work at the age of 11 a office boy to Captain William Rule , editor of The Knoxville Chronicle. This Republican paper , successor of Parson Brownlow 's Knoxville Whig of pre-war day , never succeed in win it new employe to it politics ; Adolph Ochs grow up in sympathy with the conservative Democrats of the Reconstruction period. But Captain Rule become one of the determine influence of his life , and inspire a loyalty and affection that be enduring. Fifty-two year later , when all Knoxville declare a holiday to celebrate the eighty- second birthday of Captain Rule -- then , and until his death in his ninetieth year , still in active service a an editor -- the publisher of The New York Times be a sort of secondary guest of honor ; and Captain Rule recall that `` he sweep my sanctum and clean up the paper and trash so methodically that he be promote to delivery boy , '' get up long before dawn to deposit The Chronicle on the doorstep of subscriber , for $ 1.50 a week. After a year or so of this the family decide that the boy might have a good chance in a large city , so he be send to Providence , R.I. , where his mother 's two brother have a grocery in which he work a cash boy. But the next year he be back in Knoxville , work in a local drug store , where ( tradition have it ) he lose his job some six month later by sell a customer borax in mistake for sal soda. Early in 1872 he return to The Chronicle , this time a printer 's devil -- the old-time printer 's term for the boy who do the odd job and dirty work about the composing room ; and this establish him in the newspaper business , where he be to remain for the rest of his life. Keen In Quest of Knowledge In the chaotic condition of a town recover from the Civil War through the handicap of reconstruction , it would be hard to say whether a boy work outside of school hour or go to school outside of work hours. Adolph Ochs have get the beginning of his school education at Bradford 's Hampden-Sydney Academy , a Knoxville day school , and during his next three year in The Chronicle composing room he attend class when he could in the preparatory department of the East Tennessee University ( now the University of Tennessee ) , where he impress his teacher , a he impress his employer , with his diligence and quickness. The few year he actually spend in a schoolroom might not have amount to much , however , have it not be for what he learn outside ; a an office boy , a carrier , a grocery or drug store clerk , he be always ask question -- an acquaintance of those day describe him a `` a human interrogation point '' ; and the deficiency of his formal education be compensate by the advantage of a cultured home and the private tuition of a scholarly father. There remain the printing office , his high school and university , a he later describe it ; but the thorough grounding in the newspaper business which he get in The Knoxville Chronicle shop come to him largely by accident. When the 13-year-old boy become a printer 's devil he still have no idea of make the newspaper business his life work ; he go after the job because he need the money , and be hire because his service a office boy and carrier have impress the editor of The Chronicle with his trustworthiness. Now it happen that the printer 's devil have to work at night , and that his duty be finish earlier than those of the journeyman printer , who be the aristocracy of the composing room. He have to go home alone , and the way home , along unpaved , poorly light street , lead past the graveyard of the First Presbyterian Church. A boy of 13 who have grow up in a town where there be plenty of superstitious resident , both white and color , might be excuse for sometimes forget the information he have no doubt receive at home , that a graveyard be nothing to be afraid of. He hat to go home alone in the dark ; and because the foreman of the composing room , Henry C. Collins , live near him , little Adolph Ochs use to stay in the shop after his own day 's work be over till Mr. Collins have finish and could walk home with him. Staying in the shop , he have to occupy his time , and the natural way to do it be by learn more about the printing trade than would come the way even of an alert and observant printer 's devil during his ordinary and well-filled working hours. He learn and he learn fast ; and in late year the proprietor of The New York Times be not ashamed to admit that what really make a newspaper man of him be the need of company when he walk past the graveyard late at night. Half a century later , when Mr. Ochs return to Knoxville for the Rule celebration , he and Mr. Collins go over that route again. Most of the landmark have vanish , but the friendship that spring up in the composing room still endured. Those year a devil and later apprentice be busy one for young Adolph Ochs ; learn his trade in the printing office , go to school a he find opportunity , and act a usher , with his young brother George and Milton , in Mayor Peter Staub's Opera House , where travel company play `` The Two Orphans , '' `` Monte Cristo '' and `` Hazel Kirke , '' and usher pick up a little extra money by sell candy between the acts. Starts Out In Wider Field And so it go till October , 1875 , when Adolph Ochs , 17 year old , decide to go out and see what he could do in a large field. There be a tradition that he have some idea of settling , eventually , in California , but his immediate objective be Louisville ; and the letter of recommendation that he take with him when he leave his home town be consider more than perfunctory discharge of obligation ; they be curiously prophetic. Captain Rule , the editor of The Chronicle , write that he have find him `` honest , zealous , reliable and trustworthy * * * quick to comprehend and faithful to execute , '' and `` endow with an intellect capable of reach the high point of mental achievement. '' Collins , his foreman , say that `` He be to a foreman what money be to a miser -- a necessity , hard to part with. '' His associate in the composing room present him with a volume of Hood 's poem -- he keep it all his life -- with an inscription on the flyleaf over all their signature express the hope that `` some day we shall be able to note you among the nation 's honor sons. '' And Mayor Staub , lose a valuable usher from his opera house , choose to speak in his civic rather than his private capacity : `` For the Mayor of any city such a loss a your departure , my young and worthy friend , be quite serious. '' Armed with these testimonial , the young printer go to Louisville and find work in the job print department of The Courier Journal. But six month later he be back in Knoxville ; and a Edward H. Edwards , a printer who work with him there , have put it , `` if there ever be a turning point in the life of Adolph S. Ochs it be when , have go out from his father 's roof to seek his fortune , he so sorely felt the loss of family tie and the personal contact of those near and dear to him that he be impel to return home. '' Ambition as well a homesickness be a motive , however ; a new paper , The Tribune , have just be establish in Knoxville , and it offer perhaps a good opportunity to a boy who be indeed trust and admire by his old employer on The Chronicle , but might never have live down the fact that he start at the very bottom , might never have seem to them any more than Adolph the office boy grow up. '' Attracted by Chattanooga His year and a half on The Tribune give him a more varied experience. He work at first in the composing room , then a a reporter , and be presently make assistant to the business manager , Franc M. Paul -- a rehearsal in each of the three department of newspaper-making which he be soon to find invaluable. For already his ambition , and those of some of his associate on The Tribune , be look southward to Chattanooga. The strategic importance of this city , so great in the military operation of the Civil War , have not yet be appreciate commercially ; the centre of a number of railroad , with rich mineral deposit lie in the mountain roundabout , Chattanooga have only some 12,000 people and be still in spirit a small town. Yet there be a few person , include Adolph Ochs , who realize it possibility ; and this town of promise be serve by only a single newspaper , The Times , an organ miserably inadequate from every point of view which be live from hand to mouth. Young Ochs and Colonel J. E. MacGowan , an editorial writer on The Knoxville Tribune , be plan to establish a new paper in competition with The Chattanooga Times when they discover that their colleague Franc Paul have anticipate them and start The Chattanooga Dispatch , to which he bring them both in the Fall of 1877. Colonel MacGowan a editor and Adolph Ochs a advertising solicitor. But The Chattanooga Times , feeble a it be , refuse to fold up in the face of competition. The outcome have be succinctly describe by William M. Stone , a Chattanooga printer who be afterward for many year on Mr. Ochs 's staff : `` In less than six month The Dispatch , despite Paul 's planting and Adolph 's watering , prove a hopeless failure. But this , unfortunate a it seem at the time , prove a great blessing to Chattanooga , a it leave Adolph so poor that he could not leave town. '' Paul go back to Knoxville , Colonel MacGowan stay in Chattanooga and get another job , and Adolph Ochs be make receiver of The Dispatch , and eventually manage to liquidate it debts. But meanwhile he have to eat ; and discover that Chattanooga have no city directory , he set to work on this his first publication. He himself do all the work on it but the binding ; he get the information , write it , set it up in type , read the proof and print it on a hand press. And this directory have two consequence besides the urgent and immediate one of enable it publisher to eat -- it give him a comprehensive and thorough acquaintance with all the population and all the business of Chattanooga , and it awaken the citizen to the realization that their town have possibility that they have overlook , but which be plain to the eye of an observant ( and hungry ) young immigrant from Knoxville. Takes Over the Local Times The directory not only make Ochs acquaint with Chattanooga , but make Chattanooga acquaint with Ochs. The Times have be able to outlast the competition of The Dispatch ; but it be about ready to give up the ghost , and it editor offer to sell it to Mr. Ochs for $ 800 , provide he would assume the paper 's debt , amount to $ 1,500 more. The young man from Knoxville would have be glad to accept the offer , but for one insuperable difficulty : he do not have $ 800. Indeed , he have almost nothing ; but he have make acquaintance and establish his personal standing in Chattanooga , and after further negotiation he discover that he could borrow $ 250. With that borrow $ 250 he buy a half interest in The Chattanooga Times , stipulate that his half should carry with it the control of the paper ; he assume the paper 's $ 1,500 debt in addition to the $ 250 he have borrow to buy it ; and with his own private fortune of $ 37.50 a work capital he become publisher of The Chattanooga Times on July 2 , 1878. The salutatory of the new publisher announce the theme around which his whole life be to be woven. The Times intend to become `` the indispensable organ of the business , commercial and productive , of Chattanooga , and of the mineral and agricultural district '' surround the town ; it would get all the news it could , at home and abroad ( the early Times have have no telegraph news at all ) , and would support conservative Democratic principle while reserve independence in State politics , `` be cognizant of the need of and the strongly express desire for such a newspaper in Chattanooga a the above outline indicate The Times to be , we have take the people at their word and shall give them a chance to support that which they have be ask for. '' But , it be add , `` in this matter of patronage we shall make no appeal , but rely upon that sense of propriety and justice which must teach every intelligent citizen that the obligation between himself and the paper be a mutual one , ours to print and circulate such a journal a we have describe , his to see that he contribute his share , in proportion to the benefit such a paper confers on him a a citizen , the mean to sustain it and promote it growth. * * * In short , we shall conduct our business on business principle , neither seek nor give sop and donations. '' Task a Formidable One Chattanooga know what this meant. The Chattanooga Times before Mr. Ochs 's day have , in the word of Henry M. Wiltse , `` drag itself from pillar to post , and have to lean heavily against the one or the other whenever it desire to cast a shadow or take a long breath. '' It be a fail not uncommon in the small-town journalism of the seventy , a precarious trade whose practitioner , unless they be unusually able or unusually lucky , be likely to find that they could keep afloat only by give sop to local interest , or by accept donation of one sort or another which be rarely disinterested. The young man who have turn his back on this sort of thing , who have announce that he would give Chattanooga what he think it need and would accept from it only what he think he have earn , have nothing behind him but his ability and his knowledge of his trade. He have be a resident of the town for less than a year despite the mustache which he then wear to give himself an air of maturity , he could hardly conceal from his fellow-citizens that he be not yet old enough to vote. He have a newspaper plant fit for hardly anything but the junk heap , publish a four-page paper with a circulation of 250 ; he owe $ 1,750 and his work capital amount to just about 2 per cent of his debts. Yet from that slender begin come not only The Chattanooga Times , but The New York Times of today. Colonel MacGowan , another immigrant from Knoxville leave behind after the collapse of The Dispatch , be hire to serve a editor of The Times in such time a he could spare from his other job , at a salary of a dollar a day. There be one reporter and a business office staff of one ; five men in the composing room , besides a foreman who also act a proofreader and pressman ; and the proprietor and publisher , besides be general editorial supervisor , be also business manager and advertising solicitor. The payroll even of this modest force , even in those time , be somewhat over $ 100 a week , without allow any compensation for the publisher ; and the problem of meet the payroll in the first year be often an acute one. But it be always meet , and meet without any compromise with the principle announce by the new publisher in his first issue. His first year with The Chattanooga Times be perhaps the hard , certainly the most critical , in Mr. Ochs 's whole career ; but the end of the year saw him on the road to success. Profits Put Into Business His total receipt that year be $ 12,000 ; but his expense be only $ 10,000 , include $ 900 withdrawn for his own living , and the profit be plow back into the business. From the first he have give The Times the telegraph service of the old Western Associated Press ; this be expand as rapidly a possible , and Colonel MacGowan be soon engage a full-time editor , a post he hold until his death twenty-five year later. When it become apparent that the new venture be go to be successful the publisher bring his family down from Knoxville , and his brother George and Milton presently take their turn a reporter on The Times , thus begin newspaper career that be later to bring distinction to both. Two year after he have buy the control of The Times Mr. Ochs be able to buy the other half interest in the paper that have be beyond his reach in 1878. At that time he could have buy it for $ 400 , or probably even less ; by 1880 he have to pay $ 5,500 for it , every cent of the increment in value be the result of his own success with the paper. The newspaper which be thus succeed be fulfil it promise of impartiality and disinterestedness. To L. G. Walker , on his appointment a editor of The Chattanooga Times year later , Mr. Ochs say : `` Your only policy be to have no policy -- no policy , that be , except to be right. '' It be on that principle that The Times be conduct from the very first , in a day when newspaper , especially in the small city , be far more likely to be affect by outside influence than they be at present ; and it be that same principle that Mr. Ochs later put into practice in New York. But it never mean a weak policy or an absence of policy. It mean independence and a sense of civic duty. The Chattanooga paper prosper and the town prosper with it. In the language of William M. Stone , Mr. Ochs `` take the dirty , poverty-stricken village by the nape of the neck and by sheer force of magnetic optimism and courageous enterprise lift it to where it be today. '' One of his own contribution to the upbuilding of the city be the erection , in 1892 , of the substantial building of The Chattanooga Times. Captain Rule , year before have note that his young employe be not only honest but zealous ; and it be that zeal that Chattanooga be feel now -- the zeal of a young man who have pick out a town that he think have a future , and be resolve to make that future a pleasant reality. There be no civic improvement of those year in Chattanooga that The Times do not promote -- indeed often it start them -- the opera house , the fireman 's fountain , the dredging of a channel in the Tennessee River. More important , perhaps , be the Chickamauga National Park , of which Mr. Ochs be one of the originator , and which serve to get him start in the park movement which be to prove one of the great interest of his life. His Only Public Office It be perhaps this zeal for promotion of his home town that lead him to accept the only public office he ever hold in his life -- membership on the Chattanooga School Board in 1884 and 1885. Mr. Ochs 's leadership in the boosting of his home town have a number of consequence , one of which be not altogether pleasant. Chattanooga be flourish , largely because of the vigorous work of The Times ; and in 1888 the town pay the inevitable penalty of a real estate boom. The publisher of The Times later admit that he run wild like everybody else and buy up a lot of land which for year afterward eat it head off in tax ; but the boom turn out to be only an anticipation of value that be really there , and ultimately Mr. Ochs lose no money by this demonstration of his faith in Chattanooga. Another by-product of Mr. Ochs 's civic leadership have more agreeable and , a it turn out , more fruitful consequences. By common consent the publisher of The Times , young , affable and abundantly enthusiastic , be accept a the unofficial reception and entertainment committee for distinguished visitor to the town. He be the good able to discharge this function since he have be marry in Cincinnati on Feb. 28 , 1883 , to Miss Effie MiriamWise , daughter of the Rev. Dr. Isaac M. Wise , founder of the Hebrew Union College and the Union of American Hebrew Congregations. Marriage bring him not only an invaluable helpmate but a brilliant connection. In the early day when the whole Ochs family be collaborate in get out The Chattanooga Times , Mrs. Ochs do her part a book reviewer and dramatic critic , besides preside over the household at which eminent visitor to Chattanooga be entertained. To this union be bear some year later a daughter , Iphigene Bertha , who be marry in 1917 to Arthur Hays Sulzberger. All sort of people pass through Chattanooga in the late eighty and early ninety , and the publisher of The Times meet most of them. There be President Cleveland ; there be Governors , Senators , banker , Bishops and railroad presidents. A young Republican editor from Ohio name Warren G. Harding come to town on his honeymoon , and confess to the publisher of The Times that he be n't satisfy with his prospect back home and have some idea of start a Republican paper in Chattanooga. This notion be promptly drop when Mr. Ochs point out to him that the only Republicans in Chattanooga be color people , few of whom in those day could read. Casual Remark Prophetic Another caller , in 1890 , be Harry Alloway , a Wall Street reporter for The New York Times , who be write a series of article on the industrial development of the South , to whom Mr. Ochs remark casually that he think The Times , then in the beginning of decay , offer the great opportunity in American journalism. This remark be forget by the young publisher ; but Harry Alloway remember it , and the rehabilitation of The New York Times be the fruit of that pass comment. The outcome of all this entertainment of distinguished visitor , unintended but inevitable , be that the publisher of The Chattanooga Times be acquire a national acquaintance far large than fall to most small-city publisher , and the time be at hand when he would find it useful. In his trade , too , he be become widely and favorably known. Invited to address the meeting of the National Editorial Association at St. Paul in 1891 , he put his finger on the great change American journalism be undergo at the time and foretell the tendency of the future. Through the mid-nineteenth century the great paper have be essentially political and essentially personal ; they be the platform on which great editor could display their personal brilliance and the news column be usually a bias and argumentative a the editorial page. But Mr. Ochs tell the assembled editor at St. Paul : `` The day of the organ , if not past be rapidly passing. A journal conduct a a newspaper ( with the emphasis on the news ) be the newspaper of the future. '' Many newspaper of the South , The Chattanooga Times include , be at that time get their telegraph news from the old Associated Press , an Illinois corporation compose chiefly of Middle Western newspaper , with The New York World a it principal Eastern member. In opposition , the other New York paper be maintain , at heavy cost , the old United Press. Southern paper be not altogether satisfy with the service they be get , and in 1891 Mr. Ochs , a secretary of the Southern Press Association , call a meeting which organize The Southern Associated Press , of which he become general manager and later chairman of the executive committee. But the division of newspaper territory among three compete organization do not prove successful ; in 1894 the majority of Southern paper throw in their lot with The United Press. Mr. Ochs think that the Western organization have a well prospect of survive the struggle than the Eastern ; The Chattanooga Times go into The Associated Press , and the connection there form be presently to prove of immense value to it publisher and to the great enterprise which he be about to undertake , as well a The Associated Press itself. His First Call to New York Early in 1896 Mr. Ochs receive a telegram from a friend in New York -- Leopold Wallach , a lawyer -- inform him that `` the opportunity of your life lie before you. '' To an ambitious young man of 38 who have already explore and realize on about all the opportunity that be offer in Chattanooga the information be too allure to be overlook ; Mr. Ochs go to New York to see what it be all about. The reality be disillusioning. This great opportunity be only the business managership of The New York Mercury , a small paper deal chiefly in theatrical and sport news , which a group of politician who favor free silver be plan to buy in order to give New York a silver newspaper in the Presidential campaign of 1896 , in which it be already evident that the currency issue would play a large part. Mr. Ochs , however , be a believer in the gold standard , which The Chattanooga Times be valiantly support , even though the majority of Southern Democrats have abandon it. With the management of a silver paper , in New York or elsewhere , he would have nothing to do ; but when the silver group presently give up it plan to buy The Mercury the owner of that paper , anxious to get rid of it before it die on his hand , offer to sell it to Mr. Ochs direct. This be rather more of a temptation. Mr. Ochs believe that in New York at the time there be an opening for a compact paper devote itself strictly to the presentation of news and selling at 1 cent , a price then represent in New York only by the flamboyant `` yellow '' paper of the time , The World and The Journal. The paper he envision be very much the sort of thing that another ambitious young man , Alfred Harmsworth , be just then begin to publish in London ; and it be Mr. Ochs 's notion that The Mercury could be develop into what he have in mind. But all depend on The Mercury continue to receive , a it be then receive , the service of The United Press , and when he find that it owner could give him no assurance of that Mr. Ochs return to Chattanooga. Hardly have he reach home before he have a telegram -- on his thirty-eighth birthday , a it happen -- from that Harry Alloway of The New York Times to whom he have remark six year before that The Times offer the great opportunity in American journalism. Since 1890 The Times have sadly decline , there be talk of an imminent reorganization and Alloway -- purely on his own account , and without any authority -- wire to Mr. Ochs that if he be interested in The Times it could probably be buy cheap. In Mr. Ochs 's early year in New York rumor keep insist that he have be bring to town by various personage , from President Cleveland on down , to rehabilitate The Times ; but the fact be that the only man who `` bring him to town '' be The Times reporter who want to see the paper set on it foot , and believe that the Chattanooga publisher have the ability to do it. At the moment Mr. Ochs do not take the idea very seriously ; but it happen that the next day business take him to Chicago. There , at lunch , he mention the matter to his friend Herman Kohlsaat , publisher of The Chicago Times-Herald , who exclaim , `` Ochs , there 's your opportunity. '' `` But , '' Mr. Ochs protest , `` I do n't believe I 'm a big enough man for the job. '' This argument fail to impress Mr. Kohlsaat. `` Do n't tell anybody , '' he advise , `` and they 'll never find it out. '' Becomes Interested in The Times Thus encourage , Mr. Ochs go to New York and begin to investigate the situation , which be to prove not only his opportunity but The Times 's , too. George Jones , who have join with Henry J. Raymond in found The New York Times in 1851 and have conduct it since Raymond 's death , have die in 1891. The antiquated organism , which he know how to operate , his child be unable to conduct successfully , and within two year of his death his heir be prepare to save themselves further loss by sell The Times to anybody who would pay the price. As it turn out , only one purchaser be willing to pay the $ 1,000,000 they ask for nothing but the paper 's name and good-will -- a company hastily organize by the editor of the paper , with all the money they have themselves and all they could get from their friend , to prevent an institution of great and honorable tradition from fall into unworthy hands. The company thus establish , under the presidency of Charles R. Miller , editor of The Times since 1883 , never have a fair chance to get started. Almost at once the panic of 1893 strike a paper which have no working capital , and the only marvel be that the organization manage to keep go for three year longer. By the Spring of 1896 the circulation of The Times have dwindle to 9,000 ( the paper be print 19,000 copy a day , but more than one-half of them be come back unsold ) ; it have outstanding obligation of $ 300,000 , and be lose $ 1,000 a day. Mr. Miller , a brilliant scholar , thinker and stylist , but no business man , who would never have try to be anything but an editor except under the pressure of necessity , have endeavor to interest other New York editor and newspaper manager in the rescue of The Times , but these men who be on the spot , who know all the detail of the situation , be of the unanimous opinion that it could not be done. A plan of reorganization -- involve , of course , the raising of more money to be throw into what begin to look like a bottomless pit -- be be formulate by Charles R. Flint and Spencer Trask , already heavily involve in the Times Company ; but it be generally recognize that what the plan need be a man to work it , and every man in New York who might have be suppose to see in The Times the opportunity of his life have declare the thing be impossible. A Momentous Interview In this situation the young publisher from Chattanooga come to town , and through Alloway arrange an interview with the editor and president of The Times. Mr. Miller , hard driven and worried , have so little hope of find a solution for his trouble in this encounter that he arrange for a meeting at his home , and decide to squeeze it in between dinner and a trip to the theatre on which he have promise to take his wife and child to forget the trouble that The Times have bring down on their heads. But it need only a few minute to make it clear to the editor that , a Fraser Bond put it in his life of Miller , this small-town newspaper man have forget more about the business than most metropolitan executive ever knew. Theatre time arrive and Mr. Miller tell his family to go on , that he would join them later. But he never do join them ; they come home after the play to find him still deep in discussion with Mr. Ochs ; and when the two men part after midnight Mr. Miller be convince that The Times have find the man. Meeting Mr. Flint and Mr. Trask the next day , Mr. Ochs impress them so favorably that he be invite to join their syndicate. He be compel to decline , for their plan would have require him to invest more money than he have or would have care to try to borrow. Mr. Flint then propose that if the plan be carry out Mr. Ochs should become the manager of the paper. He mention a salary of $ 50,000 a year -- a staggering amount for a man from Chattanooga. But Mr. Ochs have decide that he could not rescue The Times unless he own and control it. The Flint-Trask project thereupon collapse , and another group at stockholder come forward with a proposal to consolidate The Times with The Recorder , another daily newspaper then also in difficulty and which go out of existence the same year. But Mr. Miller and his associate editor , Edward Cary , felt sure that Mr. Ochs could save the paper a an independent publication if he only have a little time. They therefore obtain the appointment of a receiver , who keep The Times go while Mr. Ochs work out his own plan , obtain the approval of stockholder and creditor and raise the need funds. Takes Over The Times Now at last his service a greeter and entertainer of distinguished visitor to Chattanooga bore fruit. An unknown young man from a small city , however sound his plan and hearten his enthusiasm , might have have some trouble persuade wary creditor that he could do what all the newspaper executive in New York have pronounce impossible. But , head by a letter from President Cleveland , the Chattanooga publisher be able to produce a mass of recommendation from men whose name mean something in New York. President Cleveland 's letter , in his own handwriting , say of Mr. Ochs : * * * `` In your management of The Chattanooga Times you have demonstrate such a faithful adherence to Democratic principle and have so bravely support the idea and policy which tend to the safety of our country as well a our party , that I should be glad to see you in a large sphere of usefulness. '' With such reference behind him , and with the soundness of his own idea to prove that the testimonial be not perfunctory , Mr. Ochs manage to gain acceptance of his own plan for the reorganization of The Times , which be transfer to him on Aug. 18 , 1896. The new plan be briefly this : The New York Times Company be organize with 10,000 share of capital stock and a bond issue of $ 500,000. Two thousand share of stock be exchange for the share of the old company on a one-for-five basis ; holder of the old company 's note receive in exchange bond of the new company , dollar for dollar , and $ 200,000 worth of bond be sell at par to provide work capital. ( The new publisher discover when he take charge that the paper have about $ 100,000 worth of unfunded obligation , so half of that work capital be eat up before Mr. Ochs get started. ) As a needed incentive , each purchaser of a thousand-dollar bond get fifteen share of stock with it ; and Mr. Ochs himself , with all the money he have and all he could borrow -- most of it be borrow -- buy $ 75,000 worth of bond , carry with them 1,125 share of stock. Of the rest of the stock , 3,876 share , just enough to make an absolute majority , be put into escrow , to be deliver to the publisher whenever the paper have pay it way for three consecutive years. His control , however , be to be absolute from the first. This , of course , be a gigantic gamble : but it be a gamble in which nobody but the purchaser of bond for cash stand to lose anything which be not hopelessly lose already ; and of these bond the new publisher have buy nearly half. The rest be purchase mainly by capitalist who consider them a good if speculative investment , but would not have be seriously discommode if the venture have failed. Almost the only man who stand to lose much , in other word , be Adolph S. Ochs. He have mortgage his achievement of the past and his prospect of the future ; but if he win , everybody else would win with him. Competes With Yellow Press At the moment it seem almost incredible that he could win ; he have buy The Times with $ 75,000 and his ability , but all he have buy be a great name ( of late somewhat shopworn ) and a deficit. Dominating New York journalism of the period be The Herald , The World and The ( morning ) Journal , now The American ; the former with an excellent and costly foreign service which The Times could not hope to rival for year , the latter two wildly sensational , accord to the idea of that day , with immense circulation build up at a price of 1 cent , while the other morning paper , The Times include , sell for 3 cents. It be evident in retrospect , a it be clear to Mr. Ochs at the time , that to have imitate any of these successful competitor would have be suicidal ; but he would not have do it anyway. There be only one sort of paper that he know how to or care to publish , the sort of paper The Chattanooga Times have be ever since he take it over , and the sort of paper The New York Times have be in the best day of Raymond and Jones. His salutatory announcement on Aug. 19 , 1896 ( publish in full elsewhere in this issue ) , promise `` to conduct a high-standard newspaper , clean , dignified and trustworthy , '' for `` thoughtful , pure-minded people. '' Impartial news be promise and the opening of a forum for opinion ; and the continuation of the editorial policy which the paper have previously advocate , with Mr. Miller still in the editor 's chair. Despite the prosperity of the `` yellow '' Mr. Ochs believe that there be still a public for the sort of paper The Times have be in it best day , and he mean to seek that public out. His influence be instantly apparent in the news column of The Times , which in the late unhappy day have make room for item that be free publicity rather than news , and have inject some editorial bias into news reporting , which the new publisher promptly stopped. Columns of dull matter leave in from mere tradition be drop from the paper and the policy of print news for `` thoughtful , pure-minded people '' be emphasize , a against the sensationalism of The World and The Journal , by the adoption on Oct. 25 , 1896 , of the motto `` All the News That 's Fit to Print , '' which The Times carry to this day. This definition of The Times 's purpose be Mr. Ochs 's own ; it have be much criticize , but the criticism deal usually with the phraseology rather than with it practical interpretation , and the phraseology be simply an emphatic announcement that The Times be not and would not be what the ninety call a yellow newspaper. In place of the comic supplement of the yellow The Times soon offer a pictorial Sunday magazine and a few month after Mr. Ochs take charge the Saturday Review of Books , later shift to the Sunday issue , become a permanent feature of the paper. Letters to the editor controvert the paper 's editorial policy be admit to the rejuvenate Times on a scale not previously known. The Times of 1896 , small and simpler , a be necessitate by it constricted resource and by the less advanced newspaper technology of the period , be essentially The Times of today. Road to Success a Hard One The new paper find favor ; in the first year of Mr. Ochs 's proprietorship the circulation more than double , and the deficit which have be $ 1,000 a day when he take charge , average less than a fifth of that at the end of the year. But there be still a deficit ; and after the year of prosperity in Chattanooga the publisher have be suddenly fling back to the condition of his beginning a a newspaper proprietor when each week 's payroll be a problem. All the other prominent paper in New York have million behind them ; Mr. Ochs have nothing , and his personal credit have be strain to what seem at the time the uttermost in obtain the money to buy the paper. It turn out to be capable of extension , because there be men in New York who begin to realize what he be do with The Times , and to see that the paper be a good commercial risk. But it be year before that problem be definitely a thing of the past ; and it be year before some of the men whose investment in The Times , old and new , Mr. Ochs be save for them begin to realize how fully he deserve their trust. Some of them know it from the first ; the faith inspire in Mr. Miller at that first interview endure , and personal friendship come to reinforce it. Another man whose confidence in and affection for the new publisher prove of immense value be Colonel Marcellus Hartley , a member of the reorganization committee , who do perhaps more than any one else to teach the young man from Tennessee his way around New York and the technique of deal with New Yorkers. If Mr. Ochs 's way be pretty hard in the first year , it be make hard partly by his own principles. The volume of advertising in The Times do not increase as fast a the increase in circulation warrant , because the new publisher have bring to New York not only some novel idea about the treatment of news but an unusually rigorous conscience about advertising. Certain type of objectionable advertising that be commonly carry in the paper of the ninety be exclude from The Times from the first , and a censorship system be establish to investigate all offer advertising in which there be suspicion of fraud and to exclude questionable matter. In Mr. Ochs 's opinion all good and honest advertising be in it way news , and he regard his paper -- editorial column , news column , advertise column -- a all of one piece. Big Tammany Offer Rejected Furthermore , he be alert from the first to reject advertising which seem to have string to it. A notable instance occur in his first year in New York when the city government ( then a usual under Tammany control ) offer all it regular advertising to The Times. This amount to $ 150,000 a year -- a sum sufficient to insure success to Mr. Ochs 's venture , at a time when it seem highly probable that otherwise it would end in disaster. Furthermore , The Times be assure that the offer be not expect by the Tammany leader to change The Times 's customary attitude toward that organization ; it be make simply because they felt that it be a good idea to support a conservative Democratic paper in New York in the general interest of the party. Nevertheless , the offer be refused. It be Mr. Ochs 's opinion that regardless of the effect such a contribution to a paper of small circulation and dubious stability might have on the staff , it would be take by the general public a proof that The Times have be buy by Tammany , and that the paper could not afford for a moment to let that belief , however unfounded , be spread abroad. Moreover , he wish to avoid that subtle and almost unrealized influence which Tammany might wield by the mere threat of withdraw it advertising once the paper have adjust itself to that much-needed revenue. A similar feeling lead him four year later to reject the proposal of the Republican National Committee to buy a million copy ( at a time when the paper 's circulation be little more than 80,000 ) of an issue contain an especially cogent editorial support the Republicans on the national issue of 1900. The early year be frequently enliven by controversy with advertiser who think they be buy more than advertising space. To one such gentleman , who want certain guarantee from the management of The Times about it advertising policy , Mr. Ochs write : `` You must excuse me from discuss with you the policy of The New York Times. That be a subject we do not care to discuss with an advertiser. * * * We be seek to secure the good-will and confidence of intelligent , discriminate newspaper readers. The advertiser be a secondary consideration. * * * If your advertisement remain out of The New York Times until you have some assurance , other than the paper a it appear every day , a to the policy of the publisher , The Times so long a it be under it present management will endeavor to get along without your business. '' In the course of time the advertiser in question discover , a do others who raise similar issue , that The Times could get along without him good than he could get along without The Times , and he return with the understanding that what he buy be space in the paper and no more. These advertising policy , like the policy in treat news which Mr. Ochs announce in 1896 and follow ever afterward , be now the commonplace practice of all respectable newspapers. But in the ninety they be not commonplace , and newspaper then and now count respectable do not always adhere to them -- until Mr. Ochs have demonstrate that it be possible to publish a paper of those principle , and make it pay. Two Alarming Setbacks Despite what many practical newspaper men of the ninety must have regard a the handicap of honesty and dignity , The Times be steadily , though slowly , go ahead in circulation and advertising. But in Mr. Ochs 's first two year come two external calamity , each of which in turn all but ruin the new venture before it be fairly started. In 1897 the old United Press , which most of the New York paper have be support at heavy cost , collapsed. Mr. Ochs , whose Chattanooga Times be a member of The Western Associated Press , immediately apply for membership in that organization for The New York Times , a do the other New York papers. The World have previously be the only member of The Associated Press in New York , and Joseph Pulitzer have the power of veto over new applicant in the city. He readily agree to admit The Sun , The Herald and The Tribune ; but at first he would not have The Associated Press service extend to The Times. The paper be die , he say , and there be no use in prolong the agony. Refusal of Associated Press service at a period when The Times could afford very little special correspondence would have ruin the paper ; but eventually Mr. Pulitzer be persuade to let it come into The Associated Press with a Class B non-voting membership which , though it carry a derogatory implication with it , do give The Times The Associated Press news. A few year later , The Associated Press have to be reorganize under a New York charter ; and Mr. Ochs , whose paper could no longer be stigmatize a `` moribund , '' become a full member , a director and member of the executive committee. He hold these office for the rest of his life , and be one of the three or four men who practically make The Associated Press of today. The second and more disastrous external event be the war with Spain. It be largely make by the newspaper , and be perhaps the great opportunity for newspaper showmanship that have ever be offered. The immense expenditures for staff writer , staff artist , special dispatch boat and cable toll in which the other New York paper compete be beyond the capacity of The Times ; it have to be content with The Associated Press news , supplement by a little mail correspondence , and consequently could not hope to share in the fantastic rise in circulation which partially compensate some of it more prosperous rival for the money they pour out. But , inevitably , The Times lose advertising when the other paper do ; and a loss that the Hearst , Pulitzer , Reid and Bennett fortune could bear threaten to be fatal to the publisher of The Times , who have use up his meager work capital and have absolutely nothing else. The deficit in Mr. Ochs 's second year be $ 78,000 -- large than in the first year ; the circulation have be push up to 25,000 , but the advertising linage of 1898 show only a 10 percent gain over 1896. Something have to be done. Mr. Ochs be advise to raise the price of the paper from 3 cent to 5 cent a copy , on the theory that people who want his kind of paper would as soon pay 5 cent for it a 3. To the astonishment of every one , Mr. Ochs propose instead to cut the price to 1 cent. Faith In Public Vindicated This be to prove one of the most brilliant of his inspiration ; but it have behind it the solid faith of a lifetime -- the faith that there be a public for the only kind of paper Mr. Ochs could or would publish , and a large public than The Times then enjoyed. Mr. Ochs believe that there be many people in the city who buy the `` yellow journal '' only because they cost a third as much a the other paper , and that they would buy a different sort of paper if they could get it for the same price. He be well aware that the 1-cent price be regard a the badge of the yellow press , and that some people would suppose , when The Times go to that price , that it be go to that manner , too ; he know that there would be -- a indeed at first there be -- suspicion that some outside interest have subsidize the paper. His only defense against these suspicion would have to be the paper a it appear every day ; and he have faith that people who could now get for 1 cent the same kind of paper that they have formerly pay 3 cent for would realize that the suspicion be baseless. They did. Despite the universal belief among New York newspaper men ( outside The Times ) that the cut in price be the beginning of the end , it be in fact the beginning of victory. The circulation of the paper instantly begin to leap ; the public for that kind of paper , at a low price , which Mr. Ochs alone have discern , be actually there. A year after the change the circulation of The Times have treble , rise from 25,000 to 76,000 , and except for a brief recession after the World War it have be rise ever since , even though in 1918 , when all newspaper have to face increase production cost , the price per copy be raid to 2 cents. Mr. Ochs 's third year a publisher show a profit of $ 50,000 , and from then on the success of The Times be assured. So obvious be this that the reorganization committee of 1896 , which be to continue until the paper be firmly on it foot , be dissolve at the end of the second year. The original agreement have stipulate that the 3,876 share hold in escrow should be turn over to Mr. Ochs when he have make the paper pay for three successive years. On July 1 , 1900 , he have fulfil this condition and become the owner of a majority stock interest in The Times , which he retain ever afterward , with some increase. Growth Financed With Profits The great fight of Mr. Ochs 's life be win , therefore , by 1900 , and he win it by himself. Other men , before and afterward , make great contribution to the paper , the value of which he be always the first to acknowledge. But he be the man who ( a E. A. Bradford , a veteran of the editorial staff , put it ) `` find the paper on the rock and turn them into foundation stones. '' Another editorial veteran , F. J. Mortimer , amplify this a little : `` The rest of the paper , plant and men , be just the same the day before he take command and the day afterward. He be the only difference ; and from the moment he come in , a paper that have be steadily go down turn right around and start go up. '' That it keep on go up be due very largely , Mr. Ochs 's opinion , to the fact that most of the profit be plow back into the business -- plow back , needle to say , in a wise and productive fashion. The Times pay it way out of it own earnings. On Mr. Ochs 's twenty-fifth anniversary , Aug. 18 , 1921 , he announce that the gross income of the paper for that quarter century have be about $ 100,000,000 , of which only $ 3,750,000 -- an average of $ 125,000 a year -- have be withdraw a dividends. The rest of the profit have go into finance the growth of the paper. The story of Adolph S. Ochs during those year be the story of The New York Times. The two be inseparably woven. He have already lay down his fundamental code of integrity , soundness and completeness , and from this he never varied. But new invention , new idea and the broadening horizon of world event make necessary a constantly widen interpretation of `` All the News That 's Fit to Print. '' As The Times grow , Mr. Ochs grow with it , seize upon every improvement in technique that would enable his paper to get the news more quickly and more fully and to print it and get it to the reader in the best possible form and with the least possible lapse of time. The development of The Times carry the double thread of constantly improve newspaper making and of world-shaking event which put an unprecedented strain upon every facility a newspaper had. An account of the mechanical improvement in the production of The Times since Mr. Ochs take over the paper would be a long story in itself. In 1896 The Times be still be publish on Park Row , in a building which at it completion eight year earlier have be regard a the last word in newspaper housing. With the paper 's grow prosperity this building become too small. Realizing the northward drift of business and population , Mr. Ochs resolve to build in what be now know a Times Square , then a decidedly second-rate neighborhood. The design chosen for this structure , which be still one of New York 's landmark , be derive from the celebrate Giotto Campanile at Florence , and it be regard a one of the architectural triumph of it decade. Pressrooms and editorial room be newly equip and enlarge , and in January , 1905 , the paper be move uptown without miss an edition. New Quarters Soon Outgrown Perhaps nothing so dramatically indicate the growth of The Times during this period a do the fact that this spacious building , plan with all the foresight that proprietor , architect and staff possess , become too small in exactly seven years. The Times grow out of it quarter , then and afterward , somewhat a a healthy boy grow out of his clothes. From the Times Building , which still bear that name , the paper migrate , in 1913 , to the Times Annex at 229 West Forty-third Street , just off the square. In 1924 and again in 1931 addition have to be make to the Annex. In each case Mr. Ochs take pride in erect a dignified , appropriate and beautiful building. Meanwhile the development of rotogravure make necessary a separate plant for that process , construct at 636 West Forty-fourth Street in 1925. A new building be erect in Brooklyn in 1931 to print the paper 's Brooklyn and Queens edition. The process of set type , of stereotype and of printing be continually be improve , and The Times , under Mr. Ochs 's direction , never lag in take advantage of each new improvement. Mr. Ochs , who have set type by hand and have do some of his first printing on a hand-operated press , take a personal interest in each forward step in the mechanical department. In become a newspaper proprietor he take pride in not cease to be a printer -- and a good one. In 1926 he find it necessary to become , by proxy , a papermaker as well a a printer. In that year The Times become a large stockholder in the Spruce Falls Power and Paper Company , with holding of approximately 5,000 square mile of timber right in Northern Ontario , and subsequently one of the great papermaking plant in the world be erect by the company at Kapuskasing , Ont. From this mighty plant come now all of the newsprint use by The Times. The mechanic of communication be always important in Mr. Ochs 's eyes. He be early interested in Marconi 's experiment with the wireless , and arrange with Marconi , in cooperation with The London Times , for the first regular transatlantic wireless news service in 1907. For a time most of The Times 's European news be transmit in this fashion. Mr. Ochs be also a pioneer enthusiast for aviation , encourage some of the first cross-country flight and make use of airplane for carry photograph and deliver papers. He saw , too , that improved mean of communication and high speed press would be of little value without a well-organized world-wide news service , and this he set out to get , just a he have earlier do on a small scale in Chattanooga. In 1901 he arrange with The London Times for an exchange of service which give him the dispatch of that paper from all part of the earth. It be this cooperation that give The Times the first wireless account of a naval battle -- that send by Captain Lionel James from a dispatch boat 150 mile at sea during the encounter between the Russian and Japanese fleet in 1904. Mr. Ochs have a keen interest in exploration , both for it own sake and for it value a news , and show it in practically every expedition of importance from Peary 's journey to the North Pole to Admiral Byrd 's flight over the South Pole and afterward. He realize , too , the value of scientific news of all kind , and The Times give much space to it , especially after the World War. But complete presentation of all news worth printing , whether routine or otherwise , continue to be his ideal. The World War be a severe test not only of a paper 's ability to get and print the news , but of it editorial soundness and of the impartiality of it news columns. Editorially , The Times decide that the German Government be in the wrong. In the news column and in the Sunday edition it aim to present not only all the actual event of the war without bias , but also to give every point of view a chance for expression. Mr. Ochs take it a a tribute to the success of this latter policy that The Times be accuse by German sympathizer of favor the Allies and by allied sympathizer of favor Germany. The Times organize it European news service so thoroughly that it sometimes publish more special foreign dispatch than all other American newspaper combined. Of particular value to student of the war be it practice of print all important document in full , no matter what their length. At the end of the war Mr. Ochs have the satisfaction of know that his newspaper have reach a peak of prestige and prosperity which in the early year he have hardly dare dream of. In June , 1918 The Times have receive the first award of the Pulitzer Gold Medal for `` disinterested and meritorious service '' for publishing in full so many official report , document and speech by European statesman relate to the progress and conduct of the war. Advertising , circulation and the size of the paper have expand greatly , though the record of 1918 be to be far surpass in later years. Mr. Ochs be not the man to take this success a a purely personal triumph , and he be generous in his appreciation of the men who have work with him to bring it about. His material success probably mean less to him than the demonstration that his ideal of journalism and his faith in the fundamental decency of human nature be sound. In Fight for World Peace The post-war period do nothing to shake either his ideal or his faith , though it culminate in the depression of 1929. Editorially The Times throw itself into the fight to bring about world peace through the League of Nations just a it have fight for the same end in a different way during the war. The post-war news be just a important and almost as exciting a that of the war itself , and The Times expand it news-gathering network in Europe and all over the world. It continue to print important document in full , begin with the full text of the Versailles treaty , which it be the first paper in the world to publish completely. It retain it interest in science and exploration. It adhere to it old policy of present the news without bias. Its success in this field be illustrate in 1932 when Walter Duranty , The Times correspondent in Moscow , receive the Pulitzer Prize. Editorially The Times have a little sympathy a a newspaper could have with the idea and policy of the Soviet Government , yet it be able , through Mr. Duranty , to give the news of the Communist experiment so impartially that it gain the confidence of reader of all shade of opinion. In May , 1930 , The Times receive the first award of the medal of the University of Missouri School of Journalism `` for distinguished service in journalism. '' The success of The Times might have suggest to another man than Mr. Ochs the possibility of a chain of newspaper base on the same idea , which , a it always seem to him , would work not only in Chattanooga and New York but in any other American city. In 1899 Mr. Ochs do contemplate buy The New York Telegram , then own by James Gordon Bennett. Later , in 1901 and 1902 , he buy The Philadelphia Times and Ledger and amalgamate them , his brother , the late George W. Ochs Oakes ( who take the added name of Oakes in 1917 ) , become editor. In 1913 Mr. Ochs sell The Ledger to Cyrus H. K. Curtis. In 1918 he have almost complete arrangement to buy The Herald and The Telegram when the death of Mr. Bennett put an end to the negotiations. In the end Mr. Ochs come to regard the management of The New York Times , with it grow circulation , not only in New York but throughout the world , a a big enough job for any man. As related but independent enterprise , however , he establish The Annalist , a weekly financial review ; Current History , a monthly survey of world affair , long edit by George W. Ochs Oakes , and the Midweek Pictorial , an illustrated review of the week 's news. As component part of The Times he develop the weekly Book Review , The Times Magazine and the Sunday feature section. Steady Rise in Circulation The steady growth of the paper be reflect in the circulation statistic over a period of years. The figure by two-year period from 1896 to 1934 be a follow : Weekday Sunday 1896 21,516 22,000 1898 25,726 34,041 1900 82,106 39,204 1902 100,738 48,354 1904 109,770 46,991 1906 124,267 59,511 1908 158,692 86,779 1910 178,708 113,325 1912 220,139 158,539 1914 270,113 231,409 1916* 327,711 376,933 1918* 339,238 434,157 1920* 327,275 499,924 1922* 344,596 542,039 1924* 345,149 576,321 1926* 356,471 610,041 1928* 405,707 700,925 1930* 437,577 757,028 1932* 467,296 780,470 1934* 466,470 716,135 *Averages as report to Postoffice Department. Mr. Ochs often speak of this circulation growth a `` a vindication of the newspaper reader , '' in that it prove that there be a public interested in a clean , dignified newspaper. There be nothing perfunctory in his relation to anything that The Times did. He be interested in every activity a an exemplification of the ideal that he , a a publisher , be try to carry out. He take a similar interest in the business policy of the paper , a field in which he be just as much at home a in the news and editorial departments. In his eye The Times be a unified enterprise , with operating distinction between the different department , but with no difference a to fundamental principle among them. Truth in advertising be as important to him a truth in the news column and integrity in the editorial column , a he prove again and again , at whatever sacrifice of revenue. The Times 's censorship of advertising set a standard for American journalism. In the field of circulation Mr. Ochs never have any sympathy with artificial device to bring in new readers. He rely on the paper itself to be it own circulation-getter , and the circulation department do it work without any offer of premium or other special inducements. Mr. Ochs make much of his conception of The New York Times a the accepted newspaper of record. It be the obligation of a newspaper , he think , to present a complete record of it time. An important and logical part of this conception be the inauguration , in 1913 , of The New York Times Index , list and cross-referencing every news item in The Times 's columns. In 1927 , to make the record in it file imperishable , The Times begin print each day a limited edition upon pure rag paper stock for indefinite preservation in bound files. The personality of Mr. Ochs dominate his newspaper. Probably few other journal have ever reflect the personality of their publisher more definitely and completely than The Times have Mr. Ochs 's -- but in a different way from that generally associate with such a reflection. He place an imprint of character upon the organization. He do not permit The Times to exploit himself , his personal interest , antipathy or like , or to swerve in the slight degree because of his own opinion from the balance of impartial news presentation. His name rarely appear in it columns. Mr. Ochs believe that a single authority should control and direct a newspaper. He think that committee management be fatal , ineffective. But though he be supreme he welcome the frank expression of opinion contrary to his own. He once say that one of the most valuable men on his staff be one who rarely agree with him. Mr. Ochs always could count upon this man for a strong , reasoned statement of the other point of view. Pioneer in Many Ways Mr. Ochs 's eager , active mind , devote itself constantly to The Times , be generally so far in advance of others that some of his associate felt their task be to serve a a brake upon his audacity. Generally he be look upon a a conservative. Yet it be he who pioneer in many field of newspaper building. He be the first to bring rotogravure print for newspaper picture section to the United States. He look upon this beautiful process of printing a the best mean of present news in picture to readers. The Times rotogravure section have not show oddity and notorious person , but have accept it task a gather the important news of the world in pictures. The Times 's own Wide World Photo Service , with bureau and correspondent all over the world , for the purpose of assemble the best news picture , be Mr. Ochs 's idea of what such a department of a newspaper should be. Again Mr. Ochs be a pioneer in the improvement of newspaper printing. He develop the idea of The Times 's typographical standard , which forbid display advertisement to use unlimited area of crude black in type or illustration of bizarre arrangement of type -- a forward step now adopt by more than a score of other important newspapers. Mr. Ochs have a habit of make friendly and unostentatious tour of the building , often with some distinguish visitor. His use of power have nothing of arbitrariness ; rather be it exert a an influence. The editorial page , for instance , command his keen interest , and when at the office he be accustom to interrupt his executive duty at noon each day to preside over the editorial conference which argue out and decide on the editorial for the following issue. In consonance with his general theory of newspaper policy he believe that an editorial page should be temperate in statement and should recognize that there be usually something to be say on both side of a question. Coming up from Chattanooga he have describe himself a a conservative Democrat , a term which have some meaning in Grover Cleveland 's day. Mr. Ochs have a whole-hearted admiration for Woodrow Wilson , a he have have for Cleveland. But his Democratic principle do not prevent him give support to the President of whatever political faith so long a the administration policy warrant it. Consistently Broad-Minded In this and other matter of policy the editorial page be a reflection of Mr. Ochs 's personality. Naturally he do not bring to The Times editorial writer who be not in sympathy with it general principle ; he do not believe that it would be fair to the writer or to The Times to do so. Yet The Times editorial staff under Mr. Ochs 's direction have room not only for the full freedom of the individual writer 's conscience , but for a considerable variety of temperament and opinion. On point not involve his fundamental principle Mr. Ochs be always ready to listen to argument ; in fact , he enjoy the clash of opinions. On certain issue which he felt keenly he do not yield , but even then no man ever have to write against his own convictions. The power of Adolph S. Ochs be not that of the money which have come to him , but of his personality and his ideas. To The Times he be more than a proprietor ; he be what he have be to Foreman Collins of The Knoxville Chronicle -- '' a necessity , hard to part with. '' The least pretentious of men , he refuse to make a mystery of his own success. The principle he have follow seem to him self-evident , and he believe that they would have the same result if they be follow anywhere else. To a newspaper man , who observe in late year that Mr. Ochs have come to New York and taught New York journalist something new he remark that he have only remind them of something they have forgotten. Speaking at the convention of the National Editorial Association in 1916 he say that he have practice no new journalism in New York -- only the old journalism , the kind that succeed best in small towns. The policy of have no policy except to be as right a you know how -- this have be his sole admonition to a new editor of his Chattanooga paper -- be what he have follow in Chattanooga and in New York a well. It mean that clear , honest thinking , not expediency or partisanship , dictate the editorial decisions. He seem hardly aware that high principle , though they make success a public good instead of a public evil , do not guarantee success ; and that his own achievement be due not only to the idea and ideal which he cherish , but to his boundless energy , his supreme confidence , his willingness to stake everything on what he believe to be right and sound , and the confidence he inspire in other men. He have the quality of a born leader. He have the rare ability , a he show in 1896 , to win victory with a defeat and discourage army. Paper 's Leader to the End Mr. Ochs continue to direct The Times all his life , keep in close touch by telephone or cable whenever he be away from the office. As one of his subordinate testify before a Senate committee which once have some suspicion of absentee influence on The Times , he be , when in town , `` there every day. '' His town house be for many year at 308 West Seventy-fifth Street , until in the Fall of 1931 he buy an estate in White Plains. During the war Mr. Ochs purchase the country seat of George Foster Peabody , Abenia , on Lake George , and there use to spend his Summers in a colony where he have many friendship and where he could enjoy a daily game of not very laborious or too serious golf ; but even during the Summer absence at the lake he be in communication with The Times by telephone , morning , afternoon and evening. In his late year he travel in Europe more frequently than he have do before the war , become acquaint with virtually all the leader of politics and public opinion , and devote himself with all his private energy as well a those of his paper to the endeavor to smooth out misunderstanding and promote a good relation between Europe and the United States. The publishing of The Times be his avocation and his hobby as well a his vocation. He put into it the best that he have to give to his fellow-men , with a high seriousness and an unremitting sense of responsibility. He be a religious man in his daily work as well a outside of it , and many of his statement bore testimony thereto. Not only by tradition but by conviction he be a firm adherent of the reformed Jewish faith. He say at the Cleveland convention of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations , in January , 1927 : `` What we as a religious people have preserve through century of oppression be rapidly become the accepted concept of the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. It be call Modernism , but it hark back to the underlie faith of an ancient people , who give to civilization the Ten Commandments , the prophet and the Psalms. '' It be in keep with his conception of his faith and of his people 's place in history that he be oppose to Zionism. In a statement in The American Israelite in 1922 he say that `` the great heritage of the Jew be his religion. * * * As a distinctive race the Jews need no place in modern civilization. '' Nevertheless , he be open-minded enough to be immensely impressed , during his travel in Palestine , by the achievement and the spirit of the Zionist pioneer , however much he question the ultimate validity of their objective. Active in Well-Doing For many year he be a trustee of Temple Emanu-El in New York , and in 1924 he give to the congregation in Chattanooga a new building which be name , in honor of his parent , the Julius and Bertha Ochs Memorial Temple. In 1926 he undertake the chairmanship of the committee which succeed in raise more than $ 4,000,000 for the Hebrew Union College , which his father- in-law have founded. One of the principal interest of his late year be the park movement , in which he have be active long before a one of the advocate of the proposal for the Chickamauga National Park , near Chattanooga. It be due chiefly to him that the Lookout Mountain National Park be later institute to preserve this historic battlefield nearer the city ; he be active also in the organization which preserve the battlefield of Saratoga. The Times 's consistent endeavor to protect New York City park against encroachment be , of course , well known. In recognition of this stand the Park Association of New York City award it medal to Mr. Ochs in 1931. Of his contribution to public cause , perhaps the most notable be the gift of $ 500,000 which he cause The New York Times to make to finance the preparation of the manuscript of the Dictionary of American Biography , whose successive volume have meet a need of American scholarship which have long be felt. The New York Times also begin in 1928 the preparation and publication of The American Year Book. Of the numerous foreign decoration which he might have have Mr. Ochs accept only one -- membership in the French Legion of Honor , in which he be later promote to be Commander. He make an exception of the Legion because it be so universally looked upon a be free from political significance. To the acceptance of academic honor , fittingly bestow on a publisher who have do his best to make his paper an educational institution , he be more hospitable. He be make an honorary Master of Arts by Yale in 1922 , and in subsequent year receive honorary doctorate from Columbia University , the University of Chattanooga , New York University , Dartmouth and Lincoln University. In 1927 he receive the gold medal of the National Institute of Social Sciences , in 1929 he be one of seven citizen of New York cite for distinguish service by the Chamber of Commerce , and in 1931 he become a member of the American Philosophical Society. No honor gratify him more , however , than the title of Citizen Emeritus of Chattanooga , which be formally confer on him in July 1928 , at the conclusion of a three-day celebration of his semi-centennial a proprietor of The Chattanooga Times. This celebration be organize by the city and county government and attend by deputation from The Associated Press , the American Newspaper Publishers ' Association , the newspaper publisher and the Advertising Club of New York City and the Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York. He always retain an affection for Chattanooga and an interest in it affair , and the friendship which he have make there a a struggle young man be break only by death. Welfare of the Staff Of the welfare of the army of employes require to get out The Times Mr. Ochs be always solicitous. On March 12 , 1918 , he celebrate his sixtieth birthday by the establishment of group insurance for all employes , increase the maximum amount on late anniversaries. His quarter- centennial a publisher of The Times be mark by the institution of a system of sick benefit and a retirement pension fund. For Mr. Ochs 's unusual thoughtfulness and generosity in individual instance hundred of The Times staff in both important and humble position have cause to be grateful. An incident illustrate his unvarying thoughtfulness. Junior employes of The Times receive less than $ 18 weekly have a lunch card which permit them to purchase a complete 50- cent lunch for 10 cents. When The Times Annex be enlarge in 1931 it be necessary to close the restaurant for two week , and due notice be given. Upon the reopening of the restaurant every employe have a lunch card be surprise to receive , at Mr. Ochs 's order , a check to cover the extra cost of their lunch for the period of closing. The Hundred Neediest Cases A charity which come close to Mr. Ochs 's heart and engage his warm personal interest be the collection of fund , each year at the Christmas season , for `` The Hundred Neediest Cases. '' This feature be inaugurate by him in 1912 , when a fund of $ 3,630 be collect , to be distribute to person in dire need choose from list furnish by the lead charitable organization of the city. The appeal be and still be make solely through the publication of brief individual narrative in The Times. In this way Mr. Ochs try to bring home to his reader the poignant fact of destitution and to enlist their cooperation in relieve it. There be no personal solicitation ; the contribution be wholly spontaneous , sometimes come from reader who do not even give their name ; and every cent collect go to relieve want , the expense of administration be meet by the charitable organization send in the list of case and the other expense by The Times. No feature of the paper have more importance in Mr. Ochs 's eye during the Christmas season than this. He follow the campaign closely , even in it detail , and rejoice a the total mounted. The number of case relieve during the first twenty year total more than 5,000 and the number of individual nearly 18,000. For the Christmas season of 1930 the total of gift be $ 345,790. In many instance contribution come from person who be themselves out of work and limit a to funds. Trust fund , gift give in memory of the dead and repeated contribution from reader who take pride in keep up the annual total make `` The Hundred Neediest Cases '' a notable institution , and it success be a source of real joy to Mr. Ochs. Monuments He Leaves Mr. Ochs leave behind him two newspaper -- he retain his control interest in The Chattanooga Times -- the building of which occupy nearly all his energy for nearly all the work year of his life. Both be close to his heart. He could not have exist without intimate daily contact with their affairs. Each be create out of next to nothing by his personal effort , in the face of discouragement which would have defeat most men and of obstacle which seem insuperable. These newspaper be his monument , and he would now be willing to be judge by them. But his great monument be invisible -- the principle of clean , temperate and impartial presentation of news and of high standard in advertising. These be now such commonplace of decent newspaper practice that many newspaper men of today may think they have obtain from time immemorial. But they do not secure a foothold easily or automatically ; they do not prevail in New York City until Adolph S. Ochs come to town from Chattanooga and risk everything he have on his faith that not only could such a newspaper be publish but that there be a public which want it. Mr. Ochs be more than a publisher. He be a man who have faith in humanity and who back that faith by all the intelligence , all the energy and all the fight spirit that be in him. His Views on Life 's Meaning In October , 1931 , Will Durant , in prepare his book `` On the Meaning of Life , '' ask Mr. Ochs for his views. The following paragraph be quote from that book : Evidently religion do not die ; in the vast majority of men it be still a living force for good and ill. I find a sincere note of it in the reply of Adolph Ochs , publisher of that fine achievement in modern journalism , The New York Times ; by this letter I be well able to understand the solid , quiet success of this man in make his paper the most respected and most influential in America without ever cater to the mob. `` New York , Oct. 22 , 1931. `` Dear Mr. Durant : `` * * * You ask me what mean life have for me , what help -- if any -- religion give me , what keep me go , what be the source of my inspiration and my energy , what be the goal or motive-force of my toil , where I find my consolation and my happiness , where in the last resort my treasure lies. `` To make myself clearly understood , if I be able to do so , would take more time and think than I can give the matter now. Suffice it for me to say that I inherit good health and sound moral principle ; I find pleasure in work that come to my hand and in do it conscientiously ; I find joy and satisfaction in be helpful to my parent and others , and in thus make my life worth while found happiness and consolation. My Jewish home life and religion give me a spiritual uplift and a sense of responsibility to my subconscious well self -- which I think be the God within me , the Unknowable , the Inexplicable. This make me believe I be more than an animal , and that this life can not be the end of our spiritual nature. `` Yours faithfully , `` Adolph S. Ochs. '' More and more it stand out that a man must combine action with thought in order to lead a life that shall have unity and significance. Surely a monument like The Times be mean enough for one life. Adolph S. Ochs Proud Chattanooga 's flag have he unfurl High 'mid the city-banners of the world ; A bit of blue above the crimson dawn A single star -- when all the rest have go -- Staying to welcome through the Eastern gate The best that be to be , for his loved State ; A flag upon faith 's Lookout Mount to scan The wider destiny of Western man -- That signal to the youth , below , the way From out the dark despair of yesterday Up past the Smoky Altars , toward the West In never-halting , never-aging quest .