October 21 , 1936 OBITUARY Mrs. Macy Is Dead ; Aided Miss Keller BY THE NEW YORK TIMES Mrs. Anne Mansfield Sullivan Macy , who for nearly fifty year be the kindly , patient and brilliant teacher of Miss Helen Keller , note blind and deaf woman , die yesterday at their home , 71-11 Seminole Avenue , Forest Hills , Queens. She have be suffer from a heart ailment , which become acute early this Summer. Mrs. Macy be 70 year old. Mrs. Macy teach Miss Keller to read , speak and know the world about her by use of her fingertips. Their lifelong devotion to each other be internationally famous and one be seldom see or hear of without the other. Blindness , which have shadow the child Anne Sullivan 's life and which she have conquer before she meet Miss Keller , have return to darken her last day , and Miss Keller have to become the teacher and Mrs. Macy the pupil. Miss Keller yesterday pay this tribute : `` Teacher be free at least from pain and blindness. I pray for strength to endure the silent dark until she smile upon me again. '' Miss Polly Thompson , Miss Keller 's secretary , say yesterday that Miss Keller be `` bear up magnificently '' under her loss. During the last week Miss Keller be almost constantly at Mrs. Macy 's side. Mrs. Macy be in a coma from Thursday until she died. On Wednesday she say : `` Oh , Helen and Polly , my child , I pray God will unite u in His love. '' Mrs. Macy , so long the link to light for Miss Keller , lose the sight of her own right eye in 1929 , due partly to a cataract , for which an operation be performed. In May , 1935 , a cataract operation be do on her left eye , but thereafter she be able to distinguish only light and color with it. She could no longer read or guide her beloved Miss Keller , who , despite her own handicap , devote herself to her friend. Pupil Guides Teacher in Braille As early a 1933 Miss Keller have commence to teach Mrs. Macy to read Braille. But the Braille system have change since Mrs. Macy teach it to Miss Keller and the teacher find it difficult. When it become know that year that Miss Keller , who have be lead out of the black silence in which she have exist since childhood by the ingenuity , perseverance and patience of her teacher , be in turn prepare her teacher to `` see '' with her finger , THE NEW YORK TIMES , in an editorial , say : `` The 'blind lead the blind ' will henceforth have a new meaning wherever the story of Anne Sullivan and Helen Keller be known. They who have be exile from the light have be able to demonstrate the power of the mind to overcome limitation. '' Mrs. Macy be 21 year old when she meet Helen Keller. Born in Feeding Hills , near Springfield , Mass. , on April 14 , 1866 , the daughter of Irish immigrant , John and Mary Mansfield Sullivan , Mrs. Macy suffer the loss of her mother when a young child. For a year or two she be support by poor relative , but at the age of 10 she be send to the State Infirmary , Tewksbury , Mass. She be already partially blind and at the infirmary two eye operation be perform , but her sight do not improve. She be lead to believe that Frank B. Sanborn , chairman of the State Board of Charities , who sometimes visit the infirmary , might be able to aid her. She plead with him and he arrange for her entry into the Perkins Institution for the Blind in Boston , where live Laura Bridgman , blind and deaf , who have be train there. Underwent Two Eye Operations Mrs. Macy enter the Perkins Institution in 1880 , make there a brilliant scholastic record and learn to study with her finger , and later , after two operation have restore her sight , to use her eyes. She learn the manual , or finger , alphabet , so a to be able to talk to Laura Bridgman. In 1886 she be graduate a valedictorian of her class. Not long after her graduation Helen Keller 's father write to the institution ask for help for her. Miss Sullivan be choose to be her teacher and , after familiarize herself with the detail of her new work , go to Helen 's home in Tuscumbia , Ala. The two who be to mean so much to each other until Mrs. Macy 's death yesterday meet first on March 3 , 1887 , three month before Helen be 7 year old. Miss Keller say later that it be `` the most important day I remember in all my life. '' Working carefully , so a to bring Helen under some sort of discipline without break her spirit , Mrs. Macy begin spell word into her hand. With no understanding of what they mean , Helen begin repeat them. The teacher persist , spell the word doll when she give her a doll , bread when she give her bread , candy when she give her candy. In less than a month Helen realize that everything have a name and that she have a way , the finger alphabet , of call the names. Teaching Along New Paths One day Mrs. Macy try to teach Helen the difference between a cup and the water in the cup. She take her to a pump , pumped water over one hand and spelled water into the other hand. Helen at last understood. She point to Miss Sullivan , who spell teacher , and `` teacher '' she be to the close. Mrs. Macy educate Helen , use always the finger spelling , but treat her like any other child. After preliminary lesson in speaking , Helen learn from Mrs. Macy to converse and even speak from a platform. Teacher and pupil remain for a time at the Perkins Institution. Then , in 1894 , Helen be enrol in the Wright-Humason Oral School for the Deaf in New York. Later Miss Sullivan take her to a school in Cambridge to prepare her for Radcliffe College and finally Helen pass triumphantly her entrance examination , enter Radcliffe and in 1904 be graduate cum laude. Throughout the college course Mrs. Macy be with Helen , spell into her hand the word of the textbook and the book of require reading. Miss Keller 's career thereafter bring her more and more into the public eye. She become famous a an author , she raise huge sum for the blind , she travel , she be everywhere acclaim , and Mrs. Macy go everywhere with her. `` My own life , '' Mrs. Macy say once , `` be so interwoven with my Helen 's life that I ca n't separate myself from her. '' Honored by Foreign Lands When Mrs. Macy 's sixty-seventh birthday be celebrate Miss Keller propose a toast : `` Here 's to my teacher , whose birthday be the Easter morning of my life. '' In 1931 Mrs. Macy receive the honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters from Temple University and the Order of St. Sava from the King of Yugoslavia. In 1932 she become an honorary fellow of the Educational Institute of Scotland. Mrs. Macy stay in seclusion for several month in 1933 in Scotland while Miss Keller nurse her. Mrs. Macy 's blindness grow more pronounced and on her return from Scotland she say : `` Helen be and always have be thoroughly well behave in her blindness as well a her deafness , but I 'm make a futile fight of it , like a buck bronco. It 's not the big thing in life that one miss through loss of sight , but such little thing a be able to read. And I have no patience , like Helen , for the Braille system , because I ca n't read fast enough. '' Early this month the Roosevelt Memorial Association announce that Roosevelt medal `` for a cooperative achievement of heroic character and far-reaching significance '' would be present to Miss Keller and Mrs. Macy. In a telegram of sympathy to Miss Keller yesterday Hermann Hagedorn , executive director of the association , say that presentation to Miss Keller would be postpone from Oct. 27 to next year. Mrs. Macy be marry to John Albert Macy , author and critic , in 1905. He die in 1932. There be no immediate survivors. A funeral service will be conduct at 2 P. M. tomorrow at the Park Avenue Presbyterian Church , 1,010 Park Avenue , by the Rev. Dr. Harry Emerson Fosdick and the Rev. Edmund M. Wylie , the pastor. After the service , cremation will take place , in accord with Mrs. Macy 's wish , at the Fresh Pond Crematory , Queens. The honorary pallbearer will be M. C. Migel , president of the American Foundation for the Blind , which Miss Keller and Mrs. Macy greatly aid ; Robert Irwin , executive director of the foundation ; Harvey D. Gibson , Russell Doubleday , Dr. Conrad Berens , Dr. Philip S. Smith , Dr. William F. Saybolt , Dr. John H. Finley , Louis Bamberger , the Rev. Dr. Edward E. Allen , director emeritus of the Perkins Institution ; Dr. William Allan Neilson , president of Smith College , and William Ziegler Jr .