June 19 , 1936 OBITUARY Maxim Gorky Dies At Moscow Villa Special Cable to THE NEW YORK TIMES MOSCOW , June 18. -- Maxim Gorky , most famous of contemporary Russian novelist , die shortly before noon today of heart disease , the result of pulmonary congestion follow grip. He have be ill for two weeks. His heart weakness have already give rise to anxiety , which be greatly accentuated yesterday. He die in his country villa , about thirty mile from Moscow , at the age of 68. Gorky have become one of the most popular figure in the U.S.S.R. in recent year a he gradually pass from a sympathizer to one of the warm supporter of the Soviet regime. He play a leading role at the International Writers Congress in Moscow in the Summer of 1934. His photograph in the congress hall be nearly as large a Stalin's. Although he do not participate in politics directly and be not a member of the Bolshevist party , he champion the Soviet cause unequivocally. Tverskaya Street , one of the lead thoroughfare of Moscow , be name Gorky Street in his honor. There will be a great public funeral on Saturday or Sunday and the body will lie in state in Moscow for twenty-four hour previously. Tribute From London Special Cable to THE NEW YORK TIMES LONDON , June 18. -- The Times of London in an appreciation of Maxim Gorky say : `` If any of his work survive a literature and not merely a document in the stage of the Russian Revolution , they may be not his novel and short story for which he become famous in early life , but the odd , unchronicled volume of reminiscence on which he work when his health permit after the downfall of the old regime. Collectively call 'My Universities , ' they make a fascinate a gallery of curious portrait and picture of outlandish way of life a can be find in the work of Dickens at his most fantastic. `` The success of his play be probably due more to admirable presentation by the Moscow Art Theatre than to intrinsic merit. '' Comment From Shaw By The Associated Press LONDON , June 18. -- George Bernard Shaw , informed of the death of Maxim Gorky , say today : `` I dare say it 's time for all u nineteenth century writer to clear out. You 'd better prepare my obituary. You never know. '' Triumphal Return to Russia Maxim Gorky 's return to Russia in 1928 be something in the nature of a triumphant parade. Honors -- more honor than for any other man in Soviet Russia -- be shower upon the author. The ancient city of Nizhni Novgorod lose it old name and be call Gorky in 1932. The large airplane in the world at the time be name after the author of `` Chelkash. '' It be wreck in 1935. The main literary institute in the U.S.S.R. have be call the Maxim Gorky Institute. Gorky 's more recent writing include play like `` Dostigayev '' and `` Yegor Bulevitch '' and novel or historical work like `` Other Fires , '' `` Bystander '' and `` The Magnet. '' Although his influence on the mass of the Russian people have be enormous , the new school of Soviet writer have rebel to a certain extent against his somewhat ponderous writing of later years. His fame , at the turn of the century , be international. In later year he have be more of a semi-political figure in Soviet Russia. Gorky open the first congress of Soviet writer in Moscow in August , 1934. It be estimate in 1933 that his book have a circulation of 10,000,000 copy in Russia. Alexis Maximovitch Pleshkov take the name of Maxim Gorky , mean `` Maxim the Bitter , '' or `` The Bitter One , '' when he start to write. He be bear in Nizhni Novgorod , Russia , March 14 , 1868 , the son of a journeyman upholsterer. His rise in the world of literature be in every way extraordinary , a will be see from the chronology which Gorky once submit to an editor who ask for his autobiography. This be what he send to the editor : 1868 -- Born at Nizhni Novgorod. 1878 -- Shoemaker 's boy. 1879 -- Apprentice to a designer , paint ikons. 1880 -- Cabin boy on a Volga steamer ( where the ship 's cook teach him to read ) . 1883 -- Worked in a biscuit factory. 1884 -- Porter. 1885 -- Baker 's boy. 1886 -- Dummy in a village theatre. 1887 -- Fruit seller. 1888 -- Attempted suicide. 1889 -- Railway employe. 1890 -- Clerk to an advocate ( where he learn to write ) . 1891 -- Operative in a salt mill ; later vagabond. 1892 -- Wrote his first novel , `` Maker Chudra. '' 1903 -- Celebrity and riches. Abandoned by His Parents When only 5 year old Gorky be abandon by his parent and be care for by his grandfather , describe a a miserly and brutal old man. The lot of the nomad , which he immortalize in late year , appear to be his destiny. Desperate struggle with cold and hunger , neglect and misery be his lot from his early days. He be compel to leave school when he be take down with cholera and he never returned. His father contract the same illness and die , and upon Gorky 's recovery he find that his mother have die of consumption. The grandparent inform his convalescent boy that he have lose his hoarded wealth and that he must go to work. Long and dreary day follow a the shoemaker 's apprentice. He decide that the life of a drudge , with it weary hour and slum , dark cellar and otherwise sordid environment , could be forsake forever by run away , and this he do : Tramping about the Volga region , he chance upon Captain Mikail Samouir , an old seafaring man , who like the bright and companionable vagabond. The captain , an educated man , offer to teach the youth to read , but at first Gorky hat book , and it take him a long time to acquire an appreciation of the beauty store in the book the captain offer him. At first he read the Bible , then the Arabian Nights , and at length become fascinate with the work of the Russian master of the day. When he realize how ignorant he be he seek an education. He have read somewhere that Leo Tolstoy get his education at the University of Kazan , so , at the age of 15 , he bid the captain good-bye and set out for Kazan. He be destine to disappointment at the end of his journey , for , to his chagrin , he learn for the first time that an education such a he desire have to be bought. He therefore go to work in a bakeshop , earn the sum of 3 ruble per month -- $ 1.50 in the coin of the United States. Immortalizes Dingy Bakeshop In his short story `` Twenty-one and One Other , '' he immortalize the miserable and dingy bakeshop , with it ceaselessly toil baker and fiery tongue leap from the bake oven. Fantastic picture set his imagination aglow , for he have hear of the city of Tiflis , with it semi-barbaric inhabitants. He leave the bakeshop bound for the Crimea , but apparently on this attempt he do not get far. A stranger stop him a he lounge about the university preparatory to take his departure. The man be a lawyer , who , after hear the story of the impetuous boy , offer him employment. Gorky become a clerk in the law office , and then follow long day of hard study. Finally he part from his benefactor and arrive in Tiflis in 1892 , where he find employment in a railroad shop. There he write his first short story , but his best work in this line be not do until some year later , when he meet Vladimir Korolenko , the famous Russian short-story writer. Unlike most Russian writer , Gorky be receive with great enthusiasm. He find an echo within the heart of the multitude. All over the world his work begin to meet with approval , a it be translate into many languages. Following his first story Gorky attract wide attention by his tale call `` Chelkash. '' This be follow by a series of story in which he sketch with realistic success the life of the bosniakl , or tramp. His favorite type , however , be the man in revolt against society. Through his year of association with that class he write from personal knowledge and easily enlist the sympathy of his readers. He also produce some play with high ideal , such a `` At the Lowest Depths , '' which meet with great success in Moscow. An Exile for Eight Years While Gorky cultivate the art of express revolutionary idea in his book without actually give the censor an excuse to suppress them , he fell into disastrous conflict with the authority when , later , he engage actively in socialistic anti-government propaganda. Several time he be cast into prison because of his seditious utterance , and after incarceration at Riga in January , 1905 , he virtually become an exile for eight years. He come to America in the Spring of 1906. When it be learn that the `` Mme. Gorky '' with whom he be travel be in reality Mlle. Andreieva , an actress , and not legally marry to the revolutionist , a revulsion of sentiment set in and society refuse to have anything more to do with him , despite the explanation that under the Russian law it have be impossible to obtain a divorce from his wife , with whom he have not live for years. Admission to New York hotel be refuse him , and , finally , after a period of seclusion , he leave America , bitterly denounce the country. In 1907 , while living in the shadow of death from tuberculosis at Capri , Italy , Gorky marry the actress. In 1913 he be include in an amnesty concede by the Czar , but at first decline to avail himself of it. In 1914 , however , he return to Russia. Soon thereafter the World War started. Although 46 year old , with health undermine , and a supposedly confirm pacifist , Gorky enlist in the Russian Army a a private and serve at the front in Galicia. He say a European disaster would be bring about if Germany win the war , and he be willing to sacrifice his principle to avert such a catastrophe. Attacked Bolsheviki When the revolution break out in 1917 Gorky be a ardent a revolutionist a any , and be active in politics a editor of his revive organ , Svobodnaia Zhizn ( Free Life ) , which have be previously suppress because of it revolutionary tendencies. When Kerensky be overthrow , Gorky find himself in bitter disagreement with the Bolsheviki and attack them almost daily in editorial and bulletin issue over his name. His opposition do not last long , however , and he be soon win over to the Bolshevist cause. His adherence to the Soviet cause be question at various time , due to temporary quarrel with the power that be , but , generally speak , he never waver in his support of the principle for which the Bolsheviki stood. In 1918 he be appoint chief of the Soviet Bureau of Propaganda , and early the next year he be elect a member of the Petrograd Soviet. His wife become an official of the Department of Education. Gorky 's political connection with the Soviet end in 1924 , when , either because his health be bad or because he felt himself temporarily out of sympathy with the regime , he leave Russia for Germany , France and Italy. Faithful to Soviet Creed As a matter of fact , Gorky be to show himself by his late action and statement to be heartily in accord with Soviet principles. When the tenth anniversary of the Bolshevist regime be celebrate , Gorky send a letter of greet to the Soviet Government. While in Russia Gorky abandon his literary work , only to take it up again when he be abroad. For a year or two after leave Russia he be believe to be slowly die of his tubercular trouble , but , after purchase a villa in Sorrento , Italy , and take up his residence there , he recover his health completely. His most important literary work , compose at Sorrento , be his autobiography , write in the form of a diary , but he also write several novel and play , consider by critic to be as fine a any of his early work. On his sixtieth birthday , which occur in March , 1928 , the Soviet Government honor him by issue a special set of postage stamp bear his portrait. Gorky be the first writer so honor in Russia .