December 29 , 1937 OBITUARY Maurice Ravel , 62 , Composer , Is Dead Wireless to THE NEW YORK TIMES PARIS , Dec. 28. -- Maurice Ravel , one of the best known French composer , die in a clinic here today at the age of 62. He have be operate upon on Dec. 17 for a brain ailment from which he have be suffer for some years. His composition , notably `` Scheherazade , '' `` La Mere l'Oye , '' `` Pavane pour une infante defunte '' and `` Bolero , '' please concertgoers the world over. He have be professor at the American School of Music in Fountainebleau. Wrote in Many Forms Maurice Ravel rank a one of the outstanding composer of music of the twentieth century. He write in many form , for piano , voice , opera , ballet , chamber ensemble and orchestra. Perhaps his most significant contribution be his mastery of instrumentation. It be say of him that his genius have a fantastic turn , but a critic point out that `` form , form , form , present in the small work a in the big and free one , '' be always the foundation of his music. Speaking of his own aim and ideal , Mr. Ravel once say : `` Of course , if I ever do a perfect piece of work I would stop compose immediately. One just try , and when I have finish a composition I have 'tried ' all I can ; it 's no use attempt anything more in the same direction. One must seek new ideas. '' Mr. Ravel deliberately fashion his musical style and follow his self-appointed path. When he be ask about the need for a composer to write with sincerity , he reply : `` I do n't particularly care about this 'sincerity. ' I try to make art. '' He illustrate his point by say that he have work on a violin and piano sonata for four year , three of which be spend in take out the note that be not necessary. Began Piano Lessons at 12 Mr. Ravel be bear in Ciboure , near St. Jean-de-luz , March 7 , 1875. His mother be of Basque descent , his father come of French and Swiss people. When he be 12 year old he be take to Paris for lesson in piano and theory. Two year later his serious training begin when he enter the Paris Conservatory a a piano student. In a few season his talent win him an honorary medal and entry to the advanced class of Charles de Beriot. Supplementing his piano work be his class in harmony with Emile Pessard , counterpoint and fugue with Andre Gedalge and composition with Gabriel Faure. His own taste lead him to study the music of Satie , Liszt , Chabrier and many of the Russians , principally Rimsky-Korsakoff , all of whom exert some influence upon his work. But from the first , a be reveal in his early know composition , his style be a personal one. The first public hearing of his music be unfavorably review by the few critic who pay attention to them. That fact , however , set up the story that Ravel be a dangerous political revolutionist -- a story that spread to musical officialdom and seriously hinder the young composer 's early effort at recognition. Thus , have win the second place in the Prix de Rome in 1901 , he try unsuccessfully for the first prize in the following two years. Ruled Ineligible by Jury In 1905 the jury rule him ineligible in the preliminary contest , design only to eliminate obviously incompetent candidates. Since his string quartet , his `` Pavane '' and `` Jeux d'eau '' for piano have be perform and publish , this verdict be patently unfair. Important critic who have little sympathy with Mr. Ravel 's music protest vigorously , but as far a concern the Prix de Rome , in vain. Recognition of Mr. Ravel 's gift , however , be not slow in coming. There be no ignore early work like `` Jeux d'eau '' ( 1901 ) , `` Gaspard de la nuit '' and the `` Mother Goose '' suite ( 1908 ) . Of later work the `` Scheherazade , '' `` Alborada del gracioso , '' `` Rhapsodie Espagnole '' and `` La Valse '' -- all for orchestra -- be notable contributions. Other important work be the F major string quartet , Introduction and Allegro for harp , quartet , flute and clarinet ; `` Tzigane '' for piano and violin , `` Le Tombeau de Couperin '' for orchestra , the comic opera `` L'Heure Espagnole , '' and many songs. The opera be give by the Metropolitan Opera Company in the season of 1925-26 , with Lawrence Tibbett in a leading role. Two year later Mr. Ravel come to America , appear a pianist and conductor in his own works. Perhaps more than any other of his composition , the now ubiquitous `` Bolero '' for orchestra spread the name of Ravel throughout the world. Its first hearing create storm of enthusiasm and dissent , but it be now firmly entrench in the concert repertoire. Based on a single theme , it entire power resides in it masterly orchestration and cumulative effect. As a writer of ballet music , Mr. Ravel 's importance be such that , when the Diaghileff Ballet Russe bring out `` Daphnis et Chloe '' in 1912 , it be deem by one critic a `` date notable in the revival of the French ballet as well a in Ravel 's career. '' The ballet have it American premiere in Philadelphia in 1936 with the Philadelphia Orchestra by an ensemble of sixty dancer under the direction of Catherine Littlefield. Assiduously avoid public attention , Ravel rarely accept prominent post or honors. Twice he be propose for the Legion of Honor , but he declined. Three year ago he accept the position of director of the American Conservatory of Music at Fountainebleau , but ill health prevent him from continue his responsibility .