August 13 , 1937 OBITUARY Edith Wharton , 75 , Is Dead in France Special Cable to The New York Times PARIS , Aug. 12. -- Edith Wharton , American novelist , die yesterday afternoon at her villa , Pavilion Colombes , near Saint Brice , Seine-et-Oise. She have be in fairly good health until she suffer an apoplectic stroke early yesterday morning and do not recover consciousness. She die at 5:30 P.M. , but her death be not know in Paris. At her bedside be her friend , Mrs. Royal Tyler. Many of her friend will drive tomorrow to the villa , where the body be lie in state. Among them will be Edward Tuck , the philanthropist ; Mrs. Walter Gay Wells and American and French officials. Funeral of Author Today Saint Brice Sous Foret , France , Aug. 12 ( AP ) . -- Edith Wharton will be bury in the Protestant cemetery at Versailles tomorrow. Representatives of the French War Veterans Association of Saint Brice will accompany the coffin , honor her for her war work for France. She be survive by a niece , Mrs. Max Ferrard , wife of a noted historian. Published Thirty-eight Books Edith Wharton be the child as well a the author of the Age of Innocence. In her seventy-five year of life she publish thirty-eight book , include that great love story , `` Ethan Frome. '' But her reputation rest mostly upon her achievement a the chronicler of Fifth Avenue , when the brownstone front hid wealth and dignity at it ease upon the antimacassar-covered plush chair of the Brown Decade. As a child she live within the inner circle of New York society that always think of itself a spell with a capital S. In her ancestry be a long succession of important names. The Schermerhorns , the Joneses , Pendletons , Stevenses , Ledyards , Rhinelanders and Gallatins , who have lead the social life of New York before Mrs. Astor 's horse be a symbol , before Commodore from Staten Island , or men with strange new name from the West have descend on the town. Her own father , although not overly rich , be , nevertheless , able to live , a she say , `` a life of leisure and amiable hospitality. '' Besides Fifth Avenue , there be Newport. Beyond that be only Europe. When little Edith walk on the Avenue she pass nothing but brownstone and the cow pasture of the Misses Kennedy. When she go on Bailey 's Beach she shield her fair skin from the sun with a black veil. When she go to Europe it be an escape from the crudity of American society -- even that with a capital S. Innocence be the life of her childhood and it be the stuff of her good books. Much Abroad a Child Edith Wharton be bear Edith Newbold Jones on Jan. 24 , 1862. Her father be George Frederick Jones ; her mother be the former Lucretia Stevens Rhinelander , and back of each be Colonial and Revolutionary ancestors. When she be 4 the family go abroad in pursuit of culture , health and economy , for her father 's inherited fund have not increase during the Civil War that be just ended. Her early impression be the international -- New York and Newport , Rome , Paris and Madrid. Added to this be a vivid imagination , which find outlet in story tell even before she could read. In keep with the sheltered life of the time , she be never send to school , but be teach at home. She begin write short story in her early teen , but they be never about `` real people. '' Little happen to the real people she know ; what do `` happen '' be generally not talk about. It be from this background that Mrs. Wharton be to inherit the belief from which she never depart , that `` any one gift with the least creative faculty know the absurdity of such a charge '' a that of `` put flesh-and-blood people into books. '' Later critic be to say that in this be her great lack. The young author write her first effort on brown paper salvage from parcels. She be not encouraged. `` In the eye of our provincial society , '' she be later to say , `` authorship be still regard a something between a black art and a form of manual labor. '' Each be equally despise in her social level. Her first acceptance be three poem which she send to the editor with her call card attached. Wrote a Novel at 11 In her autobiography Mrs. Wharton give a picture of her literary beginning along with a picture of her life. Her first novel , write when she a 11 , begin : `` 'Oh , how do you do , Mrs. Brown ? ' say Mrs. Tompkins. 'If only I have know you be go to call I should have tidy up the draw room. ' '' The little girl show it to her mother , whose icy comment be : `` Drawing room be always tidy. '' Her first publish book be a collaboration call `` The Decoration of Homes. '' How many short story she write before 1899 be not know. But she be encourage in her writing by such friend a Egerton Winthrop and Walter Berry and somehow , while abroad , meet Paul Bourget , the `` chronicler of the bourgeoisie. '' Other mentor be William Brownell and Edward Burlingame , for many year editor of Scribner 's Magazine. In her autobiography she write : `` I do not think I have ever forget one word of the counsel they give me. '' To which a well- know critic add , `` One well believe it. '' But it be Henry James who be her close friend and most worth-while advocate. She be always his respectful disciple and , although in their many meeting he disguise the severity of his judgment with his usual elaborate verbal courtesy , he manage to convey the meaning of his criticism. He remain her close friend until his death. In 1899 Mrs. Wharton -- she have be marry to Edward Wharton , a Boston banker , in 1885 -- publish her first book : `` The Greater Inclination. '' In this may be find two of her best short story , , `` The Pelican '' and `` Souls Belated. '' This volume do not make her a wide reputation overnight. In fact , it be not until 1905 that she gain a large public , although in the interim there have appear these book : `` The Touchstone , '' `` Crucial Instances , '' `` The Valley of Decision '' and `` The Descent of Man and Other Stories , '' and her flare for travel book have assert itself in two volume on Italy , it villa and gardens. In 1905 she publish her first of many best-sellers , `` The House of Mirth. '' Most critic do not consider this her great book , but it popularity establish her a a writer. This be in reality her first novel , although she have write long short story in her other books. Its title come from the biblical assertion , `` The heart of fool be in the House of Mirth , '' and it be a happy title for project , a Wilbur Cross once put it , `` a group of pleasure-loving New Yorkers , mostly as dull a they be immoral , and let them play out their drama unmolested by others. '' Other novel come in rapid succession , but none attract the attention in this country that be reserve for the book Elmer Davis once call `` the last great American love story '' -- '' Ethan Frome. '' Those which have go between be `` Madame de Treymes , '' in which certain French critic detect the influence of Flaubert and Maupassant ; `` The Fruit of the Tree , '' `` The Hermit and the Wild Woman '' and `` Artemis to Actaeon. '' `` Ethan Frome , '' which be most successfully dramatize two season ago , be write in 1911. In it she most successfully blend the psychological refinement she have learn from Henry James with her own inimitable ability to tell a story with a beginning and an end. One critic have say it be comparable only to the work of Nathaniel Hawthorne a a tragedy of New England life. A novelette , it be consider a masterpiece of love and frustration , and be likely to stand , despite it comparative brevity , a her most accomplished work. Until 1906 Mrs. Wharton have divide her time between New York and her Summer home at Lenox , Mass. In that year she go to live in France , in Summer at Saint Brice and in Winter at Hyeres in Provence. Did Relief Work in War When the World War break out she be in Paris and she plunge at once into relief work , open a room for skilled woman of the quarter where she live who be throw out of employment by the closing of workrooms. She also feed and house 600 Belgian refugee orphans. In recognition France award her the Cross of the Legion of Honor and Belgium make her a Chevalier of the Order of Leopold. Meanwhile she write story and article on the war , include `` Fighting France '' and `` The Marne. '' After the war she visit Africa with General Lyautey at the invitation of the French Government , and write a a result `` In Morocco. '' `` The Age of Innocence '' be her next book and in term of sale her most successful. Here she use actually the material she have hitherto use only for background -- the social life of the New York into which she have be bear and in which she be bread. Published serially here and abroad , it be widely read , and be award the Pulitzer Prize for 1920. It show Mrs. Wharton at her best , understand the cramped society of her youth , unaware of the world beyond it. Four year later she follow it with four novelette publish under the title of `` Old New York , '' a constricted panorama of society in the Forties , Fifties , Sixties and Seventies respectively. Shortly after the publication of this volume she be make an officer of the Legion of Honor. Then she return to America , to be award the Gold Medal of the National Institute of Arts and Letters , the first woman to be so honored. In 1924 she also become the first woman to be award an honorary Doctor of Letters degree by Yale University. In 1930 she be make a member of the National Institute of Arts and Letters. Four year later she be elect to membership in the American Academy of Arts and Letters. Since that time she have write other book , include `` Twilight Sleep , '' a story of fashionable life in modern New York ; `` The Children , '' a study of the child of expatriated divorcee ; `` Hudson River Bracketed , '' a study of a modern writer , and `` Certain People , '' a collection of short stories. But that be many year ago. That generation which know her best for `` The Age of Innocence '' flock to see `` Ethan Frome '' when it be adapt for the stage by Owen Davis and his son , Donald. Presented on Broadway with Pauline Lord , Ruth Gordon and Raymond Massey in the leading role , the grim tragedy prove to be as good theatre a it have previously be a great book. `` Ethan Frome '' be not the only one of her book to have be translate into play in recent years. `` The Age of Innocence '' help add to the luster of Katharine Cornell eight year ago , and one of her shorter piece become `` The Old Maid '' of the theatre , in which Judith Anderson and Helen Menken star in 1935 .