May 24 , 1937 OBITUARY Financier 's Fortune in Oil Amassed in Industrial Era of 'Rugged Individualism' By THE NEW YORK TIMES John Davison Rockefeller be the rich man in the world at the height of his active career. Starting his business life a a poor boy in an office , with little formal education and no capital except what he save by strict economy out of meager earnings , he become the pioneer of efficient business organization and of the modern corporation , the most powerful capitalist of his age , and the great philanthropist and patron of high education , scientific research and public health in the history of the world. It be estimate after Mr. Rockefeller retire from business that he have accumulate close to $ 1,500,000,000 out of the earnings of the Standard Oil trust and out of his other investments. This be probably the great amount of wealth that any private citizen have ever be able to accumulate by his own efforts. The foregoing estimate be make on the basis of 1918 income tax return , which indicate that Mr. Rockefeller 's taxable income be then $ 33,000,000 and that his total fortune be probably more than $ 800,000,000. At that time he have distribute about $ 500,000,000 in public benefactions. Mr. Rockefeller 's taxable income in 1921 have decrease to between $ 1,000,000 and $ 1,500,000 , and he no longer head the list of the Internal Revenue Bureau , a there be a taxpayer with a net income of more than $ 5,000,000. John D. Rockefeller Jr. make a public statement in the same year that his father 's wealth have never reach $ 1,000,000,000 , although the elder Rockefeller have often be refer to a `` the world 's only billionaire. '' John D. Rockefeller Jr. also say that his father 's property have be `` materially reduce by the large gift from principal which he have make during recent years. '' In 1923 , during the Senate oil investigation , it be learn from testimony at Washington that the elder Rockefeller be no long a stockholder in the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey and that he do not hold 1 per cent of stock in any of the Standard Oil companies. The World 's Greatest Giver Mr. Rockefeller , who have be the great `` getter '' of money in the country during the year he be exploit it oil resource , become , after his retirement from business , the world 's great giver. He give even more than Andrew Carnegie , whose philanthropy amount to $ 350,000,000. Not until Mr. Rockefeller 's death be complete and accurate figure on his benefaction make public. Then it be disclose that in the period between 1855 and 1934 he have make gift to various charitable and educational organization total $ 530,853,632. Of this sum , $ 182,851,480 go to the Rockefeller Foundation , $ 129,209,167 to the General Education Board , $ 73,985,313 to the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial in New York City and $ 59,931,891 to the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research. These be the large item on his list of philanthropies. There be other sizable gift , however , include $ 34,708,375 to the University of Chicago and large gift to Protestant church , the Y. M. C. A , Y. W. C. A. , the Anti-Saloon League and the Republican National Committee. The amount of money that Mr. Rockefeller induce others to give can not be estimated. It be his custom , however , to make many of his gift contingent upon the ability of sponsor of an institution to raise an equal amount through their own efforts. Mr. Rockefeller also distribute a large part of his fortune among member of his family. Whereas the elder Rockefeller own less than 1 per cent of the stock of any of the Standard Oil company in 1923 , John D. Rockefeller Jr. , it be testify before the Senate committee , own Standard Oil stock with a market value of $ 410,674,399 , pay an annual dividend of $ 11,946,622. The life story of the man who start with nothing and accumulate so much and who give away so much be the outstanding example of the romance of American business , the most dramatic illustration of the opportunity for amass wealth which be a part of the era of rugged individualism. How his heredity and environment , his home life and his early training fit him to seize opportunity when it come to him ; how it come ; how he develop it in the foundation of the first and most powerful of American trust , and how he devote his decline year to `` scientific give '' on a scale as large a his business enterprise make one of the most fascinating story in American life. Favorable heredity be an important factor in Mr. Rockefeller 's success. It be a commonly accept scientific belief that only the hardy , strong spirit have the courage to leave their home and emigrate to a new country in it early day , and that the descendant of such pioneer be best fit to survive in an era of ruthless competition. Ancestors From Coblenz John D. Rockefeller 's ancestor come to this country from near Coblenz on the Rhine in 1720. The family , originally name Rochefeuille or Rocquefeuille , accord to genealogist , have leave the Province of Languedoc in the south of France during the persecution of the Huguenots in 1685. The pioneer spirit and a simple and unyielding religious faith be tradition in the Rockefeller family. John D. Rockefeller be bear in Richford , a village in Tioga County , near Oswego , N. Y. , on July 8 , 1839. His father be William Avery Rockefeller , a country doctor and farmer. His mother be Eliza Davison , daughter of John and Cynthia Davison of Niles Township , near Moravia , N. Y. John D. have two young brother , William and Frank. Mr. Rockefeller himself testify , during his infrequent reminiscence of his life , to the practical training and business lesson he receive from his father almost as soon a he be able to walk and talk. His mother , who be a strict disciplinarian and `` use a birch switch , '' also encourage him in hard work , economy and thrift. The story of his first business experience be tell in `` Random Reminiscences of Men and Events , '' the only book that Mr. Rockefeller ever published. `` When I be 7 or 8 year old , '' he write , `` I engage in my first business enterprise with the assistance of my mother. I own some turkey , and she present me with the curd from the milk to fee them. I take care of the bird myself and sell them all in businesslike fashion. My receipt be all profit , a I have nothing to do with the expense account , and my receipt be keep as carefully a I know how. '' A legend in connection with the boy 's ownership of the turkey be that they have stray away and have be lose for several day , and that his mother promise him he could have them for his very own if he find them. He search for the turkey with the same thoroughness that he display in his maturity and find them after much trouble. Kept a Memorandum a Boy The great gift that Mr. Rockefeller make to charity and his active interest in the church when he become rich can also be trace back to the lesson he learn in the family circle. His parent teach him to make small gift to the church and to the poor , even when he be a small boy. Under his father 's guidance , he keep from boyhood an account of every cent he receive and spent and give away. The first of these account book , a small paper-backed memorandum book , which become famous in late year a `` Ledger A , '' contain a record of everything , include `` philanthropy '' of a cent or two and incident of his early life. Finding this little book twenty-five year later in a collection of old paper , Mr. Rockefeller recall how he have economize so much in those day that he have even keep his account on the cover. Ledger A show that a a boy Rockefeller have give a cent to his Sunday school every Sunday. In one month there be entry of 10 cent to foreign mission , 50 cent to the Mite Society , 12 cent to the Five Points Mission in New York , 35 cent to his Sunday school teacher for a present and 10 cent to the poor people of his church. `` I have a peculiar training in my home , '' Mr. Rockefeller once said. `` I can not remember when hard work be new or strange to me. We be teach to work , to save and to give. Ours seem to be a business training from the beginning. We be encourage to be self-reliant. I be teach to do as much business at the age of 10 or 11 a it be possible for me to do. I be send over the hill to buy cordwood. I do not require the presence of anybody to enable me to secure good measure of good wood from the men who sell it. It be good training for me. '' Mr. Rockefeller discover the secret of make money his slave at the age of 14. He have save $ 50 from his turkey sale , other small enterprise and the performance of chore for his father and the neighbors. Lending this at 7 per cent , he receive the principal and interest back at the end of a year. About the same time he receive $ 1.12 for three day of back-breaking labor , ten hour a day , dig potato for a neighbor. On enter the two transaction in his ledger he realize that his pay for this hard work be less than one-third the annual interest on his $ 50 and resolve to make a much money work for him a he could. Family Moves to Ohio The Rockefeller family move to a farm near Cleveland in 1853. Mr. Rockefeller , who have attend the Owego Academy at Oswego , N. Y. , spend a year and a half at the Cleveland High School. There he meet Laura Celestina Spelman , a classmate , whom he marry when he be 25. Her father be a merchant of Akron , Ohio. His father have intend to send him to college , but could not afford to do so. Instead , John D. attend a business college for several month , learn bookkeeping and the fundamental of commercial transactions. At the age of 15 he join the Erie Street ( now the Euclid Avenue ) Baptist Church in Cleveland. It be a struggle mission church , with a $ 2,000 mortgage about to be foreclosed. Young Rockefeller stand at the door of the church beg contribution every Sunday until he raise enough to pay the debt. Two year later , when he be only 17 , he be make a trustee of the church and later on be superintendent of the Sunday school for thirty years. He be always active in the church , and once say that he have be a `` beggar '' for church fund all his life and be proud of it. He get his first job on Sept. 26 , 1855 , at the age of 16 , after tramp the street from morning to night for six week , at a time when business be bad and job be scarce. The job be a turning point in his life. He say later that he have almost give up hope of get work in a business office and that a few more refusal of work would have send him back to his father 's farm. When he become rich Mr. Rockefeller celebrate Sept. 26 with annual party which he seem to rank as high a or high than his birthday celebrations. His first employer be Hewitt & Tuttle , who have a wholesale produce commission warehouse on the lakefront at Cleveland. At first he be a clerk and assistant bookkeeper. He do not get pay until Jan. 1 , 1856. Ledger A show that he have receive $ 50 for more than three month ' work , out of this pay his landlady and washerwoman , save a little and give away a little. There be entry of `` 25 cent to a poor man '' and `` 50 cent to a poor woman. '' The ledger disclose that from Nov. 24 , 1855 , to the following April he spend $ 9 for clothes and give $ 5.58. At the end of a year he become bookkeeper for Hewitt & Tuttle at a salary of $ 500 a year. He attach vital importance later on to the influence this job have in shape his career. It give him a chance to see and hear how business be transact by member of the firm , in addition to audit the book , pass bill , collect rent , adjust claim and meet customers. After another year his salary be raise to $ 700 , but he demand $ 800 and give up his job when it be refused. His First Business Venture In 1858 , at the age of 19 , he go into the commission business for himself in partnership with Maurice B. Clark , an Englishman ten year his senior. Each put $ 2,000 into the business. Rockefeller have save $ 1,000 and he borrow the rest from his father at 10 per cent interest. He be the junior partner in the firm , which be call Clark & Rockefeller. `` We be prosperous from the beginning , '' Mr. Rockefeller tell his Bible class in late years. `` We do a business of $ 450,000 the first year. Our profit be not large -- I think about $ 4,400. '' Mr. Rockefeller be always `` a great borrower , '' a he say himself. He keep expand his business and borrow large sum to finance it. His reputation for work and economy , as well a his regular habit and church attendance , give his credit a high rating at the banks. Once a bank president warn him that he have borrow almost all the money in the bank and that the director wish to see him right away. `` All right , '' he replied. `` I 'll go right over to see them. I want to borrow a great deal more. '' He get the additional loan and pay it back on time. He organize the commission business to a high point of efficiency , drive sharp bargain and continue to live frugally and simply , save money and put it back into his business , so that he be prepare to seize the opportunity which come after oil be discover in Pennsylvania in 1859. Mr. Rockefeller go into the oil business in 1862 , after make a thorough study of it possibilities. He and his partner , Clark , invest in a refinery plan by Samuel Andrews , who have learn how to refine the crude oil. A new firm be organize under the name of Andrews , Clark & Co. Although he be destine to become the best-known oil man in the world , Rockefeller be then so young and unknown that his name do not even appear in the firm. Partnership Is Dissolved Andrews , Clark & Co. build a small refinery on the bank of Kingsbury Run , near Cleveland , in 1863. The oil business in it infancy be so haphazard and speculative that this firm could not surmount it obstacles. In 1865 the partnership be dissolve and the plant be offer at auction. Mr. Rockefeller , undiscouraged , buy it in for $ 72,500 , borrow most of the money , and organize the new firm of Rockefeller & Andrews. In 1867 this firm absorb an oil refinery that have be establish by William Rockefeller , and take in a partner William Rockefeller and Henry M. Flagler. This be the first of the long series of reorganization and merger that lead to the formation of the great Standard Oil Trust. In 1870 , when he be 31 year old , Mr. Rockefeller organize the original Standard Oil Company , with William Rockefeller , Andrews , Flagler and Steven V. Harkness , all of whom grow rich and prominent with him a his associates. Mr. Rockefeller be president of the company , which be incorporate in Ohio for $ 1,000,000 , a huge sum in those days. By 1872 nearly all the refining company in Cleveland have join the Standard Oil Company , and it capital be increase to $ 2,500,000. The company soon be refine 29,000 barrel of crude oil a day and be make 9,000 oil barrel a day in it cooper shop. It own several hundred thousand barrel of oil tankage , warehouse for store refine oil and work for the manufacture of paint and glue. The capital be increase in 1873 to $ 3,500,000 to include other refine company , and trustee be appoint to hold property which could not be hold under the charter from the State of Ohio. All these property be merge in the Standard Oil Trust in 1882 , with a capital of $ 70,000,000 , which later be increase to $ 95,000,000. Mr. Rockefeller say in late year that he and his associate do not dream of the magnitude of the subsequent expansion of Standard Oil. But the business have an extraordinarily rapid growth , outdistance all competitors. For one thing , at a time when capital be hard to get , especially for such a speculative industry a oil be then , Rockefeller could always get capital , either by put his profit back into the business or by borrowing. Another reason for the success of Standard Oil in an era of ruthless competition , Mr. Rockefeller say , be the fact that it be one of the first company to work out the problem of direct selling to the consumer on a broad scale. Moreover , the Rockefeller system of close accounting and strict economy give the Standard Oil a tremendous advantage over most of the oilman , who have little or no business training. Others Join His Company Early condition in the oil industry be so unstable that many company be ruin overnight by sharp fluctuation in the market. Mr. Rockefeller begin preach to his competitor in an around Cleveland that they be all in danger of be wipe out unless they have some mutual organization for protection , and invite them to come into Standard Oil. At the end of two year nearly all of the petroleum refiner in Cleveland be member of the Standard Oil Company , begin a development and absorption which be to become one of the wonder of the nineteenth century business world. Cleveland displace Pittsburgh a the principal oil-refining center of the country. This result in effort to dislodge Rockefeller from his position of grow power. Colonel Thomas A. Scott , head of the Pennsylvania Railroad , project a combination of railroad and oil refiner under the name of the South Improvement Company with the announced intention of `` wipe Cleveland off the map. '' Rockefeller fight back to save his business and fortune and be ready to grapple for the final battle when the charter of the South Improvement Company be revoked. This victory be follow by a merger of the Pittsburgh refiner into the Standard Oil combination. Refiners in Philadelphia , New York , New Jersey , New England , Pennsylvania and West Virginia then go into the combination. Mr. Rockefeller organize the Standard Oil Trust , hold the stock of all these company , as well a of the original Standard Oil Company , in 1882 , when he be 43 year old. The original Standard Oil Company have already distribute some $ 11,000,000 in dividend and have establish asset of $ 55,000,000. Mr. Rockefeller be grow rich and more powerful every day , and be still put his money back into the business. In the organization of the Standard Oil Trust Mr. Rockefeller create a new form of commercial enterprise which become more powerful than the rich bank in the country. It mark the beginning of an era of modern industrial monopoly. Pipe line company and other company for gathering , distributing and marketing petroleum product in all part of the world be organize , all work in cooperation for the general benefit of the trust. Mr. Rockefeller effect great saving in the business. He develop a system of pipe line which prove one of the great factor in the economical transportation of oil. The Standard Oil build it own pipe line , buy it own tank car for transport oil in train load , and establish it own depot , warehouse and docks. It make it own barrel in it own shop , buy whole forest of timber and build dry house to dry the wood. It make it own glue and paint and hired scientist to work in laboratory on mean of utilize the by-product of petroleum hitherto wasted. Expands His Influence The name of Rockefeller spread all over the world. His agent and steamship with their cargo of oil invade every port. His great corporation have gradually establish itself in practical control of oil production and distribution in America. Mr. Rockefeller begin invest his profit in other corporation in other industry , include iron interest , steamship and railroads. At the height of his career he direct the affair of thirty-three oil company and indirectly influence the affair of hundred of other companies. The combined capitalization of the corporation in which he be interested ran into billions. They employ hundred of thousand of men and women. Rockefeller become the rich man in the world. People begin to denounce him a a menace and to call the Standard Oil an octopus. The anti-trust movement begin in the United States. Muckraking grow in fashion in the magazine , with Rockefeller and Standard Oil a the chief targets. Ida M. Tarbell write a book , `` The History of the Standard Oil Company , '' in which she attack the business method and financial operation with which Mr. Rockefeller have create the Oil Trust. He be accuse of crush out competition , get rich on rebate from railroad , bribe men to spy on compete company , of make secret agreement , of coerce rival to join the Standard Oil Company under threat of be force out of business , build up enormous fortune on the ruin of other men , and so on. Mr. Rockefeller deny all these charges. He declare that there be a great difference between good trust and bad trust , between moral and immoral corporations. He insist that the Standard Oil be a good trust and that he have make his money honestly and honorably. In an age of waste and inefficiency , when the proper exploitation of natural resource be badly need , he declare , industrial combination be a necessity. He be proud of succeed where others have fail in a highly hazardous industry , and be proud that there have never be any `` water '' in Standard oil stock. Denying that he have coerce rival into join Standard Oil , he declare that they have be glad to join , and have often have so little faith in the oil business that they insist on be pay in cash instead of take Standard Oil stock when their company be merge into his. Had they have the faith he have , he say , they would have grow rich with him. Denies Coercing Others `` No man , no concern , '' he say once , `` be ever force into the Standard Oil Company. The charge be false. We treat the small and weak among our competitor with just a much consideration a the big and ablest. Our organization be form upon the principle of cooperation , conservatism and service. '' Mr. Rockefeller declare that his business method have bring about an economic revolution which have antagonize those who prefer old and obsolete method of do business. It be a striking contrast that the American who have since be most bitterly criticize by radical should have regard himself a a revolutionist in economics and should have deride the standpatters of the business world. Mr. Rockefeller , though denounce by labor union and radical a an oppressor of the worker , give financial support to a survey by John D. Rockefeller Jr. of condition in the Colorado Fuel and Iron Company follow the labor trouble of 1913. This survey result in the Rockefeller plan of industrial relation , a plan of industrial democracy soon put into effect in the Colorado Fuel and Iron Company and , in 1918 , in the Standard Oil Company. The occasion on which Mr. Rockefeller answer the charge against him be very few. He follow in the main a policy of `` saw wood and say nothing. '' On one occasion he say : `` Sometimes thing be say about u that be cruel and they hurt. But I be never a pessimist. I never despair. I believe in man and the brotherhood of man and be confident that everything will come out for the good of all in the end. I have decide to say nothing , hop that after my death the truth will gradually come to the surface and that posterity will do strict justice. '' Mr. Rockefeller `` saw wood '' with such good effect that it be estimate that the Standard Oil combine distribute $ 751,000,000 in dividend in the twenty-nine year between it organization in 1882 and it dissolution by the United States Supreme Court in 1911. In 1895 , at the age of 56 , Mr. Rockefeller retire from active business , merely retain the title of president of the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey , capitalize at $ 110,000,000 , into which the Standard Oil Trust have be reorganize after it dissolution be first order by the court in 1892. He retire from this office in 1911 , six month after the corporation be order to dissolve into it constituent companies. During the dissolution suit the government file a list of Standard Oil stockholder , show that Mr. Rockefeller hold 247,692 share with a market value of $ 167,192,000. This be only part of his fortune , a he have enormous holding in company outside the oil industry , include stock in most of the trunk line railroad in the United States. Selected Able Aids One of his talent , in business a in philanthropy , be in select good men and let them alone. His personal nature be little know to the general public , so that it be not generally realize that Mr. Rockefeller be the forerunner of the modern executive who keep his desk clear , spend his afternoon on the golf link and delegate detail to subordinates. He believe in conserve his strength. After he be 34 he make it a practice to take a nap of an hour or two after luncheon every day and frequently take three or four afternoon away from his office for golf or putter around his country estate , lay out road and path and plant trees. He never bustle and never be excited. He use to say that after he have establish himself he could hardly be call `` diligent in business '' in the copybook sense and that he be only a fifth wheel in the Standard Oil organization. Mr. Rockefeller take up golf in 1899 and play it constantly thereafter. It be his sole exercise in his later years. When well past 80 he play a good nine hole in 41 to 45 , and be delight when he defeat an opponent or when his side win in a foursome. On his eighty-second birthday he play a round of golf with his physician and lifelong friend , Dr. H. F. Biggar of Cleveland , also 82 , and plan a game of golf for his 100th birthday. He play the game all the year round on his private link at Pocantico Hills and at Ormond Beach , Fla. In his eighty he sometimes play on hot Summer day with an attendant follow him around to hold an umbrella over his head to protect him from the sun. Early in 1928 he cut his daily course from eight hole to six at Ormond Beach , remark that eight hole be too much for a man of 88 and that it be well to play a good game for six hole than to be a dub for eight. Mr. Rockefeller attribute his long life to his temperate habits. He never use alcohol or tobacco , eat moderately and exercise daily. At the time of the eighty-two-year-old golf match Dr. Biggar say that Mr. Rockefeller never take medicine , that he play golf every morning , slept well and eat well of simple and plain foods. He once have indigestion for several year , but get over it. He live on a methodical schedule , with a time for everything -- a certain hour for golf , a certain hour for motoring , & c. After every meal he remain at the table playing Numerica , a simple puzzle of number , with member of his household , to aid his digestion. He go to bed early and get up early. He like to hear music on rise and retire , especially old song and Negro melodies. In his decline year he like to play with his grandchild , whom he teach to save and give like himself. He have birthday party with frosted candle and enjoy join the child in blow out the flames. Wore Wigs for Many Years Mr. Rockefeller wear wig for many year , have them make by an expert in Washington. He have a special wig for golf , another for church and others for ordinary wear. Mr. Rockefeller be much more friendly to stranger in his later year than earlier. He carry shiny new dime around by the pocketful and distribute them among girl and boys he find play in the street and to singer on the ferry between Tarrytown and Nyack , which he often cross in his automobile. Whereas in former year he have be cold and reticent toward the general public , he surprise reporter and photographer several time in recent year with his friendly and approachable behavior. He engage stranger in genial conversation and hand them the inevitable new dime a souvenir of the meetings. He apparently care little for the pomp and circumstance of life. The spotlight do not attract him. He never hold public office and he keep off committees. When he give money to charity he content himself with a brief announcement and do not seek applause. It be several year after he found the Rockefeller Institute before he visit the buildings. When he do visit them he be unheralded and have no official welcome. Neither Mr. Rockefeller nor his wife take much interest in social affair outside of the circle of their lifelong friends. Mrs. Rockefeller devote most of her life to her family , church and Sunday school and charities. During her last year she be unable to attend church and Mr. Rockefeller bring her note on the sermon every Sunday. She die at Pocantico Hills in 1915 while Mr. Rockefeller be in the South. The Rockefellers have five child , one of whom , Alice , die in infancy. Two other daughter die later in mature life. They be Bessie , who marry Charles A. Strong , formerly Professor of Psychology at Columbia University , and Edith , who marry Harold McCormick of Chicago in 1895 and divorce him in 1922. The living child be John D. Rockefeller Jr. of New York , who marry Miss Abby Greene Aldrich , daughter of former United States Senator Nelson W. Aldrich of Rhode Island , and Alta , now Mrs. E. Parmalee Prentice of New York. Had Five Fine Homes Mr. Rockefeller , at one time , have five homes. His town house be at 4 West Fifty-fourth St. The country estate at Pocantico Hills , near Tarrytown , N. Y. , be his favorite residence. He call it Kiikuit -- old Dutch for Lookout. It be situate on a hill overlook the Hudson River and the valley and hill of Westchester County , and contain 3,000 acre , with beautiful gardens. Mr. Rockefeller build on this property a home at a cost of more than $ 2,000,000. The property be say to cost $ 500,000 a year to maintain. With 350 employes and thirty team constantly at work , the payroll be say to be about $ 18,000 a month. Mr. Rockefeller also have a large estate call Golf House at Lakewood , N. J. , and formerly have a Summer place call Forest Hill near Cleveland , surround by 640 acre of lawn , garden and groves. This house burn down in 1918 and be not rebuilt. Several year ago he buy an estate at Ormond Beach , Fla. , where he spend his Winters. A mystery in Mr. Rockefeller 's private life which he never clear up publicly concern his attitude toward his father and his brother Frank. Frank Rockefeller cast in his fortune with his brother , John and William , in their early oil venture , and become wealthy a Vice President of the original Standard Oil Company. He become estrange from his brother , however , and sever business connection with them. He become a stock farmer in Kansas and die in a hospital in Cleveland in 1916 after an intestinal operation. On his deathbed Frank Rockefeller dictate this statement : `` Frank Rockefeller have not send for his brother John and will not send for him , nor will he advise his brother of his illness. '' Frank Rockefeller hint that his brother John have fail to take care of his father properly in his old age. Mr. Rockefeller , in his book , `` Random Reminiscences , '' give his father credit for train him in practical way and teach him the principle and method of business. He also say in this volume that his father have charge him 10 per cent interest on loan need in finance the young man 's business. In this connection , John D. write that 10 per cent be a common interest rate on such loan in those day , but that many person regard it a excessive. He add that his father often test his business capacity by demand the return of his loan at unexpected moment , which frequently embarrass John D. and , he admit , somewhat displeased him. William Rockefeller , who remain on friendly term with his brother John all his life , die at his estate , near North Tarrytown , in 1922. His temperament be much different from his brother's. Whereas John D. belong to few club and seldom visit them , William belong to many and frequently visit them. William be not particularly interested in philanthropic work and be not prominent in religious activities. His large know public benefaction be a gift of $ 1,000,000 to the United War Work Fund. The two brother be together a great deal and frequently visit the boyhood home in Upper New York State together. Hoped to Be a Centenarian John D. Rockefeller reach a great age partly because he devote the same attention to organize the resource of his body that he once give to organize the oil industry. After he have pass 90 he tell his friend he hop to pass 100. By live each day content and quiet , he explain , he believe he have the best chance of live each morrow. Having many year ago rid himself of the worry over more than $ 1,000,000,000 in capital holding by turn them over to his son , John D. Rockefeller Jr. , to be spend `` for the benefit of all mankind , '' Mr. Rockefeller spend the remainder of his life in contentment and increase health , please to be know a `` Neighbor John. '' He turn over even the Tarrytown estate to his son. During the last decade , the only wealth that lay in his hand for immediate personal disposal be supply each morning at 7 o'clock , when his valet fill one pocket of his trouser with newly mint nickel and the other pocket with newly mint dime , about $ 5 worth. To encourage the downcast , he give a nickel. To reward the triumphant , who beat him at golf , he give a dime. Benefactions require large sum and more careful examination be matter for his son. Although the tactic of the predatory age in which the oil industry grow up have pass into history , and since then beneficiary of hundred of million for public health , education and welfare have intervene , Mr. Rockefeller 's awareness of enemy who could not forgive him for his great wealth be register by his own statement at the age of 92 : `` It must be the aim of a Christian to make his enemy lovely. It be not my supreme business to secure my safety , but to remove his ugliness. He may injure my reputation ; but , far bad , he be blight his own character. Therefore I must seek to remove the great thing , the corrosive malady in his own soul. '' Free from any worry about the practical application of these principle , however , have turn the entire administration of philanthropy over to his son , Mr. Rockefeller continue to look forward to each birthday a an achievement in the business of living indefinitely. His Views on the Depression In 1932 he dispose of the prolonged depression with the observation that `` God 's in His heaven. All 's right with the world. '' His preoccupation be the choice of poem and prayer to be read at breakfast a aid in the art of living. `` These thing , '' he often say , `` express my sentiment more satisfactorily than I could myself. '' On the eve of his ninety-third birthday , Mr. Rockefeller give his last birthday message to the public , via the press. He say : `` These be day when many be discouraged. In the ninety-three year of my life , depression have come and gone. Prosperity have always return , and will again. '' But on his ninety-fourth birthday he refrain , for the first time in many year , from give his usual message. For the first time in many year , too , his physician find it unadvisable for him in a weakened condition after a cold , to undertake his annual trip to Florida for the Winter season. He do , however , spend what he describe a his `` happy Thanksgiving '' at his Pocantico Hills estate. Thereafter his routine be administer more and more flexibly. He succeed in reach Florida in February , 1934 , but admit he would have to abandon his daily golf , which have be reduce to two hole before his last cold. As long a he remain in Florida , however , he have himself drive to the golf course to watch others play. After his return to his Summer home in Lakewood in 1934 , his public appearance be limit practically to his change of residence with the seasons. On these occasion he like to accost group of child with a cheery `` How-are-you ? '' They star at the aged face from which the greeting emerge but make no reply. Mr. Rockefeller 's physical activity become limited to sit privately in the sun a few hour a day , and be drive in an automobile along private driveway , sunk in cushion , sometimes with the shade drawn when the passing panorama lose his attention. During his infrequent walk , male nurse walk at each elbow. Electric elevator be instal in his residence so that he might not have to climb a single flight of stairs. Besides a careful diet , oxygen tank be keep on hand and include in his travel baggage a respiratory stimulants. Interested in World Events He continue to be interested in the event of the outside world and have the daily newspaper read to him -- as well a the Bible -- but he be completely isolate from all but a few friend and member of his family and a few well-behaved children. The outside world be periodically remind that he still exist only by report that he have catch cold or have recover from one. In July , 1935 , Dr. Vanderhoef Disbrow say that a complete physical overhaul of his system show there be every possibility Mr. Rockefeller would achieve his ambition to live a century. At the age of 96 , he have then outlive the maximum set by the life insurance mortality table , which go no high because only one man do in 100,000. Mr. Rockefeller spend his ninety-fifth birthday at Golf House , break a custom of fifteen year ' standing of spending that day with his family at Pocantico Hills. Even then his physical condition be cause concern among member of his family. Suffering from recurrent cold , Mr. Rockefeller leave earlier and earlier each Fall for Florida. He leave last Fall on Oct. 8 , wear a Landon sunflower in the lapel of his coat. He have plan to return to Golf House June 2 and celebrate his ninety-eighth birthday there next July 8. Never Despair , Rockefeller Philosophy ; He Held Clear Conscience Finest Asset Statements in which John D. Rockefeller , at various time , make know his view of wealth , religion , philanthropy and other topic include the following : I have always indulge the hope that I should be able to establish efficiency in give , so that wealth may be of great use to the present and future generations. One of the most important of the element which go to make up civilization be the progress of morality and religion. Sometimes thing be say about u that be cruel , and they hurt. But I be never a pessimist -- I never despair. I believe in man and the brotherhood of man and be confident that everything will come out for the good of all in the end. I believe it be a duty for a man to get all the money he honestly can and give all he can. Do all the good you can. Do not grow old before your time. Maintain an interest in life and all living things. A little rest now and then help a man to accomplish more. Be earnest. Do not be afraid to work. Persevere. If you make a mistake , remember that it be human to err. Try again and try harder. Live within your means. One of the swift toboggan I know of be for a young man just start in life to get into debt. There be no feeling in this world to be compare with self-reliance -- do not sacrifice that to anything else. A clear conscience be worth more and be a great comfort than be a great fortune gather by dishonorable methods. The religion of man be his most important possession. There be nothing in the world that can compare with Christian fellowship ; nothing that can satisfy but Christ. Sons of wealthy parent have not the ghost of a chance compare with boy who come from the country with the determination to do something in this world .