March 14 , 1938 OBITUARY Clarence Darrow Is Dead in Chicago Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES CHICAGO , March 13. -- Clarence Darrow , famous criminal lawyer , recently describe a one who thoroughly understood human nature yet love his fellow-man , die this afternoon at his home here at the age of 80. For two month he have be confine to bed because of heart disease ; for two year he have be retire , for many year he have be try to retire. With him when he die be his wife , Ruby ; his son , Paul , and a sister , Mrs. Jennie Darrow Moore. His close friend and long-time associate , Federal Judge William Holly , arrive soon afterward and make the announcement that the colorful life have come to an end. Judge Holly announce that Mr. Darrow 's body would lie in state after 10 o'clock tomorrow morning at the Skeeles-Biddle Funeral Parlors , 730 East Sixty-third Street. Funeral arrangement will be announce later. Mr. Darrow be know internationally a a criminal lawyer. Defender in a hundred or more murder trial , no client of his have ever die on the gallows or electric chair. He have build up a reputation for himself a a friend of labor and of the downtrodden. His oratory and his philosophy make him know to millions. A kindly , homely personage who dress in the certainty that clothes do not make the man , he go through life declare himself an agnostic. But three year ago he declare he no longer have any doubts. He proclaim himself a materialist whom it have take fifty year to find out that there be nothing after death. Massie Case Last Big One CHICAGO , March 13 ( AP ) . -- Mr. Darrow 's last record act on behalf of unfortunate occur March 31 , 1936 , when he drive to the Illinois State Penitentiary at Joliet , accompany by a priest and two nun , to appear a a witness before a subcommittee of the State Parole Board to urge the release on parole of Jesse Binga , 71-year-old Negro ex- banker serve a one to ten year sentence on a charge of embezzlement. His last big case be the trial in Honolulu of Lieutenant Thomas Massie , U.S.N. , and three others , include Massie 's mother-in-law , Mrs. Granville Fortescue , who be convict of manslaughter in the death of a native accuse of assault Massie 's wife , Thalia. Their ten-year sentence be commute to one hour in the custody of the territorial sheriff. Back in America , he be prevail upon to come out of retirement to appeal the case of Russell McWilliams , Rockford , Ill. , boy slayer , who be twice sentence to die. After the verdict be upheld Mr. Darrow go before the Pardon Board to plead for leniency. The youth 's sentence be commute to life imprisonment. A Fighter for `` Lost Causes '' Clarence Seward Darrow spend his life fighting for `` lose '' cause , most of which he won. His philosophy , which he recently state in his autobiography , be make up of an ardent championship of such segment a agnosticism , personal liberty , the abolition of capital punishment , the improvement of labor conditions. These and other similar one be the `` lose '' cause which dominate his career , weave the pattern of his story out of the life of those whom he save from the gallows through his devotion to one or another of his cause , make him , because of his sympathy with human being and his fundamental understanding of their emotion , perhaps the great murder defense lawyer of his time. His most famous trial be those in which the defendant be accuse , or confessedly guilty , of murder. His object be not always to bring off an acquittal , but to cheat the gallows of another victim of `` organize , legalized murder , '' a he call it. Clarence Darrow esteem himself a humanitarian. He have no belief in God or immortality , and to him man be merely a clod , a helpless organism continually `` condemn for get out of step with the crowd , not for do evil. '' His life begin on April 18 , 1857 , in the little town of Kinsman , Ohio , where his father , who have want to be a minister but who have round himself unable to hold his faith in one sect long enough to be ordain , finally settle down to keep a furniture store and building up a library. Mr. Darrow be educate rather in that library than in any other place. He attend the public school of Ohio , study for a time at Allegheny College and another time at the University of Michigan , but receive no degree from either. Began Work a a Farm Hand His first job be a a farmer 's helper , but the work be too difficult. He turn to law , because it seem to him that lawyer live rather well without have to toil very hard to do it. In Youngstown , Ohio , he study law and be admit to the bar in 1877. Some time after that , have serve for a time in the law office of the Chicago & Northwestern Railway , he move to Ashtabula , where , in 1887 , he be elect to his first public position , City Attorney. In 1888 he move on to Chicago. There one night he attend a meeting where Henry George , the impassioned pleader for the single tax , make a speech. Darrow be move to make a speech in reply , embroider George 's notion of social justice with some added scroll and figure of his own. His speech be a eloquent , at least , a that of George. At any rate , after the meeting John P. Altgeld -- who even then have hold a Supreme Court judgeship in Illinois and who later , a Governor of the State , be to pardon some of those convict in the Haymarket riot with a fiery statement that legal massacre have go far enough -- come over and make himself acquainted. Mr. Darrow be unknown. Altgeld be powerful. The two become law partner , a junction of liberal talent which be break by Altgeld 's death in 1902. Won an Acquittal for Debs Mr. Darrow , meanwhile , have again become connect with the Chicago & Northwestern Railway. In 1893 he resign his post to become the counsel for Eugene V. Debs , who have organize the American Railway Union and have call a strike , for which he be arrested. Darrow win an acquittal for Debs. He next be identify with labor by appear a counsel for the miner in the Scranton arbitration in 1885 and serve a labor counsel to the Roosevelt Commission in Philadelphia during the early part of the present century. While in Philadelphia , a thousand mile from home , he be elect a member of the Illinois Legislature from Chicago in 1902. His chief distinction in the two year he serve be that he try every mean he could to jam through a bill abolish capital punishment. There , however , he failed. That failure he discount in 1905 when he jump to the peak of national prominence by defend William D. ( Big Bill ) Haywood , C. H. Moyer and George Pettibone , official of the Western Federation of Miners , who be accuse of plot the assassination of Governor Steunenberg of Idaho. The trial go on in Boise. Senator William Borah be the prosecutor -- '' the able man '' he ever contend against , Mr. Darrow say -- and Mr. Darrow win an acquittal. Mr. Darrow be not at heart a Socialist , although he have come to be know a such through his association with Debs , Haywood and the labor movement in general. He be too much and too thoroughly the individualist to accept the manifesto of Karl Marx or any one else. Whether this or some other essential incompatibility force his action , he break with Haywood after the trial. His split with the Socialist movement widen beyond repair during 1911 in Los Angeles , where he have go to defend John J. and James B. McNamara , brother , charge with the dynamiting of the Los Angeles Times Building. Tried on Bribery Charge Samuel Gompers and the American Federation of Labor be raise a large fund for the defense of the accuse men. Job Harriman be make an intensive drive for election in Los Angeles a a Socialist candidate. As election time come on thing begin to happen with lightning rapidity. First Burt Franklin , a detective in the employ of the defense counsel , be arrest on a charge of pay a juror $ 500 and promise him $ 3,500 more to hold out for acquittal. Several day after Franklin 's arrest and a few day before the election , the McNamara brother enter a plea of guilty to the charge , shatter the Socialist hop for any chance at election. Subsequently Mr. Darrow be indict -- with the McNamaras off to San Quentin prison -- for attempt to bribe a juror. Franklin testify that Darrow have give him the $ 4,000 for bribery purpose , have ostensibly procure the money from Job Harriman. Mr. Darrow , deny each and every charge from the witness stand , throw every ounce of his dramatic power of appeal into his argument before the jurors. At one point in that speech he say : `` I know the mob. In one way I love it , in another way I despise it. I know the unreasoning , unthinking mass. I have live with men and work with them. I have be their idol and I have be cast down and trample beneath their feet. I have stand on the pinnacle and I have hear the cheer mob sound my praises. And I have go down to the depth of the valley where I have hear them hiss my name -- this same mob -- but I have go on -- go on my path unmoved by their hiss or their cheers. '' And at another point he say : `` Where men toil with their hand -- where woman , weak and weary , be sew tear into garment to be wear by the rich -- I know that there be prayer go up for me today , prayer that this jury will acquit me. '' The prayer be answered. The jury take thirty-five minute to reach a verdict of not guilty. Defended Leopold and Loeb The trial of Nathan F. Leopold Jr. and Richard A. Loeb , youthful son of rich family in Chicago , be Mr. Darrow 's next courtroom epic. They have murder the 13-year-old Bobby Franks. Mr. Darrow have them plead guilty and then go before Justice Caverly in Illinois Supreme Court he plead mitigate circumstance of insanity and bring both off with life term in prison. Aside from the dramatic moment in the trial of Mrs. Fortescue and Lieutenant Massie in Honolulu , when Mrs. Thalia Massie , the wife of the defendant , tear up a paper which have be hand her by the prosecutor , perhaps the great moment in Mr. Darrow 's life be when he face William Jennings Bryan in the evolution trial in Dayton , Tenn. Here again be the element of the `` lose '' cause -- Mr. Darrow , the agnostic , face Mr. Bryan , the believer. The issue be God , the veracity of the Bible ; in sum , the religion of Christians. The two titan , perhaps the two best orator in America at the moment , argue all afternoon on the lawn of the Rhea County Court House , fight with logic until each be purple faced and weary. Here again Mr. Darrow win the case , but a between the personal opinion of the two men it be a draw : Mr. Darrow remain the doubter and Mr. Bryan the believer. Not for `` Court-Packing '' Plan In the last few year Mr. Darrow live in seclusion , emerge only occasionally with some characteristic comment on public affair or the meaning of life. His economic opinion be reflect in the report of the committee of which he be a member on the effect of the NRA on the fortune of the small business man. The report be very critical and arouse much controversy. His attitude be not surprising , for he be too much of an individualist not to resist the encroachment of an omnipotent State into the life of human beings. Thus , on the issue of reorganization of the Supreme Court a propose by President Roosevelt , Mr. Darrow react with his usual skepticism. While regard the Supreme Court as fallible a any other human institution , he show little sympathy for the `` court-packing '' plan. `` Just because a man be 75 or 80 do not mean that he be senile , '' he tell a representative of THE NEW YORK TIMES , `` and he may be incapable of judgment at a much young age. Few of u be capable of judgment , just a few of u ever think , and few can ever mete out justice to our fellow , no matter how sincerely we try. And to reconcile the law with justice and human progress be sometimes impossible. I be not a conservative , a everybody who know me realize : I be a pessimist with hope. But I do n't like to see the fundamental structure of our government change quickly. This be a good country than it use to be , just a most people be more humane , more sympathetic with the other fellow than they be year ago. I do n't think much of some of our process , but I do n't see how we can get much good one until the human race be a lot near perfect than it be now. There be n't much freedom anyway , and we might as well hang on to what we have. '' Foe of Sit-Down Strike A life-long champion of labor , Mr. Darrow look askance at sit-down strike , for he orred force and violence in any form. `` Violence never accomplishes much , '' he said. `` If men substitute reason and understanding for violence , there would be no sit-down strikes. I sympathize with their objective , but I do n't like their methods. I 'm enough of a lawyer for that. It pay to get what you want by legal methods. It make the pact more binding , leave less bitterness to be forgotten. '' Mr. Darrow do not look for consistency in life or individual and he be not unaware of his own inconsistencies. A revolutionist in heart and mind , he be essentially a conservative in action and conduct. He be oppose to violence , but support the war because of his sympathy for Belgium , the underdog. On the other hand , in line with the dictum that one could not indict a whole people , he refuse to join in the war hysteria against Germany , and do not believe the story of German atrocities. He campaign for Liberty Bonds and later defend his German friend in this country. Samples of His Philosophy Here be some of Mr. Darrow 's saying , illustrate his skeptical philosophy. `` My learned opponent say the League of Nations be n't much good , but that it may be good some day. Men go to hell on the same theory. '' `` Everybody be a potential murderer. I 've never kill any one , but I frequently get satisfaction read the obituary notices. '' `` Saving criminal be only save child , and save child mean not only save criminal , but their victim , too. '' `` Even the civil lawyer know that poverty be the cause of crime , and that be why they do n't practice criminal law. There be no money in it. '' `` There be n't a man of the intelligence of an ordinary moron who do n't know that people believe in enforce only those law that they believe in. '' `` I never study geometry or history , or much Greek , and I study scarcely any Latin , and not much arithmetic ; and I never do anything with grammar , except to study it -- in fact , I always think that this be the only purpose for which grammar be invented. '' `` There be no logical consistency in what a man do with his life. I run on emotion , like everybody else. '' `` In spite of all the yearning of men , no one can produce a single fact or reason to support the belief in personal immortality. '' `` I wish some fellow like Henry Ford or Rockefeller or some other patron saint of America with great organize ability would teach u how to be inefficient and happy. '' `` I could n't join the Socialist party because I 'd be too lonely , and I do n't like be lonely. '' `` You can take $ 5 to a drug store and buy everything that make up a man. '' `` I be sure of very little , and I should n't be surprised if those thing be wrong. '' Praised by Dr. Wilson PORTLAND , Ore. , March 13 ( AP ) . -- Dr. Clarence True Wilson , church and temperance leader , express sorrow today at the death of Clarence Darrow , whom he meet in forty- six joint debate between 1925 and 1935. `` I feel lonely to think he be go , '' Dr. Wilson said. `` He be a kind , considerate friend , and I have a great love for him. `` He be a very able man -- a most able one. He be one of the most affable , lovable men I ever meet in friendship , and we have correspond ever since our debate ended. `` Before I know him well , I use to think he be the bad type of man we have in our nation , a defender of crime , but I learn to know differently. He simply do not believe in capital punishment. '' Malone Also Saddened Dudley Field Malone , who be associate counsel to Mr. Darrow in the evolution trial at Dayton , Tenn. , and later in the Massie trial at Honolulu , be grief-stricken at the loss of his friend. In tribute to the famous lawyer , he say : `` In universality of information , quality of mind , great heart , honesty , courage and character , Clarence Darrow be the most distinguished human be I 've ever known. My service with him in many case and cause will always be my most precious professional memory. `` The American bar have lose a great leader , for ideal rather than legal interpretation. The thousand of men and woman whom he so unselfishly serve will never forget him and the American people have suffer an incalculable loss . ''