February 22 , 1938 OBITUARY Dr. George E. Hale , Astronomer , Dead Special to The New York Times PASADENA , Calif. , Feb. 21. -- Dr. George Ellery Hale , one of the world 's most renowned astronomer , die of heart trouble today in the Las Encinas Sanitarium. He be 69 year old , bear in Chicago June 29 , 1868. Dr. Hale be credit with found the Yerkes Observatory in Chicago and the Mount Wilson and Palomar Mountain Observatories in Southern California. He be a brother of William B. Hale , Chicago lawyer. Distinguished scientist call him `` the modern Zoroaster '' and the `` priest of the sun. '' He invent the spectroheliograph and first learn that the sun 's outer shell be make of gas. He photograph colossal hurricane of incandescent vapor , discover that the flaming whirlpool of hydrogen leap 300,000 mile from the surface of the sun and be large enough to engulf the earth like a cinder in a furnace. Became Ill a Year Ago The scientist be unusually active until he become ill a year ago. He enter the sanitarium a few month ago after a stroke. Typical of the honor bestow upon him be the Sir Godfrey Copley medal , first award to Benjamin Franklin by the Royal Society of Great Britain. Dr. Hale win it in 1932 for his discovery of magnetic field in sunspot , term `` the most vital thing accomplish in solar astronomy in 300 years. '' He be organizer and director of the Carnegie Institution of Washington 's Mount Wilson Observatory , equip with a 100-inch mirror , from 1904 to 1923 , and be honorary director since then. He become chairman of the California Institute of Technology observatory council in charge of construction of the Palomar observatory with it giant 200-inch reflectors. He be trustee of the California Institute of Technology. It be say that his vision lead to the founding of the Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery , of which he be also a trustee. Praised by Dr. Carrel Dr. Alexia Carrel , surgeon and Nobel Prize winner , call Dr. Hale a `` Father of Intellectual achievement. '' Dr. Carrel say that Dr. Hale convince the founder of California Tech to dedicate the institution to the search for knowledge for it own sake instead of to the improvement of industrial technique. `` Because of him , undoubtedly , Dr. Robert A. Millikan , Dr. Thomas Hunt Morgan and Dr. Arthur Noyes be willing to leave the beaten path of the East and cast their lot with California Tech , '' Dr. Carrel explained. In recent year Dr. Hale obtain new clew to the nature of magnetism and striking indication to prove that the entire sun be a whirl magnet. With Dr. R. M. Langer he make it possible to calculate the displacement of spectral line due to solar magnetism to be one of twenty-thousandth of an inch in width. Dr. Hale be a member of a score of scientific society and author of six book on astronomy. In 1931 he succeed M. Auguste Picard , stratosphere balloonist , a president of the International Council of Scientific Unions. Surviving also be his widow , Mrs. Evelina S. Hale ; a son , William Ellery Hale of South Pasadena ; a daughter , Mrs. Margaret Hale Scherer of San Francisco , and a sister , Mrs. William W. Harts of Madison , Conn. Received Many Honors Dr. Hale receive the gold medal of the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia , the high honor the institute could award him , for his work in invent the spectroscope , the spectroheliograph and other basic astronomical instrument , accord to The Associated Press. The same institution , prior to May 3 , 1927 , give him the Elliott Cresson medal for his research on the sun. He also receive the Janssen medal of the Paris Academy of Sciences , the Rumford medal of the American Academy of Sciences and the Draper medal of the National Academy of Sciences. Later he receive the Bruce medal , the Galileo medal of the University of Florence , Italy , and the Actonian prize of the Royal Institution of London. Belgium decorate Dr. Hale with the Order of Leopold and Italy award the Order of the Crown of Italy. On July 2 , 1919 , he be elect an associate of Academie de Sciences , Institut de France. He be an honorary member of the Vienna Academy of Sciences and honorary chairman of the National Research Council. In February , 1927 , he be award the Arthur Noble medal for 1926 , award each year to the Pasadena resident who do the most for the city .