August 8 , 1938 OBITUARY Stanislavsky Dies in Moscow At 75 By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Moscow , Aug. 7 -- Constantin Sergeivitch Stanislavsky , one of the great master of Russian drama and a founder of the Moscow Art Theatre , die here today of a heart ailment. The 75-year-old dramatist have be ill since June 15 when he collapse during preparation for stag `` Cartouche , '' a work of the seventeenth century French playwright Moliere. All Russia celebrate his birthday last January. Stanislavsky begin his stage career that make him internationally famous by direct performance of non-professional artist in Czarist Russia and , in 1933 , he receive the Order of the Red Labor Banner for his service to the proletarian stage. Stanislavsky be an actor , producer , teacher and philosopher of the theatre. As an actor he appear in role that have become part of the history of the Russian theatre. He be Satine in Gorky 's `` Lower Depths '' and Famusov in `` Woe to Reason , '' by Griboyedov. For fifty-five year Stanislavsky strive to create bold new form of theatrical expression. In forty of those year , during which he head the Moscow Art Theatre , he stag fifty play and enact twenty-seven characterizations. In recognition of his work the government confer on him , besides the Red Banner of Labor , the Order of Lenin and the title of People 's Artist of the U.S.S.R. Co-Founder of Art Theatre Constantin Stanislavsky , co-founder with Nemirovitch-Dantchenko of the Moscow Art Theatre and for many year it director , be the acknowledged father of the modern Russian theatre. He revolutionize the art of produce , and his genius a director be laud even in foreign country where audience could not understand the language use by his players. The individual distinction of his group of actor be due to his philosophy of direction. He transplant nature upon the stage , and the expression `` just like life '' be what audience delight in Stanislavsky 's productions. What he launch be unlike anything previously see on the stage. He bring something to life that be invisible before. Yet the Russian be far from `` discover '' something new in dramatic art or from attempt to produce something that be never see before. He simply go ahead with his plan , conduct by an artistic spirit , and drive by an impulse that he could not suppress. While his inspiration be sudden , the technique of the Moscow Art Theatre be create gradually , yet spontaneously. His actor be his pupil , and they saw in him the master. He be their idol , and they be convince that he alone have the quality of develop their individuality. `` My work with the artist , '' Stanislavsky once say , `` be to open his eye to what he have to accomplish , to encourage and guide him to the expression of all of those thing that must be develop out of his own soul. '' Natural Setting Disquieting In his book of memoir , `` My Life and Art , '' he relate the following episode : On one of their tour in the province some member of his company happen to be walk in a park. They come upon a spot which bore such a striking resemblance to one of their set in Turgenev 's `` A Month in the Country '' that then and there they decide to play the scene in it natural setting. `` It be my turn to make the entry , '' relate Stanislavsky. `` As set out in the play , I and Mme. Knipper walk down a long alley say our line ; then we sit on a bench , just a we use to do on the stage ; begin to talk , and -- stop , for we find ourselves unable to proceed. In the surroundings of living nature my acting , I felt , be utterly false. Yet people say that we have bring simplicity to the point of complete naturalness. How conventional the thing we be accustom to do on the stage prove to be ! '' In another of his book on act and playing , `` An Actor Prepares , '' Stanislavsky hold that `` in our art you must live the part every moment that you be play it , and every time. '' In order to accomplish this aim he evolve his `` psycho-technique '' for the release and free play of proper inspiration , which have it source in the subconscious mind. He make it impressively clear that an actor who be to be prepare in this manner must have an excellently trained physical and vocal apparatus. His body and his voice , accord to the director , must respond to the creative work of his emotion `` with precision. '' He be of the opinion that the world be on the eve of a new form of drama. `` War and suffer have change people 's outlook , '' he said. `` Although I do n't know myself what the new theatre will be , I 'm sure there be a general expectancy of a new ideal. '' Group Performed in United States The Moscow Art Theatre under Stanislavsky 's direction perform here in 1923 and 1924. It present play by Tolstoy , Gorky , Tchekhoff and other Russian dramatist in their own language , and they appear in a large group , more than fifty in all. They be then look forward to their American appearance , because the Russian revolution and tour on the Continent have leave the company in anything but prosperous circumstances. The American Defense Society protest against their entrance here on the theory that they be Communist propagandist , to which charge Stanislavsky answer : `` It be not so. We have no connection with the Soviet Government. We be interested only in art. It be our art that we have come to bring you , not politics. '' The development of the Russian Art Theatre spell romance , and it be always with pride that Stanislavsky point to it. It be bear at a moment when he , an amateur actor , dream great dream of his art which he have not be able to carry into effect , meet Dantchenko in a Moscow cafe in 1897 , and they sit for eighteen hour talk of the stage and what they wish to do. They determine to do it , and that mark the beginning of the Moscow Art Theatre. It be begin a , and always remain , a cooperative institution. Its member draw salary and whatever profit come be divide among them after the need of the theatre have be provide for. The most prominent actor , more interested in their art than in become wealthy , belong to it , and the undertaking boast that it have never have an empty seat. Trained Young Actors But the Moscow Theater itself be only a part of the organization Stanislavsky created. To train young actor and actress who show talent for the stage he form four studio , small theatre in which they be develop until the time when they be ready to take their place in the great theatre. He add to these undertaking an operatic studio , and in them all , at one time , more than 1,000 person be employed. When the revolution of 1917 come the company fell upon evil day , and a minor theatrical Odyssey happen which end only in 1923. The group be under a constant threat in Moscow because of the supposedly bourgeois tendency of it repertory , and it be only by the courageous enthusiasm of Stanislavsky that it be able to carry on. Stanislavsky , whose real name be Constantin Sergeevich Alexeev , be bear at Moscow in 1863. His father be a rich mill owner and his grandmother a French actress. He study at the Imperial School of Dramatic Art and in 18888 begin work a an actor and producer in the Society of Art and Literature. The Moscow Art Theatre be found in 1898. As a director he be an actor of great force and subtlety , take the lead part in Tchekhoff 's and Gorky 's play which he produce .