January 30 , 1939 OBITUARY W. B. Yeats Dead ; Famous Irish Poet Wireless to The New York Times NICE , France , Jan. 29. -- The death of William Butler Yeats , famous Irish poet and playwright , occur yesterday near Mentone. Mr. Yeats , who win the Nobel Prize for literature in 1923 , be 73 year old. MENTONE , France , Jan. 29 ( AP ) . -- Mr. Yeats die in the little French Riviera town of Roquebrune , after a short illness , at a boarding house where he and his wife have be staying. He will be bury tomorrow at Roquebrune. It be expect , however , that eventually the poet 's body would be remove to his native Ireland. Mr. Yeats arrive in Roquebrune early last month in ill health. He suffer repeated heart attack , and be able to take only short walk in the garden of the house where he stayed. He have be confine to his bed since Tuesday. Wrote Poems , Essays , and Plays When he labor at his chosen craft , that of write poetry , essay and play , Mr. Yeats frequently let his mind roam far afield in the realm of fancy , and it be for the gentle beauty of such work that he be hail by many a the great poet of his time in the English language. Yeats find time to crusade for worldly end , but there his tactic be notable for tenacity and vigor. At the turn of the century he share in the establishment of the Abbey Theatre in Dublin , and for ten year devote himself almost exclusively to drama. The struggle of the Irish Free State likewise occupy his time. From 1922 until 1928 he be a Senator in the Dail Eireann. John Masefield , poet laureate of England , on the occasion of Yeats 's seventieth birthday in June , 1935 , call him `` the great living poet , '' and unquestionably it will be for his verse that posterity will remember him. The high point in a life full with recognition come in 1923 , when Yeats receive the Nobel Prize for literature. Nearly fifty year ago he publish his first verse in the Dublin University Review. The flow of word exhibit in that early composition indicate Yeats 's natural command of language. Thus , he write : I pass a little further on and hear a peacock say : Who make the grass and make the worm and make my feather gay ? He be a monstrous peacock , and he waveth all the night His languid tail above u , light with myriad spot of light. Went to School in London Yeats be bear at Sandymount , near Dublin , on June 13 , 1865 , son of John Butler Yeats , well- know Irish painter. When 10 year old he be take to London for train at the Godolphin School in Hammersmith , but much of his time , especially during the Summers , be spend in County Sligo , Ireland. Three year direct to the study of paint fail to satisfy the young man 's desire to express himself and , in 1886 , he finally abandon his father 's profession in preference for a literary one of his own. Yeats return to London , where he associate with William Morris , W. E. Henley , Arthur Symons and Lionel Johnson in the founding of the Rhymers Club and the maintenance of the Yellow Book. Oscar Wilde interest him , a do Verlaine , whom Yeats visit in Paris in 1894. George Moore , his opponent in many a literary battle , write of him at this period : `` Yeats be stride to and fro at the back of the dress circle , a long black cloak droop from his shoulder , a soft black sombrero on his head , voluminous black silk tie flow from his collar , loose black trouser drag untidily over his long , heavy feet. His hair be black and his skin yellow. '' It have be say his laughter be `` the most melancholy thing in the world. '' Throughout a lifetime half in dreamy composition and half in the thick of political warfare Yeats retain a `` hieratic '' appearance. While yet in his twenty the Irish poet dwelt on the possibility of rejuvenate the intellectual life of his native land. Its energy have be sap by politics. An Irish drama be the farthest from the thought of living Irishmen. But Yeats dream on , faithfully hold to the hope of write Irish play in verse with Irish folklore a subject-material and native of Ireland share a actor and audience. Active in Abbey Theatre Lady Gregory and others answer his prayer for the organization of a national theatre in Dublin. With the opening of the Abbey Theatre , Yeats find opportunity to fulfill his passion for dramatic writing. Already he have write `` The Land of Heart 's Desire '' and `` The Countess Cathleen. '' Important play by him include : `` Kathleen ni Houlihan , '' `` The Pot of Broth , '' `` The Hour Glass , '' `` Deirdre , '' `` The King 's Threshold , '' `` The Shadowy Waters , '' `` On Baile 's Stand , '' `` The Green Helmet , '' `` The Player Queen , '' `` Plays for Dancers , '' `` The Cat and the Moon , '' `` The Words Upon the Window Pane '' and `` King Oedipus. '' Yeats write more effectively in verse than prose , although there be frequently scant difference. Innumerable article slip from his pen and , a the year pass , he come to be synonymous with the Irish Movement in literature. Nevertheless , Sean O'Faolain , a countryman , note : `` He begin independently of Ireland. Some of his fine work be do under her inspiration. But his positively fine work of all -- his late poem -- be the work of a man who have again retire into himself and who write clean out of his 'heart of darkness. ' '' `` The Tower '' and `` The Winding Stair '' be Yeats 's last notable works. His contribution to Eire will grow out of the Abbey Theatre group , for the intensity of that campaign bring Ireland wide recognition and far exceed anything else Yeats accomplish in a non-literary field. True , he defend divorce from the floor of the Dail , plead for a restrict use of Gaelic because he have utterly `` fail to learn any language but English , '' give stump speech on the tax question , preside at official function , inspected school and in every way conduct himself after the manner of public politicians. `` I be a Cosgrave man , '' Yeats once say , `` but I believe that de Valera be dead right in his dispute with Great Britain. Whether or not Ireland can stand the racket be a ticklish question . . . We be a nation of believers. We produce anti-clerics , but atheist , never. '' In 1917 he marry Georgia Hyde Lees of Wrexham , Wales , a woman who be say to possess power a a spiritualist medium. They live for many year with their two child in an ancient tower on the outermost coast of Ireland. Crowded Years Recalled Three year ago to a day the poet suffer a heart attack at Palma , Mallorca. He rally , however , and in May publish a volume hail a among the outstanding intellectual autobiography of our time. `` Dramatis Personae '' continue the thread of revery start in the Nineties and cover minutely the crowded year at the turn of the century when the Irish Dramatic Movement be conceived. In it his duel with George Moore flare anew. A one-volume reprint of the autobiographical material be release only last August. In 1938 , too , a book of play by Yeats attract interest because he have rewrite one of them from it original prose form into verse. He complete an anthology call `` The Oxford Book of Modern Verse , '' which be see a a remarkable reflection of his own preference -- willful and individual a usual. His name appear before the public in typical fashion during the last two year : When he engage a Boston professor in argument over a play offer by the Abbey Theatre , when he deliver a radio broadcast of a poem and later comment on the political aspect of the microphone , or the occasion of his statement that the Free State government would strive to regain certain art treasure now hold in London. Of the radio , Mr. Yeats explain : `` I speak quietly , with confidence , a if I be address my wife. '' Today the word of Yeats 's poem `` The Shadowy Waters , '' write in 1900 , come to mind : Could we but give u wholly to the dream , And get into their world that to the sense Is shadow , and not linger wretchedly Among substantial thing .