February 10 , 1939 OBITUARY Pontiff Spent His Life in Religion From His Boyhood Years By THE NEW YORK TIMES Before he be elect Pope on Feb. 6 , 1922 , Ambrogio Damiano Achille Ratti have make a distinct , although restrict , name for himself in the vocation of priest , scholar , librarian and diplomat , and in the avocation of bibliographer and alpinist. He be bear May 31 , 1857 , in the village of Deslo , Province of Milan. He be the fourth of seven children. The survivor come to visit him at the Vatican when he celebrate his seventy-second birthday in 1929. They be the first born , Count Fermo Ratti , and his sister Camilla. There be also his niece , the Marchesa Ugolino Persichetti , and her husband. In the middle of the last century there be in the village of Deslo a retired priest name Don Giuseppe Volonteri , who conduct a school for the child of the elite of the neighborhood on condition that he could dismiss deficients at will. From him and later from his uncle , Don Damario Ratti , Achille receive his early education and his mind turn toward the church. At the age of 10 he be show such a pronounced trend in this direction that he be send to the seminary of St. Peter the Martyr and then to the seminary of Monza , where he spend two year , and a third year at the College of San Carlo , Milan. The three follow year be spend at the Seminario Maggiore [ Grand Seminary ] whence at the age of only 16 , by the choice of the Archbishop of Milan , he be send to Rome a a pupil at the Collegio Lombardo , with a scholarship to continue his study at the Gregorian University. In late life , whenever he visit Rome , he always stay at the Collegio Lombardo , and in 1922 pack his trunk there before he have it take to the Vatican. He be graduate from the Gregorian University in 1879 , when he be `` licensed '' a a priest by the State , ordain by the church , and celebrate his first mass. The record show that he have few , if any , oratorical gifts. Excelled in Mathematics Until the last he hold all his teacher in affectionate esteem and would , on occasion , relate anecdote of Don Giuseppe Volonteri and of Luigui Talamoni , who teach philosophy and Greek at Monza , and of Giovanni Riboldi there , who teach mathematics. Talamoni and Riboldi be still live when he become Pope. At that time they look up their college file and be glad to discover that young Ratti have always receive the proficiency mark of 10. Talamoni say : `` Ratti be a great inspiration to a teacher and keep u constantly preparing. '' Riboldi 's comment at the time be : `` Ratti excel in mathematics. He would have make a great scientist. I want him to go to the University of Turin , but , ala , the church claim him. '' The first three year of his priesthood Father Ratti spent in the parish of Rome , and in 1882 he be call back to Milan a instructor in theology at his alma mater , the Seminary of San Carlo. At the age of 31 , in 1888 , he receive his Doctor 's degree and be appoint assistant director of the Ambrosian Library and later director-in-chief. For twenty-seven year his sojourn in Milan be almost uninterrupted -- his vocation principally that of librarian , his avocation that of mountain climber. The Biblioteca Ambrosiana be one of the sight of Milan ; for more than 300 year -- since it be found by Cardinal Borromeo in 1609 -- it have be the Mecca of scholar , whose research be often doom to failure until Dr. Ratti become chief director in 1907. It be one of the most valuable collection in Italy -- nearly a quarter of a million volume and about 10,000 manuscript , together with rare picture and engraving and a collection of antiquities. Became Assistant Director When Dr. Ratti enter upon his duty a assistant director the director-in-chief be the famous Orientalist , Don Ceriani. He could always find when ask the most remote and hidden treasure of the library , but nobody else could. Don Ceriani believe in neither catalogue nor indices. He have write his world-famous `` Monumenta Sacra et Profana '' without the aid of either. Dr. Ratti try first logic and then persuasion to have order bring out of the exist chaos , but it be of little use. `` Yes , '' Don Ceriani would say , `` I suppose some person who have no memory make use of catalogues. If you need one I have no objection to your make one , but do n't bother me. I have no time for such superfluous things. '' After two year ' work , Dr. Ratti ask his chief for permission to engage assistant to move the manuscript and book to their place in the diagram he have made. `` How much will it cost ? '' inquire the Orientalist. `` Oh , possibly 100,000 lire. '' `` No , '' reply Don Ceriani , add plaintively : `` Let me die in peace. When I be dead you will be able to do what you like. '' Although for this event Dr. Ratti have to wait seventeen year , he resort meanwhile to an expedient. He ask to be make `` administrator of the library fund , '' and the request be granted. So Dr. Ratti let the fund accumulate in anticipation of the time when he could use them and make the library a genuine benefit to scholars. When Don Ceriani die in 1907 , Dr. Ratti become Don Ratti a his successor and at once begin to spend the accumulated fund -- about $ 12,000. He obtain a troop of volunteer clerk from the seminary and engage the service of able indexer and practical bibliophiles. By the time Giacomo della Chiesa be elect Pope and take office a Benedict XV on Sept. 3 , 1914 , a successful revolution have take place in the Biblioteca Ambrosiana -- all book and manuscript have be rearrange and catalogue in accordance with the most approved method , with the precious item behind locked glass case in the Sala Antica. Of this work Don Ratti write from time to time article in the review -- the Rendiconto dell'Instituto Lombardo , the Giornale Storico della Letteratura Italiano , and the Archivio Storico Lombardo. In conjunction with Mgr. Magistretti , he publish a volume entitle `` Missale Ambrosianum. '' Don Ratti remain at the famous library until late in his fifty-eighth year and might have die there have not his work a librarian attract the attention of the new Pontiff , Benedict XV , who call him to Rome and make him librarian of the Vatican collection. Don Ratti would have like to be able to decline the honor ; he love the famous library at Milan whose restoration he have bring about and he love the beckon height of Monte Rosa. But `` when Rome call , one must go '' -- Quando Roma chiama , bisorgnera andarci. So Don Ratti go and be make a monsignor. Suggested a Compromise But the Pope , who have once be a member of the Instituto Lombardo and one of the committee of the famous Pinoteca of Milan , fully appreciate the new monsignor 's feelings. He suggest a compromise : The librarian should alternate every two month between Rome and Milan. He do so until 1916 , when the Pope persuade him to stay in Rome altogether , give him a private apartment in the Vatican and permit him to say mass in his room. The method of coordinate and catalogue he have find so successful in Milan he employ at the Vatican. He learn restoration and binding and have a special studio for the work with one or two proficient helpers. During the parlous year of the World War a close friendship grow up between Benedict XV and Mgr. Ratti. His Holiness , without ceremony , often visit him at his work , while Mgr. Ratti be privilege to enter the private apartment of the Pope without formality. Among the question discuss be : What could the Vatican do in order to hasten the peace which all the world crave ? It be not know whether the man who be to succeed Benedict XV have a hand in draft the famous Peace Note of Aug. 1 , 1917. It be say , however , on excellent authority , that the note be draft by the Pope , his Secretary of State , Cardinal Gasparri , and Mgr. Ratti , and that the last name , when he ascend the throne of St. Peter , retain the Cardinal in his old position on account of the opinion he have form of him in those days. Diplomacy be an art with which he have already some superficial acquaintance. During his directorship of the Ambrosiana he have be twice employ on diplomatic missions. In 1891 he have be send to Vienna to carry to Cardinal Gruscha the credential of his office -- that be the Cardinal 's hat , `` per portare il berretto cardinalizio. '' Two year later he be send to Paris to do the same for Cardinal Bourrett. Although these mission have be principally of form , they require tact and an observe eye. His mission to Poland be far more important , particularly a the peace of Brest- Litovsk have just be sign ( March 3 , 1918 ) and the interest of the church in Poland be somewhat in jeopardy. His passport and `` laissez-passer '' be date April 28 , 1918 , and give him the title of Apostolic Visitor. It be a most difficult mission. Other than ecclesiastical interest have to be dealt with. Although by this time the delegate have acquire several title , in the church he merely rank a a priest. He be not even a titular Bishop. Poland be then occupy by Austro- German troop under command of General Beseler , while the Civil Governor be Prince Leopold of Bavaria. First a Apostolic Visitor and then a Apostolic Nuncio he be to remain in Poland three year -- to be make an Archbishop there -- and then to proceed on a similar visit to Russia. Before he arrive in Warsaw a Council of Regency consist of the Archbishop Kalowski , Prince Lubomirski and Baron Ostrovski , have be establish , but be look upon with suspicion by the Poles a an expression of Imperial if not Protestant Germany. As his title be then Apostolic Visitor , Mgr. Ratti 's instruction at first limit him to spiritual matters. He be so successful in these that in the second year of his presence he be make Papal Nuncio and his mission extend to all of occupied Russia. Here and in Poland his first care be to establish a regular ecclesiastical regime in the region where for century every effort have be make by the Greek Orthodox Church , through the vehicle of the Czarist Holy Synod , to oust Catholicism. Mgr. Ratti provide for the re-establishment of many see suppress by the synod , and in spite of revolution and counter-revolutions , create an ecclesiastical organization which have never exist under the Czars. With the armistice of November 1918 , and the collapse of Austro-German authority and power , Poland regain her independence , a regency be constitute under Marshal Pilsudski and a Constituent Assembly be summoned. Mgr. Ratti be first , in the name of the Holy Father , to greet the new government. But new and grave question immediately arose. First there be the partition of the great landed estate , many of which comprise ecclesiastical property. Mgr. Ratti constitute a commission of Bishops to deal with the matter , for he have receive instruction from the Vatican to allow a division of the property to be carry out so long a it be without detriment to the spiritual interest of church and people. Mgr. Ratti become the medium between the Bishops and the government , and be so successful with the latter that he be responsible for at least two clause in the Polish Constitution. The first provide that the Catholic Church should hold the first position in the new Polish State ; the second , that any measure regard this church be only to be take after consultation with the Vatican. All this so pleased Benedict XV that he re-established the ancient nunciature at Warsaw , and in the Consistory of July 3 , 1919 , make Mgr. Ratti Archbishop over the Titular Archiepiscopal See of Lepanto. This be not without significance to the Poles , who with Venice have take part in the Battle of Lepanto , which shatter the Turkish control in the Levant in 1571. He be consecrate Archbishop in the great Cathedral of Warsaw on Oct. 28 , 1919. In the presence of the entire Polish Episcopate , member of the government and nearly all of the Constituent Assembly. It be an unprecedented event that a simple priest , a former librarian , should be simultaneously make Papal Nuncio and Archbishop. When the partition of Upper Silesia by plebiscite come , Archbishop Ratti be specially appoint a Ecclesiastical High Commissioner , not only at the request of Poland but also at the behest of Germany and the Supreme Council of the Allied and Associated Powers. This office he fill without criticism and with considerable advantage to the church. Other question with which he be intimately concern be the deliverance from Russian prison of the Bishop of Minsk and the Archbishop of Mohileff , and the distribution of fund among the suffering mother and child , to which the Pope have personally contribute 8,000,000 lire. Made a Cardinal Archbishop He return to Rome in the Spring of 1921. Andrea Ferrari , the Cardinal Archbishop of Milan , have just died. On March 4 Benedict XV , on the strong advice of Cardinal Gasparri , but with misgiving on the part of certain Cardinals resident in Rome , decide to have Archbishop Ratti succeed to both offices. The principal objection to give him the Milan See be that he be not a `` preacher. '' He be elect Archbishop of Milan on June 13 and at the Consistory of June 16 be make a Cardinal. His first public address soon after be a logical expression of the hope for cooperation of the civil and religious power lead to a solution of the Roman question. This be distasteful to several member of the Curia and they suggest to Benedict XV that the appointment to the Milan See have be a mistake. `` Well , '' reply the Holy Father , `` at least you be convince that Ratti can speak when he make up his mind to it. '' For scarcely seven month be he permit to enjoy in Milan the pleasure of bibliophile and mountain climber , to witness the body politic in travail which be about to bring forth fascism. Then , on Jan. 23 , 1922 , he be summon to the Conclave at Rome which almost spontaneously elect him Pope on the sixth day of the following month. He be crown six day later , retain the Prefecture of the Congregation of the Holy Office , of the Consistorial Congregation and of the Congregation for the Oriental Church ; the Protectorate of the Church and Chapter of Saints Celsus and Julianus ; of the Greek Abbey of Grottaferrata ; of the whole Order of St. Benedict ; of the Order of Preachers ( Dominicans ) ; of the Order of Regular Clerks call Teatini ; of the Archconfraternity of the Via Crucis , call the Lovers of Christ and Mary ; of the Archconfraternity of St. Rochus ; of the Archconfraternity of Saints John and Petronius of the Bolognesi. During his pre-papal residence of seven month at Milan a Cardinal Archbishop one episode be notable : The city be in the throe of a semi-anarchist , semi-Communist strike organize by the anarchist Erricone Malatesta. The personnel of the Archiepiscopal Palace be disorganize and there be a movement to raise the red flag over it. Two factor , complement of each other , restore order. One be the moral suasion of Cardinal Ratti ; the other be the firm hand of Mussolini .