March 3 , 1939 OBITUARY Howard Carter , 64 , Egyptologist , Dies Wireless to The New York Times LONDON , March 2. -- Howard Carter , Egyptologist who earn world fame for his discovery and exploration , in association with the fifth Earl of Carnarvon , of the tomb of Tut-ankh-Amen , die in his London home today at the age of 66. His Great Discovery After work a an archaeological excavator in Egypt for more than thirty year , Mr. Carter stumble upon the most dramatic discovery in the history of archaeology -- the unearthing of the tomb of the Pharaoh Tut-ankh-Amen , who rule Egypt for a brief period more than 3,200 year ago. To a modern world recover from the World War his discovery bring a complete picture of the colorful civilization of the Eighteenth Dynasty in Egypt about which little have be previously known. The splendor of the tomb and it rich furnishing within it reveal a Golden Age of art and craft equal to any other period of ancient times. Mr. Carter and many others before him have explore the entire length of the Valley of the Kings near Luxor , where some twenty-seven king have be bury , but plunderer have ravage the tomb through the century and there be little left of value. Plunderers have find their way into one chamber of the tomb of Tut-ankh-Amen , but the tomb itself contain the mummy of the Pharaoh have be untouched either by desecrators or by time itself. When Mr. Carter and his associate enter the burial chamber in 1923 it be a though they be return to the funeral ceremony of more than thirty century ago. Opening Revived Legends The opening of the tomb revive legend of a `` Pharaoh 's Curse , '' which be suppose to cause the death of any one who disturb the sleep of the ancient rulers. Twelve member of the original group that have be present at the opening of the tomb die within the next seven year , include the Earl of Carnarvon , who finance the excavation , but he have be in bad health. Mr. Carter himself , however , be the best refutation of the curse. Afflicted with bad health from his youth , he spend nearly fifty year in Egypt search for and explore the ruin of the tomb of Pharaohs and must have be subject to the fine collection of Egyptian curse in existence. Born in Swaffham , Norfolk , in 1874 , he be the son of John Carter , a painter of animal , and first engage in the field of archaeology a a painter and draftsman. Because of ill health he receive his school privately under tutor , and at the age of 17 he join his first expedition to Egypt. In 1892 he assist Professor Flinders Petrie , one of his teacher , on an expedition finance by Lord Amherst. After nearly ten year in Egypt he be appoint by the Egyptian Government a Inspector General of the Antiquities Department , and begin a series of scientific investigation that be to lead him to the tomb of `` King Tut. '' Found Other Royal Tombs On behalf of the Egyptian Government , he discover the royal tomb of Mentuhetep , and start investigation in the Valley of Kings , where he discover the tomb of Hatshepsut , Tehuti-mes IV and many private tombs. He then carry out exploration of the Theban Necropolis on behalf of the Earl of Carnarvon and discover the valley temple of Hatshepsut , the tomb of Amen-hotep I , and the cemetery of the eighteenth dynasty queens. So far his work a an archaeologist be know only within his profession. In November , 1922 , come the discovery which , with the opening of the tomb of Tut-ankh-Amen a few month later , be to carry his name throughout the civilized world and re-create an interest in the glory of ancient Egypt. For his discovery be more than an archaeological find. It be the revealing in dramatic miniature of the whole civilization of an ancient race in a manner that bring out the human , rather than the scientific aspects. For month Mr. Carter and his associate have move an estimated 70,000 ton of sand and gravel in what seem a hopeless search for a new tomb. Then , at the corner of the excavated tomb of Rameses VI , a workman find a step cut in bedrock. Further work disclose the beginning of a steep flight of rock step lead downward below the bed of the valley. Months of Digging Needed The work of clear away sand and rubble later reveal impression of the royal necropolis seal -- the jackal-like dog of Anubis over the traditional nine foe of Egypt. While examine these impression Mr. Carter notice a doorway bury in the sand. He open a hole and thrust through a flashlight. It reveal a passage beyond the doorway. Several month be require before enough debris could be clear away to make it possible to enter the tomb itself. Finally a large hole be cut into the doorway and Mr. Carter and his associate enter the `` eternal resting place '' of the Egyptian king. In the dim light they could see the glint of gold everywhere. As the scene grow clear , a whole roomful of object come into view -- couch , chair , alabaster vas , chariot , a throne , stool and chest , all glisten with inlay and gold , and a sealed doorway lead still beyond. When the doorway be open a wall of gold be reveal -- the side of an immense gilt shrine shield the sarcophagus of the bury king. The tomb consist of four chamber , each enclose by golden door and contain more than 600 group of precious objects. In the innermost chamber Mr. Carter find the sarcophagus , each of it four corner carve in high relief with one of the four guardian goddesses. Within the monument the King lay , enclose in three coffin nest one within the other and each form an effigy of the monarch. The inmost coffin enclose the mummy of the king be of solid gold. The body of the king be bind in bandage of fine linen and his head be protect by a solid gold mask. He be profusely anoint with sacred unguent and cover with amulet and emblems. An anatomical examination of the mummy indicate that the king be hardly more than 18 year old at his death. Mr. Carter superintend the work of prepare to move the content of the tomb to the Cairo Museum -- the task take ten year -- and then turn to other researches. In 1931 he announce that he plan to search for the tomb of Alexander the Great in Asia Minor , but he have be inactive in recent years. In recognition of his achievement , Yale University confer upon Mr. Carter the honorary degree of Doctor of Science , and the Real Academia de la Historia of Spain make him an honorary member. He be author of a number of book on Egyptology , include two volume on the tomb of Tut-ankh-Amen , and be a frequent contributor to scientific journal .