June 12 , 1940 OBITUARY Marcus Garvey , Negro Ex-Leader By THE NEW YORK TIMES LONDON , June 11 ( UP ) -- Marcus Garvey , West Indian Negro , who once set himself up a `` Emperor of the Kingdom of Africa '' in New York 's Harlem and later appear before the League of Nations a representative of `` the black people of the world , '' die here yesterday. His Career a a Promoter Marcus Garvey be a short , stout , ebony-colored firebrand who style himself a `` world- famous orator. '' He be a promoter who sell hundred of thousand of American Negroes on the idea of a nation for themselves , an African empire. He preach racial solidarity , racial enterprise and race segregation. Until some of his promotion land him in jail , they pay him at least $ 22,000 a year , and probably much more. Where Father Divine of a late day create `` angel '' and `` archangel '' among the colored population of Harlem , Garvey in his time sprinkle the area with prince and princess , baron , knight , viscount , earl and duke , and keep for himself for a time the comparatively humble designation of `` Sir Provisional President of Africa. '' There be no evidence that he have ever set foot on that continent , and the Republic of Liberia be , by announcement of it government , close to him and his followers. He blame the British and French Governments for that. His propose hegira of black men and woman back to the continent of their origin remain to the last simply a proposal. Exact information about the origin of Marcus Aurelius Garvey , a he sometimes proudly name himself , be never forthcoming. It appear , however , that some time about 1880 he be bear in Jamaica , B.W.I. , which fact make him a British citizen. According to his own story he be the editor of a Catholic newspaper in Jamaica at the age of fifteen , and thereafter edit paper in Jamaica and Costa Rica. He also say that he spend a year travel through Europe before come to the United States a the World War be about to begin. His career in this country begin a a journalist and lecturer to Negro audiences. It appear to him that the Negroes in this country be in a state of semi-serfdom and he propose to do something about it. The first step be the formation , in July , 1914 , of the Universal Negro Improvement Association , with an original membership of 15. His Fire-Brand Period The next five or six year be his fire-brand period. He make inflammatory attack upon white people ; suggest that for every Negro lynch in the South a white man should be similarly treat by the Negroes in New York. The trickle of due into his `` parent body , '' a he begin to call the U.N.I.A. , swell into a stream , and Garvey begin to dream other dream than race fighting. He have learn that small sum contribute by many person may reach an impressive total. So he organize the Black Star Steamship Line and the Black Star Steamship Company , to establish a world shipping firm staff wholly by Negroes. He call a convention of his U.N.I.A. and offer some 5,000 Negroes who attend at Madison Square Garden an opportunity to buy stock at $ 5 a share. The money roll in and he buy several ships. One be the Yarmouth , another the Kanawha , which have be the pleasure yacht of the late colonel Henry Huddleston Rogers. The first job the Yarmouth have be to haul a $ 3,000,000 cargo of liquor from Brooklyn to Cuba for a firm that want to get it out of the country before prohibition become effective on Jan. 15 , 1920. All that whisky be too much temptation for the crew , who get drunk and put in at Norfolk , where the ship be seize under the prohibition law. A total loss. Kanawha Rams a Pier The black skipper of the Kanawha also have bad luck at Norfolk. On his first voyage he ram a pier there , his boiler explode , and the Kanawha , too , become a total loss. Nothing , meanwhile , have happen in Harlem except the multiplication of Garvey 's notions. He have organize the African Community League , incorporate at $ 1,000,000 ; the Negro Factories Corporation and , on the non-commercial side , the Order of the Nile ; the Black Cross Nurses and the Universal African Legion. In February , 1925 , three year after he have be arrest on a charge of use the mail to defraud in solicit fund for one of his ship company , Garvey go to Atlanta penitentiary , where he stay until the middle of 1927 , when his sentence be commute , so that he could be deported. Sent back to Jamaica , he try to carry on with the mission he have inaugurate in the United States. Back within the British Empire , his plea be less well receive , financially , and , after a futile effort to raise fund to rescue Ethiopia from the Italians , he sink into obscurity .