December 12 , 1941 OBITUARY Dr. Frank Conrad , Radio Pioneer , Dies Special to The New York Times MIAMI , Fla. , Dec. 11 -- Dr. Frank Conrad , since 1921 assistant chief engineer of the Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company of Pittsburgh , whose interest in wireless telegraphy lead to the founding of Station KDKA , pioneer broadcast station , die here today in his Winter home , 1277 North Venetian Way , at the age of 67. He suffer a heart attack on Nov. 6 while drive here from Pittsburgh , and have be under a physician 's care since. A funeral service will be hold at the home in Pittsburgh on Monday. Dr. Conrad leave a widow , Mrs. Flora Selheimer Conrad ; two son , Francis H. Conrad of New York and Crawford Conrad of Pittsburgh , and a daughter , Mrs. Edwin Durham of Massillon , Ohio. Airplane Radio Used in War Special to The New York Times PITTSBURGH , Dec. 11 -- Dr. Conrad devise the only airplane radio set to see much action during the World War. His connection with radio date back to 1912 , when he put together a crude receiving set which pick up time signal send out at regular interval by the naval radio station in Washington. After the war Dr. Conrad return to his garage radio station and start broadcast two-hour phonograph recording twice a week. These program give the late Dr. Harry P. Davis the idea that regular broadcast would be the mean of create a new field for radio development. They join and create Pittsburgh 's radio station KDKA. Radio Broadcast 's `` Father '' Dr. Conrad , who be know a `` the father of radio broadcasting , '' be bear May 4 , 1874 , in Pittsburgh , the son of a railroad mechanic who sneer at formal education , but who have great faith in the worth of handicrafts. Thus , when he have finish the seventh grade at the Starrett Grammar School there , he be already imbue with a love for tools. He get a job in October , 1890 , a a bench hand in the original plant of the Westinghouse Company in Garrison Alley. When his bos , Philip Lange , go to Europe he leave young Conrad in charge of the deserted laboratory to watch over the apparatus. Left to himself , the youth begin experimenting. He be an adept learner , soon astound his old colleague with his ability , and by the time he be 23 have invent the round-type electric meter for Westinghouse which be now in universal use. One day Dr. Conrad hear signal that be in no known code. These he trace to the home of John Coleman , a wireless experimenter , who have make them by toy with a spark coil. They become friend , build set and begin communicate with each other. During the World War Dr. Conrad be drafted. In service he build an airplane radio apparatus , one of the first of it kind , and also devise a special hand grenade and thrower. Commercial Radio Launched After the war he again take up his hobby of wireless. He enlarge his home-made station in his garage , and soon begin broadcast phonograph record , have tire of converse with other wireless fans. When he run out of record he borrow some from a local music store , which stipulate he must tell his listener where he get them -- the first `` sponsored broadcast. '' Later his son begin put on home talent program , enlist amateur singers. One day a department store advertise set on which you could hear the Conrad programs. This advertisement give the inventor an idea. He in turn give the idea to the Westinghouse publicity department. Westinghouse get a license for Station KDKA from the Federal radio authority , a new station be build at East Pittsburgh and commercial radio be launch .