January 13 , 1941 OBITUARY James Joyce Dies ; Wrote 'Ulysses' By THE NEW YORK TIMES ZURICH , Switzerland , Monday , Jan 13- James Joyce , Irish author whose `` Ulysses '' be the center of one of the most bitter literary controversy of modern time , die in a hospital here early today despite the effort of doctor to save him by blood transfusions. He would have be 59 year old Feb. 2. Joyce undergo an intestinal operation Saturday afternoon at the Schwesternhaus von Rotenkreuz Hospital. For a time he appear to be recovering. Only yesterday his son report him to have be cheerful and apparently out of danger. During the afternoon , however , the writer suffer a sudden relapse and sank rapidly. He die at 2:15 A.M. ( 8:15 P.M. , Eastern standard time ) . His wife and son be at the hospital when he died. Hailed and Belittled by Critics The status of James Joyce a a writer never could be determine in his lifetime. In the opinion of some critic , notably Edmund Wilson , he deserve to rank with the great innovator of literature a one whose influence upon other writer of his time be incalculable. On the other hand , there be critic like Max Eastman who give him a place with Gertrude Stein and T.S. Eliot among the `` Unintelligibles '' and there be Professor Irving Babbitt of Harvard who dismiss his most widely read novel , `` Ulysses , '' a one which only could have be write `` in an advanced stage of psychic disintegration. '' Originally publish in 1922 , `` Ulysses '' be not legally available in the United States until eleven year later , when United States Judge John Monro Woolsey hand down his famous decision to the effect that the book be not obscene. Hitherto the book have be smuggle in and sell at high price by `` bookleggers '' and a violent critical battle have rag around it. Judge Woolsey 's Decision `` 'Ulysses ' be not an easy book to read or understand , '' Judge Woolsey wrote. `` But there have be much write about it , and in order properly to approach the consideration of it it be advisable to read a number of other book which have now become it satellites. The study of `` Ulysses '' be therefore a heavy task. `` The reputation of 'Ulysses ' in the literary world , however , warrant my take such time a be necessary to enable me to satisfy myself a to the intent with which the book be write , for , of course , in any case where a book be claim to be obscene it must first be determine whether the intent with which it be write be what be call , accord to the usual phrase , pornographic , that be , write for the purpose of exploit obscenity. `` If the conclusion be that the book be pornographic that be the end of the inquiry ... But in 'Ulysses , '' in spite of it unusual frankness , I do not detect anywhere the leer of the sensualist. I hold , therefore , that it be not pornographic. '' On the passage deal with sex , Judge Woolsey pause to remark that the reader must not forget that `` the character be Celtic and the time be Spring. '' His decision be hail a one of the most civilized ever propound by an American judge. After he have admit Ulysses to the country , there be a rush to but the almost immediately available authorize and uncensored edition publish by Random House. Since then the book , unlike many another once ban by the censor and then forget , have be read widely ; less for the passage once object to than for the book a a whole. Although Joyce appear in many of his writing , `` notably `` A Portrait of the Artist a a Young Man '' and `` Ulysses , '' a Stephen Dedalus , many detail of his life be missing. The most comprehensive study be Herbert Gorman 's biography publish in 1940. Was Born in Dublin The writer be bear Feb. 2 , 1882 , in Dublin , Ireland , the son of John Stanislaus Joyce ( The Simon Dedalus of `` Ulysses '' whom Bloom hear sing in the Ormond bar ) and Mary Murray Joyce. His father supposedly have one of the fine tenor voice in Ireland. James Joyce have an equally fine voice. The Joyce family be not prosperous and it be large. James stand out among his brother and sister and , at the age of 9 , be suppose to have write an attack on Tim Healy , the anti-Parnellite , which be print but of which no know copy exists. Since he be literary it be decide to give him an education and he be send first to Clongowes Wood College , then to Belvedere College , also in Ireland , and later he receive his Bachelor of Arts degree from the Royal University in Dublin. He be an amazing scholar , and an independent and solitary figure. When he be 17 he read Ibsen 's play and write an essay for the Fortnightly Review about the author of `` The Doll 's House. '' Dissatisfied with the English translation , Joyce learn Norwegian when he be 19 year old so that he might read his literary god in the original. At the same time he be read and study Dante , all the Elizabethan poet , St. Thomas Aquinas and Aristotle. In those day , accord to Padraic Colum , who know him at the Royal University ( later reorganize a the National University ) , Joyce be a tall , slender young man with `` a Dantesque face and steely blue eye , '' who saunter along the street in a peaked tennis cap , soil tennis shoe , carry an ashplant for a cane. Stephen Dedalus carry a similar cane in `` Ulysses '' and frequently talk with it ! He love to sing and recite poetry in his fine tenor voice , but he speak harshly and use `` many of the unprintable word he get print in 'Ulysses. ' '' Conceit and arrogance be his characteristics. When he first meet Yeats he remark : `` We have meet too late ; you be too old to be influence by me. '' AE ( George Russell ) recognize his `` keen and cold intelligence , '' but tell the young man , `` I 'm afraid you have not enough chaos in you to make a world. '' Joyce be in continuous rebellion against Ireland and it life and say : `` When the soul of a man be bear in this country there be no net fling at it to hold it back from flight. '' The word be Stephen Dedalus 's in `` A Portrait of the Artist a a Young Man , '' but it be Joyce speaking , and , at the age of 20 , he leave Ireland for Paris where he intend , and for a time pretend , to study medicine. At this time he start the story that be eventually publish a `` Dubliners '' ( this book be later publicly burn in a Dublin public square ) and start his first novel. This , the `` Portrait of the Artist , '' be ten year in the writing. His first publish work- except for the forgotten attack on Tim Healy- be `` Chamber Music , '' a collection of Elizabethan-like verse , which be print in 1907. It be at this time that he meet Nora Barnacle , `` a sleek blond beauty '' from Galway , the daughter of Thomas and Ann Healy Barnacle. They soon go to the continent to live ( their marriage be not regularize until twenty-seven year later , when they visit a London registry office to legalize the status of their two child , George and Lucia ) . In Trieste , where they settle after some wandering , Joyce teach English at the Berlitz School and the Commercial Academy. He know seventeen language , ancient and modern , include Arabic , Sanskrit and Greek. `` Dubliners '' Issued in 1914 In 1914 Dubliners be publish in London. In the same year he also finish his novel `` Portrait of the Artist a a Young Man. '' When war be declare Joyce and his wife , who be British citizen , be in Austria. He be force out of his job a a teacher , and the couple move to Zurich. While live in Zurich Joyce begin to suffer from severe ocular illness and eventually underwent at least ten operation on his eyes. For year he be almost totally blind and much of his later writing be do with red crayon on huge white sheet of paper. `` Ulysses '' be begin under this difficult situation. Much of it be publish by Margaret Anderson in The Little Review , the magazine which Otto Kahn , New York banker , once subsidize for his Greenwich Village friends. Chapters appear between March , 1918 , and August , 1920 , when the Society for the Suppression of Vice have The Review stop by court order. After the war the Joyces return to Trieste , where they live with Stanislaus Joyce , the author 's brother. Then , in 1919 , they go to Paris , where they make their home until the next war send them again to Zurich to occupy the house they have know in 1914. In 1922 Joyce 's great book , `` Ulysses , '' be publish in Paris. Great Britain , Ireland and the United States ban the book. For many year after `` Ulysses '' be do Joyce work on what he call `` Work in Progress. '' Much of it appear in Transition , the magazine publish in the Nineteen Twenties in Paris by Eugene Jolas. In May , 1939 , it be publish a `` Finnegan 's Wake , '' a book `` distinguish '' by such `` word '' a Goragorridgeorballyedpuhkalsom , to name one of the simpler one , and many puns. In it Mr. Joyce suggest the book be the work of `` a too pained whitelwit laden with the loot of learning. '' During all his year a a writer Joyce be carefully protect by his wife , who once say she care for him despite `` his necessity to write those book no one can understand. '' His conversation be clear , never anything like his writing , and his wit a keen. Joyce 's son , George Joyce , marry the former Miss Helen Castor of Long Branch , N.J. They have one son , Stephen James Joyce. James Joyce and his wife make their home with his son for many year before the present war .