December 16 , 1943 OBITUARY J. H. Kellogg Dies ; Health Expert , 91 Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES BATTLE CREEK , Mich. , Dec. 15 -- Dr. John Harvey Kellogg , surgeon , health authority , developer of the Battle Creek Sanitarium and founder of the food business which later become the W. K. Kellogg Company , die here last night at the age of 91 , nine year short of the century goal which he have set for himself. Best Example of Own Dogmas A determine practitioner of the rule for simple eating and living he preach for all humanity , Dr. Kellogg be perhaps the best example of the truth of his own dogmas. When he become a physician Dr. Kellogg determine to devote himself to the problem of health , and after take over the sanitarium he put into effect his own ideas. Soon he have develop the sanitarium to an unprecedented degree , and he launch the business of manufacture health foods. He gain recognition a the originator of health food and coffee and tea substitute , idea which lead to the establishment of huge cereal company besides his own , in which his brother , W. K. Kellogg , produce the cornflakes he invented. His name become a household word. Dr. Kellogg 's youth be one of hard work. Born in Tyrone , N. Y. , on Feb. 26 , 1852 , he move to Battle Creek with his parent , John Preston and Ann Jeanette Kellogg , at an early age. He work in his father 's broom factory and also serve a a `` printer 's devil '' in Battle Creek publish houses. Took Medical Degree in 1875 He be educate in the Battle Creek public school , the Michigan State Normal School and the New York University Medical College , from which he be graduate in 1875 with an M. D. degree. Later he continue his education , study in Europe in 1883 , 1889 , 1899 , 1902 , 1907 and 1911. Dr. Kellogg marry Ella E. Eaton of Alfred Center , N. Y. , on Feb. 22 , 1879. They be childless , but delight in provide fund for the education of deserve boy and girls. They virtually rear forty child , legally adopt several of them , in their fifty-room home before Mrs. Kellogg 's death in 1920. Dr. Kellogg lecture and write unceasingly and be the author of many volume on health practices. But Dr. Kellogg do not confine himself to research on diet and living. He be a noted surgeon , still wield the surgeon 's knife when he be in his seventy , and be the inventor of improved apparatus and instrument for medical and surgical purposes. An authority on water therapy , he be the discoverer of the therapeutic value of the electric light and inventor of the electric light bath. He be also the discoverer of the sinusoidal current .