January 6 , 1943 OBITUARY Dr. Carver Is Dead ; Negro Scientist By THE NEW YORK TIMES TUSKEGEE , Ala. , Jan. 5 ( AP ) -- Dr. George Washington Carver , note Negro scientist , die early tonight in his home at Tuskegee Institute. His age be 78. Dr. Carver have be in fail health for some month and be confine to his bed for the last ten days. He become a member of the Tuskegee Institute faculty in 1894 and have be attach to the Negro institution ever since. Dr. Carver be recognize a one of the outstanding scientist in the field of agricultural research. He discover score of us for such lowly product a sweet potato , peanut and clay. From the South 's red clay and sandy loam , he develop ink , pigment , cosmetic , paper , paint , and many other articles. No Ambition for Riches Dr. Carver , pay no attention to his clothes and refuse to make money on his discovery , simply devote his life to scientific agricultural research , to enable his colored brother to make a good living from the soil in the South. He become such an authority on cotton , the peanut and the sweet potato that he end with a place among important white men. His name be in `` Who 's Who in America , '' and he be accord a membership in the Royal Society of London. `` Who 's Who '' list him a an educator and follow immediately with the information , which he supply , that he be `` born of slave parent on a farm near Diamond Grove , Mo. , about 1864 ; in infancy lose his father and be steal and carry into Arkansas with mother , who be never hear of again ; be buy from captor for a race horse value at $ 300 and return to former home in Missouri. '' Because he be a puny boy who get his growth late , he be allow to run around a a household pet without be put to heavy work. Outdoors he learn about tree , shrub and insect and like to paint and draw them. In the kitchen he pick up much knowledge of cook and of can fruit and vegetable which later be to serve his people. In the parlor he learn something of music. Worked Way Through School Until he be almost 20 he do not learn to read and write. That come after he grow up suddenly and strike out for himself. He have see education at close quarter in a white household and felt he could use it. He work his way through high school in Minneapolis , Kan. , and later through the Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts. He be graduate there with the degree of Bachelor of Science in Agriculture in 1894 , at the age of 30 , and be immediately make a faculty member in charge of the college greenhouse and the bacterial laboratory work in systematic botany. Two year later he have earn the degree of Master of Science and make the acquaintance of Booker T. Washington , who then be bring the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama to notice. He go to Tuskegee in 1896 and stay there for the remainder of his life , direct the Department of Agricultural Research. Sand be a great curse then to the Alabama cotton farmer. The short-stalk cotton produce the fat boll and the tall-stalk produce the leanest. Yet the short-stalk cotton leave the boll expose to splash of sand when it rained. By a crossing process Professor Carver get the fat cotton boll of the short-stalk cotton to grow on the tall stalk that lift them out of the sand. Officially in Washington the cross be recognize by the name of `` Carver 's Hybrid. '' Champion of Diversification After the boll-weevil invasion have bring misery to the one-crop South , Professor Carver address himself to the develop the us of the peanut and the sweet potato and spread the gospel of diversification with these also a money crops. He develop more than a hundred different product from the peanut , include milk , ink , flour , breakfast food , wood stain , face cream and , latterly , a medicinal peanut oil which be find helpful in the treatment of infantile paralysis. When he produce an array of these product before the Ways and Means Committee of Congress in 1921 , in support of a protective duty on peanut , John N. Garner , then a Representative from Texas , pronounce it `` a most wonderful exhibition. '' Professor Carver develop almost a many diversified us for the sweet potato , from which he produce tapioca , molasses , dye , coffee , starch , as well a flour. His research into the possibility of make rubber from sweet potato attract the attention of Thomas A. Edison , who invite him to move them to Orange , N. J. , at a salary represent a princely advance over Tuskegee. Professor Carver declined. `` Revelation From God '' He likewise decline to accept $ 100 which a manufacturer send him in acknowledgment of one of his peanut discovery which the manufacturer have put to use. `` My discovery come like a direct revelation from God , '' he say in explanation of his attitude , address the annual meeting of the Women 's Board of Domestic Missions of the Reformed Church , at the Marble Collegiate Church in New York in 1924. `` The idea and the method of work out a new product come all together , '' he continued. `` In half an hour after the idea be reveal to me , I produce the yolk of an egg from the Puerto Rican sweet potato. '' He travel through the South , lecture to farm gathering on the good cultivation and utilization of common product , receive attention and applause not only from Negroes but also from white men , who recognize that he could tell them how to better their farming , their living , their health and their prosperity. In 1923 the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People award him the Spingarn Medal for discovery that would change the economic life of the South. In 1935 he be appoint collaborator in the Bureau of Plant Industry of the United States Department of Agriculture , in the division of plant mycology and disease survey. He be invite frequently to speak before agricultural class in the white technical college of the South. A less known side of Professor Carver 's activity be his Bible class at Tuskegee , start in 1906 , when his office boy and seven other student ask him to teach them the Bible on Sundays. He teach the Bible by impersonate the character himself. On one occasion he astonish his class when it reach the story of the manna-fed Israelites by produce a variety of the original manna , which he have gather in the wood about Tuskegee. Dr. Carver receive one of the three Roosevelt Medals for 1939. The next year he give his life saving of $ 33,000 ( they have be deplete by a bank failure ) to establish a foundation for research in creative chemistry. Last Summer it be announce that Dr. Carver , an old friend of Henry Ford , would take part in food experiment in the Ford laboratories at Detroit .