October 4 , 1944 OBITUARY Alfred E. Smith Dies Here at 70 ; 4 Times Governor By THE NEW YORK TIMES Alfred Emanuel Smith , four time Governor of this State , who rise from the sidewalk of New York to eminence in public life and in the heart of many Americans , die early today at the age of 70 in Rockefeller Institute Hospital. The end come at 6:28 A.M. , after a sinking spell which begin when the former Governor 's pulse weaken at about 2 o'clock. Members of Mr. Smith 's family have be send for early , as well a his personal physician , and the Rev. John Healy , pastor of St. Vincent Ferrer Church at Sixty-sixth Street and Lexington Avenue , which Mr. Smith attended. In fail health since the death of his wife last May 4 , the man whose career have take him to the high place of politics , of religious life and of philanthropy have enter the hospital on Sept. 22. His personal physician , Dr. Raymond P. Sullivan , cause him to be transfer there from St. Vincent 's Hospital , which he have enter on Aug. 10 , with an announcement at that time that he have suffer from heat exhaustion. Received Last Rites His condition become critical last Saturday , and he receive the last rite of the Roman Catholic Church from Bishop Francis A. McIntyre. Earlier Pope Pius XII , through Archbishop Francis J. Spellman , have transmit the apostolic benediction. For a time , however , it seem that the former Governor might rally despite his age , and his condition give cause for hope up to an early hour this morning. Started a a Newsboy From a newsboy and fishmonger to four time Governor of the Empire State and the candidacy of his party for President , the rise of Alfred E. Smith have no exact parallel in American history. There have be country boys in plenty , such a Lincoln and Garfield , who rise to the height , but no other city urchin , earn a precarious living in the street in his early day , ever rise so superior to his lack of youthful advantage and have so distinguish a public career. Mr. Smith 's failure to realize his foremost ambition , election to the Presidency , lead to a break with Franklin D. Roosevelt , long his friend , who twice propose him for the Democratic nomination a the `` Happy Warrior. '' After give belated support to Mr. Roosevelt in 1932 he declare for the Republican nominee in the two succeed Presidential campaign , Alf M. Landon in 1936 and Wendell L. Willkie in 1940. However , with the approach of the war , he swallow his personal feeling and call for loyal support of President Roosevelt. On May 29 , 1941 , he join with two other Democratic Presidential nominee , John W. Davis and James M. Cox , in a nation-wide broadcast appeal for national unity behind the President 's foreign policy. And after the entry of this country into the war Mr. Smith be untiring in his effort in behalf of war bond campaign and war charities. Mr. Smith be distinctly a product of New York City. He be bear in the shadow of Brooklyn Bridge in an old tenement at 174 South Street , on Dec. 30 , 1873 , the son of Alfred Emanuel Smith and Catherine Mulvihill , both also bear in New York City. He be name for his father. Later a sister , Mary , be born. There be no other children. The future Governor 's boyhood be normal. His father , a truckman , while not particularly prosperous , earn enough to keep the family comfortably. The boy go to St. James ' Parochial School , which give him all he ever obtain in the way of a formal education , play and swim on the waterfront and watch the progress of Brooklyn Bridge , then under construction. Gets Job in Fulton Fish Market When Al be a little more than 12 year old , his father , who have be in ill health for a year , died. The boy , who have previously augment the family income by his earnings a a newsboy , have to leave school and go to work. His first job be with the oil firm of Clarkson & Ford , in Front Street. His earnings be small and the family have to skimp. He go to Fulton Fish Market and get a job which keep him at hard , tiresome labor from 4 o'clock in the morning until 5 in the afternoon , but pay him $ 15 a week. A 15-year-old boy earn $ 15 a week be somewhat of a celebrity in the Fourth Ward , because that be regard a a considerable wage even for a grown man. With his antecedent and environment Mr. Smith naturally become a member of Tammany. His first political job be a a clerk in the office of the Commissioner of Jurors in 1895. A few year later he be select , because of his wit and appeal personality , a a candidate for the Assembly by the late Thomas F. Foley , then the Tammany district leader. In his first few year in the Assembly he have little to say , but devote himself to intensive study of the working of the State government. It be common knowledge that the number of legislator in both house who read the annual appropriation bill , a measure of about 300 page , could be count on the finger of both hands. Mr. Smith read the bill carefully each year from cover to cover , so that every item be familiar. His social gift , which have make him a welcome companion in his home neighborhood , win him many friend among the up-State legislator , and in a few year no one in Albany have a wider acquaintance or know more about condition in the State than he. His twelve year ' service in the Assembly furnish the future Governor with an intimate knowledge of the State 's business that be later to prove of great advantage to him. In 1911 , when the Democrats obtain a majority , he be appoint chairman of the important Ways and Means Committee , the next year he become the Democratic floor leader and in 1913 he be elect Speaker. In the latter year his great ability have come to be recognize and he be easily the most influential member of the Assembly and dominate the action of the majority. Praised by Elihu Root An important turning point in his career come with his appointment a vice chairman of the New York State Factory Investigating Commission , which follow the fatal Triangle shirtwaist factory fire in this city. For the first time Mr. Smith have an opportunity to familiarize himself with industrial condition , and his interest in welfare legislation , of which he later become a champion , date from this service. He introduce remedial measure , some of which he succeed in have pass , and bring about a recodification of the State 's labor laws. Mr. Smith greatly enhance his reputation at the State Constitutional Convention in 1915 , which be attend by some of the able men of both major political parties. His familiarity with State administration and legislative procedure and history astonish his colleague and win him many tributes. `` Of all the men in the convention , Mr. Smith be the best informed man on the business of the State of New York , '' say Elihu Root , dean of the Republican delegation. As a reward for faithful service , Tammany 's leader name Mr. Smith a their candidate for Sheriff of New York while the convention be still in session. At that time the office of Sheriff be still on the fee system and be worth at least $ 50,000 a year to the incumbent. For the first time in his life Mr. Smith be able to put by substantial savings. Strong sentiment for his nomination for Mayor develop in 1917 , but Charles F. Murphy , then leader of Tammany , decide that the situation call for the nomination of a Brooklyn man , preferably satisfactory to William Randolph Hearst , and so John F. Hylan be chosen. Mr. Smith be elect President of the Board of Aldermen , but his relation with Mayor Hylan be poor. There be a mutual dislike between them , the outgrowth of Mr. Smith 's contempt for what he regard a loose thinking and poor administration by the Mayor. As the result of the practically unanimous sentiment in his behalf among the up-State delegate to the Democratic State convention at Saratoga Springs in 1918 , Mr. Smith be choose a the party candidate for Governor , over the opposition of Mr. Hearst. Only half of one vote be cast against him , this by Samuel Seabury , who cause a tumult in the convention by declare : `` Mr. Smith be the best representative of the bad element in the Democratic party in this State. '' This represent the sentiment hold by many person at the time , who esteem Mr. Smith personally but dislike his Tammany affiliations. The outlook for his election be consider very poor , but to the surprise of political observer he defeat Gov. Charles S. Whitman , who be run for a third term , by 14,842 votes. The result probably change history , for if Mr. Whitman have be re-elected he would have be a strong favorite for the Republican nomination for the Presidency in 1920. During Governor Smith 's first administration the workman 's compensation law be amend to prohibit direct settlement between injured workman and insurance company , a defect allege to have deprive many worker of adequate compensation for just claims. Important amendment to the agricultural and health law be pass and a measure adopt authorize the construction of the vehicular tunnel between New York and New Jersey. Governor Smith also support measure enact by the Legislature ratify the woman suffrage amendment to the Federal Constitution , increase the salary of teacher and grant high appropriation for care for the insane and building more hospitals. He urge the extension of the labor law to protect woman in industry and the passage of health-insurance legislation , include provision for maternity insurance , but without full success. He succeed in have enact legislation to curb rent profiteering. He seek a State referendum to determine whether the Legislature should ratify or reject the prohibition amendment , but the Legislature ratify it without heed his proposal. A feature of his first administration be the enactment of a State income tax law to make up for the loss of revenue sustain by the State by the suppression of the liquor traffic. Governor Smith 's definite break with Mr. Hearst occur during his first term. It be bring about , it be say at the time , by the Governor 's refusal to appoint men recommend by Mr. Hearst 's friend to judicial office. At any rate , the Hearst newspaper open an attack upon Governor Smith , charge him with be a friend of the `` milk trust baron '' and with responsibility for the death of many poor child in New York. The Governor 's mother , to whom he be devote , be seriously ill at the time , and in her delirium be hear by the Governor to say , `` My son do not kill the baby ! '' Governor Smith consider these attack a bitterly unfair. That he be powerless to regulate milk price be common knowledge. The Department of Farms and Markets , the only State body with any possible power , be under the jurisdiction of the Republican-controlled Legislature , not the Governor. He finally attack Mr. Hearst personally in a speech before the Democratic Women 's League , and challenge the publisher to a debate at Carnegie Hall. The latter do not accept , but the Governor in a speech there scorn the publisher and reply fully to his charges. Governor Smith 's undying personal hatred of Mr. Hearst undoubtedly date from this incident. Willing to compromise on most matter , Mr. Smith always refuse thereafter to have any dealing with Mr. Hearst or to consider any alliance with him. Cheered at San Francisco Mr. Smith 's grow popularity be strikingly show by a remarkable personal demonstration in his behalf when his name be present to the Democratic National Convention at San Francisco in 1920. Hundreds of delegate take part in a spontaneous parade while the band play `` The Sidewalks of New York , '' the song always thereafter associate with Mr. Smith. He be not , however , a serious candidate for the nomination , which go to Governor Cox of Ohio. Mr. Smith be renominated for the Governorship in 1920 and run against Nathan L. Miller , former Judge of the Court of Appeals. Because of the landslide for President Harding he be beat by 74,919 vote , although Harding 's plurality in the State be nearly 1,100,000. Such a defeat , with a difference of more than 1,000,000 vote in the plurality for the Republican candidate for President and Governor , be look upon by many a a victory , and it make Governor Smith a national figure. After his retirement from office he become chairman of the board of director of the United States Trucking Corporation. He do well in this , his first business job in many years. Mr. Smith probably would have prefer to remain in his remunerative position in private life , but a strong demand arise within the Democratic party that he should run for governor in 1922. Any doubt a to whether or not he would become a candidate be remove by the candidacy of Mr. Hearst. In Mr. Smith 's view , the threatened dominance of the party by Mr. Hearst constitute not only a menace to the party but to the country , for it be his belief , share by many others , that Mr. Hearst hop to have himself nominate for and elect Governor a a step stone for the Democratic Presidential election in 1928. Mr. Smith decide that he would in no circumstance yield control of the party to Mr. Hearst. With practically solid backing for Mr. Smith from the up-State delegate , it be soon see that Mr. Hearst could not possibly defeat him for the nomination for Governor , and a move start to name the publisher for United States Senator. Mr. Smith refuse flatly to run on the same ticket with Mr. Hearst and nothing could budge him. For two day he resist all sort of pressure , much of it from member of Tammany to whom he be bind by tie of friendship and gratitude. Mayor Hylan leave Syracuse , the convention city , in high dudgeon , and the opposition of the Hearst newspaper be threaten if Mr. Smith persist in his refusal to run for Governor provide Mr. Hearst should be nominate for Senator. His position be approve by the voter of the State , who elect him by a plurality of nearly 368,000. His triumphant re-election immediately call popular attention to him a a leading possibility for the Democratic nomination for the Presidency in 1924. A movement to win the nomination for him be formally launch at the Democratic State Convention at Albany in the spring of that year. Gets Ovation in Convention With a late start in the quest for delegate , Governor Smith 's friend proceed to fight for his nomination. Franklin D. Roosevelt , later Mr. Smith 's successful rival for the Presidency , but then his friend , be make leader of the Smith force and place the Governor in nomination before the convention in a brilliant speech that lead to a prolonged demonstration of more than an hour. The convention result in a prolonged deadlock between Governor Smith and William G. McAdoo , with McAdoo slightly in the lead most of the time , although neither obtain a majority of the delegate nor come anywhere near the two-thirds or 727 vote necessary to nominate under the rule of the convention. Chance of the nomination of either Governor Smith or Mr. McAdoo undoubtedly be ruin by the fight over the propose platform plank denounce the Ku Klux Klan by name , which be lose by a narrow margin. The bitter fight over the plank call renew attention to the fact that Governor Smith be a Roman Catholic , stir up religious and racial prejudice and view in the light of late event , make Democratic success in the national election impossible. The convention take 103 ballot to nominate , an unprecedented number , and name John W. Davis , former Ambassador to Great Britain , on the final ballot. On the ninety-sixth ballot , before Mr. McAdoo 's strength begin to wane , the vote stand 359 for Smith and 421 for McAdoo. In a speech at the convention Governor Smith announce that he be the Democratic leader in the State and would `` take off coat and vest '' to work for Mr. Davis. Largely at the latter 's request , he consent to run again for Governor. The result be different from that in the last Presidential campaign. Governor Smith be elect by 108,000 vote over Lieut. Col. Theodore Roosevelt , son of the late President , be the only Democrat on the State ticket elected. President Coolidge carry the State by nearly 870,000. In his second and third term a Governor Mr. Smith carry on his fight for progressive legislation with considerable success against a hostile Legislature. Although busy with State matter , Governor Smith find time in 1925 to lead the movement that prevent the renomination of Mayor Hylan and result in his replacement , after a primary fight , by State Senator James J. Walker. Governor Smith 's assertion that Mr. Hylan `` do n't know enough to be Mayor '' be the principal argument of the anti-Hylan campaign. During his third term a Governor Mr. Smith make a partly successful fight for the development of water power by the State for sale to community and private company , a oppose to the Republican plan for the lease of the water power direct to private company and the development of the power by them. He compromise with the Republicans in the Legislature on legislation to make effective the reorganization of the State government a call for by the constitutional amendment , and accept practically all the recommendation make by an unofficial commission head by Charles E. Hughes , former Governor and former Secretary of State. Governor Smith win a signal victory by his election to the Governorship for the fourth time in 1926. His opponent be Ogden L. Mills , at that time a Representative in Congress and subsequently Secretary of the Treasury and probably the strong candidate that the Republican party could have put forward at that time. Mr. Mills have be one of the foremost critic of the Governor 's bond proposal , sanction by the vote of the people the precede year , and attack Governor Smith for extravagance. Mr. Mills also attempt to make a State issue out of charge that the Governor have fail to bring about an investigation of alleged milk `` graft '' in New York City , but this fail to maker much impression upon the electorate. His election a Governor for a fourth term make him the foremost Democrat in public office in the country and strengthen him greatly a a candidate for the Presidential nomination. Opposition to him develop on three ground -- that he be a Roman Catholic , that he be regard a a `` wet '' and that he be a member of Tammany , to which organization there be a traditional hostility on the part of Democrats in other section of the country. Answers Religion Critic Governor Smith make clear his view of the proper relation between State and church in a reply to a letter of Charles C. Marshall , a lawyer and Episcopalian , who have ask him in an open letter whether the fact that he be a Catholic , in view of what he declare to be the historical policy of that church , do not constitute a bar to his election to the Presidency. Governor Smith 's reply , which be publish in The Atlantic Monthly , which have publish the Marshall letter , be regard a a masterly statement of viewpoint of the American Catholic , little interested in dogma but loyal to both his country and his church. Support for him continue to develop in unexpected quarter , partly a a result of his advocacy of the repeal of prohibition. By the time the Democratic National Convention meet at Houston it be apparent that he would be nominated. His name be place before the convention by Franklin Roosevelt , and Mr. Smith be declare the nominee on a vote of 849 2/3 out of 1,097 1/2 cast. With the dry in the majority , the convention adopt a plank pledge support of the Constitution , which be declare satisfactory to the prohibition leaders. In a message to the convention Mr. Smith later write his own prohibition plank by declare for a return of the power to regulate the liquor traffic to the States. This declaration be attack by the dry and it be evident that there would be a revolt against the nomination of Mr. Smith on the three ground mention -- that he be a `` wet , '' a Roman Catholic and a member of Tammany. It be doubtful that any Democrat could have be elect President in 1928 , but the weakness of Mr. Smith a a candidate in that year become obvious a the campaign progressed. In certain section of the country religious prejudice be stir up against him. Although large crowd attend most of the Smith meeting , his speech fail to turn the tide which run day by day more strongly in Herbert Hoover 's favor. The indicated result be bear out by the election returns. Mr. Smith fail by 103,000 to carry his home State , New York , and carry only Alabama , Arkansas , Georgia , Louisiana , Mississippi and South Carolina in the South and Massachusetts and Rhode Island in the North. He lose four Southern States , Florida , North Carolina , Texas and Virginia , and the border States of Kentucky and Tennessee. After his defeat Mr. Smith go into private business. He become chairman of the board of the New York County Trust Company , later the Lawyers Trust Company , and he engage with a number of other friend in the ambitious project of erect the Empire State Building , the world 's tall skyscraper , at Fifth Avenue and Thirty-fourth Street. He become president of the corporation operate the building , and this post remain his principal business activity for many years. Nominated Roosevelt Mr. Smith give lukewarm support to Mayor Walker in the latter 's campaign for re-election in 1929. In 1930 he place Franklin D. Roosevelt in nomination for re-election a Governor at the Democratic State Convention , but do not give him particularly strong support in the campaign. Mr. Smith oppose the propose reforestation amendment to the State Constitution , which Governor Roosevelt favor , and this position be interpret by Mr. Roosevelt 's friend a foreshadow the break which come later. Mr. Roosevelt be re-elected Governor by the unprecedented plurality of 735,000 , a much large plurality than Mr. Smith ever have received. This automatically put Mr. Roosevelt in the position of an outstanding candidate for the Presidential nomination. The break between Smith and Roosevelt , which subsequently become wider , begin definitely at this time , in the opinion of close friend of each. The year 1932 bring severe political disappointment to Mr. Smith. Once more a candidate for the Democratic nomination for the Presidency , he be defeat by his former friend and supporter , Franklin D. Roosevelt. During the balloting at Chicago the margin put Mr. Roosevelt over the required two-thirds be engineer by William G. McAdoo , Mr. Smith 's bitter antagonist at the convention of 1924. After a delayed start Mr. Smith support Mr. Roosevelt for election. The two men also combine to bring about the nomination of Herbert H. Lehman , a close personal friend of them both , for Governor over the opposition of John F. Curry , then leader of Tammany Hall. Soon after Mr. Roosevelt 's inauguration Mr. Smith become a caustic critic of the New Deal. He declare that the `` cold , clammy hand '' of bureaucracy at Washington hamper industry and declare that he favor sound money instead of `` baloney '' dollar -- a term he apply to the monetary unit after Mr. Roosevelt have devalue it. Later Mr. Smith join in the formation of the American Liberty League to `` combat radicalism , protect property right and to uphold and preserve the Constitution. '' Associated with him be Jouett Shouse , John W. Davis , Irenee du Pont , former United States Senator James W. Wadsworth and former Governor Nathan L. Miller. Fails to Back O'Brien For the first time since become a voter Mr. Smith in 1933 fail to support the head of the Democratic ticket. He remain silent throughout the campaign regard Mayor John P. O'Brien , Tammany candidate for re-election , although he endorse some candidate for minor office , and thus contribute indirectly to the election of Mayor La Guardia. This failure to support the ticket bring to focus an increase resentment against him in Tammany , to bear fruit at the dinner of the Tammany Speakers Bureau the following January , when his name be boo and that of former Mayor Walker cheered. Meanwhile his break with President Roosevelt become more and more definite. Once he call at the White House , but very little be discuss , and when preparation of the 1936 campaign begin Mr. Smith be definitely align with the New Deal foes. Threatened to `` Take a Walk '' In a speech early in the year he make his famous threat to `` take a walk '' and his alliance with the Raskobs and the du Ponts and other Liberty League member bring the charge that he have forsake the brown derby for the top hat. Just in advance of the Philadelphia convention of the Democrats he be a signer of a communication to delegate urge defeat of President Roosevelt for renomination. During the 1936 campaign itself the former Governor take a step which be drastic for him , a long time adherent to the Democratic party. He abandon his allegiance and take the stump for Alf M. Landon , the Republican candidate. Former Governor Smith tour the country for the Republican nominee , and while he be greet by big crowd , not all of these be friendly. But the former Governor make his fight for Governor Landon on the ground that President Roosevelt and the New Deal be hostile to fundamental American ways. Mr. Smith saw Governor Landon go down to crush defeat , especially in New York City , where Mr. Smith be believe still to have have a strong hold. In 1938 Mr. Smith return to the scene of one of his early triumph a a delegate to the Constitutional Convention in Albany. As in 1915 , he be one of the convention 's foremost figure and contribute largely to the provision for housing and elimination of grade crossings. In 1939 his influence in his home Borough of Manhattan , think by many to have be greatly weaken , be show by the election of his son , Alfred E. Smith Jr. , run a an independent and without the Tammany designation , to the City Council. As a lead layman of the Roman Catholic Church , he be honor in 1938 by appointment a a Knight of St. Gregory and a Papal Chamberlain. Mr. Smith marry Miss Catherine A. Dunn , a boyhood sweetheart , on May 6 , 1900. They have five child , Emily ( Mrs. John Adams Warner ) , Catherine ( Mrs. Francis J. Quillinan ) , Alfred E. , Jr. , Arthur and Walter. Mrs. Smith die on May 4 , 1944 .