January 17 , 1944 OBITUARY Ida M. Tarbell , 86 , Dies in Bridgeport Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES BRIDGEPORT , Conn. , Jan. 6 -- Miss Ida Minerva Tarbell , note biographer and dean of woman author in this country , who win fame for her expose of the Standard Oil `` trust , '' die at 7:28 o'clock this morning of pneumonia in Bridgeport Hospital. Her age be 86. Miss Tarbell have be a patient at the hospital since Dec. 27 , be take there from her home in near-by Easton , where she reside with her sister , Miss Sarah Tarbell. Also survive be two niece , Mrs. James Aldrich of Brookline , Mass. , and Mrs. Tristan Tupper of California , and a nephew , Scott Tarbell of Roswell , N. M. A funeral service will be conduct at the Tarbell home on Rock House and Valley Roads , Easton , on Sunday at 3 P. M. The Rev. Wendell J. Clark of the Jesse Lee Methodist Church , Easton , and the Rev. Eric Ericson of Christ Episcopal Church , Redding , Conn. , will officiate. Served in National Posts Miss Tarbell be the type of woman who by sheer grit and hard work raise herself from mediocrity to prominence , not only in the field of write but in the domain of social work. As a member of President Wilson 's Industrial Conference in 1919 and of President Harding 's Unemployment Conference she contribute work of national importance , but Miss Tarbell be chiefly remembered for her fearless expose of the large trust of two or three decade ago. Her `` History of the Standard Oil , '' which first appear in McClure 's Magazine in nineteen installment , in 1904 , be publish in two volume and draw immediate attention to the author. Her early reputation a a `` trust buster '' do not last , for she have in a high degree develop a sense of fairness , and this be particularly reflect in her `` Life of Judge Gary , '' in which -- contrary to all expectation -- she have nothing but praise for Judge Gary. Grew Up in Oil District Ida Minerva Tarbell be bear on a farm in Erie County , Pa. , on Nov. 5 , 1857. Her parent be Franklin S. Tarbell and Esther Ann McCullough Tarbell. When oil be discover in Pennsylvania her father become the first manufacturer of wooden oil tanks. The family move to Rouseville , a village on Oil Creek , and later to Titusville. At Titusville condition be good for the girl , who be send to good school and later to Allegheny college , Meadville , Pa. , where she receive the A. B. degree in 1880 and the M. A. degree in 1883. After graduation Miss Tarbell teach school for some time at Poland , Ohio , but she be not in her element there. She be ask to do some work for The Chautauquan. Eventually she become manage editor of that publication and remain a such for eight years. In 1891 Miss Tarbell go to Paris and study at the Sorbonne and the College de France in Paris for three years. She become keenly interested in biography and history and write her first historical study on Mme. De Stael and Mme. Roland. She have very little money , but manage to live by contribute article to American newspapers. Agrees to Write for McClure One day a visitor called. It be S. S. McClure , who ask her to contribute special article for his magazine. She consent and be entrust with her first assignment -- a study of Napoleon Bonaparte. But Miss Tarbell 's fame a a biographer be chiefly in her study of Abraham Lincoln. She write `` The Early Life of Abraham Lincoln '' in collaboration with W. J. McCan Davis. In 1900 her `` Life of Abraham Lincoln '' appear in two volume , and be today a standard work. Other volume on Lincoln by Miss Tarbell be `` He Knew Lincoln , '' `` Father Abraham , '' `` In Lincoln 's Chair , '' `` Boy Scouts' Life of Lincoln , '' `` He Knew Lincoln and Other Billy Brown Stories , '' `` In the Footsteps of Lincoln '' and `` A Reporter for Lincoln. '' Her Standard Oil article be follow by other article on business and business men and be entitle `` The Golden Rule in Business. '' Miss Tarbell 's fine analytical power and gift for popular interpretation stand her in good stead. She be associate with McClure 's from 1894 until 1906 , when she become associate editor of The American Magazine , remain in that post until 1915. Miss Tarbell lecture on the Chautauqua circuit and speak frequently at public meeting in favor of sex equality. She encourage sew girl to go on strike a a mean of industrial amelioration , and be prominent in many social reform undertakings. Although originally a Republican , Miss Tarbell change her view and be a warm supporter of Alfred E. Smith and John W. Davis. She be also an ardent dry , but later realize the evil of prohibition , say that it be a failure `` which now have become a menace to temperance and be contrary to the spirit of the Constitution. '' Although she be call `` the terror of the trust , '' Miss Tarbell believe in what she call `` socialized democracy , '' and have no use for extreme left-wing movements. `` Communism and socialism , '' she say , `` treat human being like mere cog in a machine. '' Defended American Business In her late year she come frequently to the defense of American business. In her biography of Owen D. Young and in her writing for newspaper and magazine , she look forward to a new school of business man who , to use her own word , would bring close understand `` between those who control the fund and those who manage the machines. '' Although she vote for Franklin D. Roosevelt for his first two term , she oppose three term for a President and in September , 1940 , announce her support of Wendell L. Willkie. Miss Tarbell 's most extensive work be her history of American life , `` The Nationalizing of Business. '' Ten volume of this series be publish , the last in 1936 , when it lack two of completion. In 1943 , while in Tucson , she be associate with a new Arizona magazine , Letter , serve a consult editor. She have spend two winter in the south and have lecture at the University of Arizona. Her autobiography , `` All in the Day 's Work , '' be publish in 1939 .