April 19 , 1945 OBITUARY Ernie Pyle Is Killed on Ie Island ; Foe Fired When All Seemed Safe Wireless to THE NEW YORK TIMES GUAM , April , 18 -- Ernie Pyle die today on Ie Island , just west of Okinawa , like so many of the doughboy he have write about. The nationally know war correspondent be kill instantly by Japanese machine-gun fire. The slight , gray newspaper man , chronicler of the average American soldier 's daily round , in and out of foxhole in many war theatre , have go forward early this morning to observe the advance of a well-known division of the Twenty-fourth Army Corps. He join headquarters troop in the outskirt of the island 's chief town , Tegusugu. Our men have seemingly iron out minor opposition at this point , and Mr. Pyle go over to talk to a regimental commanding officer. Suddenly enemy machine gunner open fire at about 10:15 A.M. ( 9:15 P.M. , Tuesday , Eastern war time ) . The war correspondent fell in the first burst. The commanding general of the troop on the island report the death to headquarters a follow : `` I regret to report that War Correspondent Ernie Pyle , who make such a great contribution to the morale of our foot soldier , be kill in the battle of Ie Shima today. '' AT A COMMAND POST , Ie Island , Ryukyus , April 18 ( AP ) -- Ernie Pyle , the famed columnist who have report the war from Africa to Okinawa , meet his death about a mile forward of the command post. Mr. Pyle have just talk with a general commanding Army troop and Lieut. Col. James E. Landrum , executive officer of an infantry regiment , before `` jeeping '' to a forward command post with Lieut. Col. Joseph B. Coolidge of Helena , Ark. , command officer of the regiment , to watch front-line action. Colonel Coolidge be alongside Mr. Pyle when he be killed. `` We be move down the road in our jeep , '' relate Colonel Coolidge. `` Ernie be go with me to my new command post. At 10 o'clock we be fire on by a Jap machine gun on a ridge above us. We all jump out of the jeep and dive into a roadside ditch. May Be Buried Where He Fell `` A little later Pyle and I raise up to look around. Another burst hit the road over our head and I fell back into the ditch. I look at Ernie and saw he have be hit. `` He be kill almost instantly , the bullet enter his left temple just under his helmet. `` I crawl back to report the tragedy , leave a man to watch the body. Ernie 's body will be bring back to Army grave registration officers. He will be bury here on Ie Jima unless we be notify otherwise. `` I be so impressed with Pyle 's coolness , calmness and his deep interest in enlist men. They have lose their best friend. '' Colonel Coolidge be visibly shake a he tell the fact of the columnist 's death. Almost tearfully , he describe the tragedy. He say he know the news would spread swiftly over the island. The general also be visibly upset a he read a message about Mr. Pyle 's death. He say : `` I be terribly sorry to hear this news. Just before Ernie go up this road [ point toward the front line ] he talk with me and Colonel Landrum at this command post , and Ernie make arrangement to meet me back here at 3 o'clock. I tell him if he be not here on time I could n't wait for him , a I have to be back on my flagship. '' While the general be talk soldier stand near by be grieve to hear of Mr. Pyle 's death. A short distance ahead enemy machine gun and our own gun and artillery be rattle and roaring. Soldiers exhibit `` short-snorter '' bill that the writer have sign for them less than an hour before. Mrs. Pyle Grief-Stricken ALBUQUERQUE , N.M. , April 18 ( UP ) -- Mrs. Geraldine Pyle , `` That Girl '' in Ernie Pyle 's story , be grief-stricken today at her husband 's death. Mrs. Pyle say she have be notify of his death before it be announce in Washington. Mrs. Pyle answer the telephone in a calm but very low voice. She say she have receive no detail of his death. Neighbor Informs Pyle 's Father DANA , Ind. , April 18 ( UP ) -- William C. Pyle , father of the war correspondent , and the writer 's `` Aunt Mary '' -- Mrs. Mary Bales -- be stun today by word of Ernie 's death. Mrs. Ella Goforth , a neighbor , say the age relative of the newspaper man have receive the news from another neighbor , who have hear the news on the radio. Mrs. Goforth say : `` They 're not take the news very well. '' Feared Being Disliked Ernie Pyle be haunt all his life by an obsession. He say over and over again , `` I suffer agony in anticipation of meeting people for fear they wo n't like me. '' No man could have be less justified in such a fear. Word of Pyle 's death start tear in the eye of million , from the White House to the poor dwelling in the country. President Truman and Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt follow his writing as avidly a any farmer 's wife or city tenement mother with son in service. Mrs. Roosevelt once write in her column `` I have read everything he have send from overseas , '' and recommend his writing to all Americans. For three year these writing have enter some 14,000,000 home almost a personal letter from the front. Soldiers ' kin prayed for Ernie Pyle a they pray for their own sons. In the Eighth Avenue subway yesterday a gray-haired woman look up , wet-eyed , from the headline `` Ernie Pyle Killed in Action '' and murmur `` May God rest his soul '' and other woman , and men , around her take up the words. This be typical. It be rather curious that a nation should have work up such affection for a timid little man whose great fear be `` Maybe they wo n't like me. '' Yet this fear have start in childhood. Ernie Pyle be bear on Aug. 3 , 1900 , in a little white farmhouse near Dana , Ind. , the only child of William and Maria Taylor Pyle. They be simple people , content to spend their life in the little white house on the dusty Indiana country road , a William Pyle 's parent have spend their lives. Ernest -- they always call him that , and never `` Ernie '' -- seem destined to plod along in much the same way , except that he be restless , and his thought stray from the family acres to far horizons. He be shy in the country school house , apt to sit apart from classmate during game , and later , in high school and in Indiana University , go off for lonely walks. He work on The Indiana Daily Student in the one-story brick building where the paper be put together , and sometimes he stray down to the Book Nook , the Greek candy kitchen on the campus , but not often. When Stuart Gorrell , who get out the Chase National Bank house organ here now , and Paige Cavanaugh , other journalism student , crowd around the Book Nook 's broken-down piano to hear Hoagy Carmichael , another classmate , play his `` Stardust , '' Ernie be likely to be off in a corner , smile and affable , but silent. He take journalism , incidentally , not because he have any burning desire for a career in it , but because it be rat then a `` a breeze. '' He have no flaming ambition for anything. He quit college in 1923 , a few month before graduation , to work a a cub on The La Porte ( Ind. ) Herald-Argus and move on a few month later to a desk job on The Washington ( D. C. ) News. If any one thing inspire him , during this period , it be Kirke Simpson 's news story on the burial of the Unknown Soldier in Arlington Cemetery. Simpson be an Associated Press reporter. `` I cry over that , '' Pyle tell friend later , `` and I can quote the lead or almost any part of the piece. '' He stay on at The Washington News a copy editor from 1923 to 1926 , have a year in New York on The Evening World and on The Evening Post and do aviation for the Scripps-Howard paper from 1928 to 1932. He be manage editor of The Washington News from 1932 to 1935 , when he weary of desk work and start a roving assignment , write piece a he went. With him go his wife. She have be Geraldine Siebolds of Stillwater , Minn. , when he meet her in Washington and in their tour she be always `` That Girl. '' Millions of reader come to know and love them , then. The Pyle writing of that period , a in the war year , be nothing more or less than simple letter home. He travel to Canada and write of the Dionnes. He visit Flemington , N. J. , and recall the Hauptmann trial there ; tour through drought-throttled Montana and the Dakotas , and picture all he saw. In 1937 he be in Alaska , write of simple folk and of their labor , their hope , their desires. He go 1,000 mile down the Yukon , sail Arctic sea with the Coast Guard. Each day 's experience be material for a column -- a letter home to farm-bound or pavement-bound poor people and invalid who could never hope to make such journeys. He write simple , gripping piece about five day spend with the leper at Molokai , and put his feeling on paper : `` I felt unrighteous at be whole and clean , '' he tell his reader when he come away. He write of Devil 's Island , of all South America , which he tour by plane. He cover some 150,000 mile of Western Hemisphere wear out three car , three typewriter ; cross the United States thirty-five times. Magnet Pulls Him to London In the fall of 1940 he start for unhappy London. `` A small voice come in the night and say go '' be the way he put it , and his writing on London under Nazi bombing tore at his reader ' hearts. He live with Yank troop in Ireland and his description of their day-by-day living bring wide reception. When he go into action with the Yanks in Africa , the Pyle legend burst into flower. His column , do in foxhole , bring home all the hurt , horror , loneliness and homesickness that every soldier felt. They be the perfect supplement to the soldier ' own letters. Though he write of his own feeling and his own emotion a he watch men wound , and saw the wounded die , he be merely interpret the scene for the soldier. He get people at home to understand that life at the front `` work itself into an emotional tapestry of one dull dead pattern -- yesterday be tomorrow and Troiano be Randozzo and , O God , I 'm so tired. '' He never make war look glamorous. He hat it and fear it. Blown out of press headquarters at Anzio , almost kill by our own plane at St. Lo , he tell of the death , the heartache and the agony about him and always he name name of the kid around him , and get in their home town addresses. By September , 1944 , he be a thin , sad-eyed little man go gray at the temple , his face seam , his reddish hair thinned. `` I do n't think I could go on and keep sane , '' he confide to his million of readers. He start home , with abject apologies. The doughfoots have come to love him. Hundreds of thousand of combat troop , from star-sprinkled general to lowly infantryman , know him by sight , call `` H'ya , Ernie ? '' when he passed. He write , `` I be leave for just one reason . . . because I have just get to stop. I have have all I can take for a while. '' Yet the doughfoots understood. They write him sincere farewell and wish him luck. Pacific Foxholes Called His book `` Here Is Your War '' and `` Brave Men , '' make up from his column , hit the high spot on best-seller list , make Hollywood. He be acclaim wherever he dare show himself in public. He loaf a while in his humble white clapboard cottage in Albuquerque , N. M. He would sit there with `` That Girl '' and stare for hour across the lonely mesa , but the front still haunt him. He have to go back. He journey to Hollywood to watch Burgess Meredith impersonate him in the film version of his book and last January he leave for San Francisco , bound for the war again -- the Pacific this time. He have frequent premonition of death. He say : `` You begin to feel that you ca n't go on forever without be hit. I feel that I 've use up all my chance , and I hate it. I do n't want to be killed. '' Fortune have come to Ernie Pyle -- something well over a half-million dollar the past two year -- and his name be a household word. He might have rest with that. `` But I ca n't , '' he wrote. `` I 'm go simply because there 's a war on and I 'm part of it , and I 've know all the time I be go back. I 'm go simply because I 've get to -- and I hate it. '' So he go , and in the endless hour over the Pacific , in great service plane , he write with a soft touch of glorious Pacific dawn and sunset at sea , of green island and tremendous expanse of blue water. Shared GI 's Post-War Hopes He journey to Iwo on a small carrier and write about the carrier crew. Then he move on to Okinawa and go in with the marine , and there be homely piece about that. He have post-war plans. He think he would take to the white clean road again with `` That Girl '' and write beside still ponds in the wilderness , on blue mountain , in country lane , in a world return to peace and quiet. And these be the dream of the doughfoot in the foxhole as much a they be his own. But he know that death would reach for him. In his last letter to George A. Carlin , head of the United Feature Syndicate which employ him , he write : `` I be completely amaze to find that I 'm as well know out here a I be in the European Theatre. The men be depend on me , so I 'll have to try and stick it out for a long time. `` I expect to be out a year on this trip , if I do n't bog down inside again , and if I do n't get sick or hurt. If I could be fortunate enough to hang on until the spring of 1946 , I think I 'll come home for the last time. I do n't believe I have the strength ever to leave home and go back to war again. '' But yesterday Ernie Pyle come to the end of the road on tiny Ie , some 10,000 mile from his own white cottage and from `` That Girl. '' In one of his first column from Africa he have tell how he 'd seek shelter in a ditch with a frightened Yank when a Stuka dive and strafe , and how he tap the soldier 's shoulder when the Stuka have go and say , `` Whew , that be close , eh ? '' and the soldier do not answer. He be dead. So yesterday on Ie a doughfoot , white and tense , look up from a thin-faced , gray-haired figure prone beside him. Ernie Pyle have write his last letter home. Truman Pays Homage U.S. Civil and Military Leaders Mourn 'Foxhole Correspondent' WASHINGTON , April 18 ( AP ) -- Ernie Pyle 's death be announce by Navy Secretary James V. Forrestal , and President Truman issue a statement of condolence. `` The nation be quickly sadden again , by the death of Ernie Pyle , '' Mr. Truman said. `` No man in this war have so well tell the story of the American fighting man a American fight men want it told. He deserve the gratitude of all his countrymen. '' Mr. Forrestal 's statement say : `` With deep regret , the Navy announce the death on Ie Shima ( Island ) of Ernie Pyle , whose reporting of this war endear him to the men of the armed force throughout the world and to their family at home. `` He be kill instantly by Japanese machine-gun fire while stand beside the regimental commanding officer of Headquarters Troop , Seventy-seventh Division , United States Army. At the time of his death he be with the foot soldier , the men for whom he have the great admiration. `` Mr. Pyle will live in the heart of all service men who revere him a a comrade and spokesman. More than anyone else , he help America to understand the heroism and sacrifice of her fighting men. For that achievement , the nation owe him it unending gratitude. '' President Praises Service In his tribute to the 44-year-old reporter for Scripps-Howard newspaper , who cover the war in Europe before go to the Pacific early this year , President Truman say : `` More than any other man , he become the spokesman of the ordinary American in arm do so many extraordinary things. It be his genius that the mass and power of our military and naval force never obscure the men who make them. `` He write about a people in arm a people still , but a people move in a determination which do not need pretension a a part of power. `` Nobody know how many individual in our force and at home he help with his writings. But all Americans understand now how wisely , how warm heartedly , how honestly he serve his country and his profession. He deserve the gratitude of all his countrymen. '' Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson say today that soldier have `` lose a champion '' in the death of Mr. Pyle. `` The understanding of Americans in battle which run through all of Ernie Pyle 's dispatch be draw from hour spend with them under fire , share danger they endure , '' Mr. Stimson said. Marshall Expresses Sorrow Gen. George C. Marshall , Army Chief of Staff say : Ernie Pyle belong to the million of soldier he have make his friends. His dispatch reach down into the rank to draw out the story of individual soldiers. He do not glorify war , but he do glorify the nobility , the simplicity and heroism of the American fighting man. The Army deeply mourn his death. '' Eisenhower Pays Tribute Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower pay tribute to Ernie Pyle Wednesday night , say : `` The GI 's in Europe -- and that mean all of u here -- have lose one of our best and most understanding friend , '' a Blue network correspondent , Herbert Clark , report in a broadcast from Paris , accord to The Associated Press. Dewey Sees Loss to Nation ALBANY , April 18 ( UP ) -- Governor Thomas E. Dewey say today that the death of Mr. Pyle `` be a great personal loss to this country and to American journalism. '' `` Ernie Pyle be a great reporter , '' Mr. Dewey said. `` His warm , human story of our fight men -- Ernie 's beloved GI 's -- have become an integral part of our American life. Every day million of American newspaper reader eagerly read his column , which be a daily link between u here on the home front and our men fight on the battlefront of the world. '' New Mexico Mourns `` Son '' ALBUQUERQUE , N. M. , April 18 ( AP ) -- Albuquerque and the State of New Mexico be stun today by the news that Ernie Pyle have be killed. Only recently the seventeenth Legislature of New Mexico , by resolution , declare Aug. 3 , the columnist 's birthday , a `` Ernie Pyle Day. '' `` Ernie Pyle be Albuquerque 's adopted son , and all of u sorely grieve his passing , '' say former Governor Clyde Tingley , Mayor of Albuquerque. General Clark Salutes Writer FIFTEENTH ARMY GROUP HEADQUARTERS , Italy , April 18 ( UP ) -- General Mark W. Clark pay tribute today to Ernie Pyle in the following message : `` A great soldier correspondent be dead , perhaps the great of this war. I refer to Ernie Pyle , who march with my troop through Italy , take their part and champion their cause both here and at home. `` His reporting be always constructive. He be `` Ernie '' to private and general alike. He speak the GI 's language and make it a part of the everlasting lore of our country. He be a humble man and in his humility lay his greatness. `` He will be miss by all of u fight with the Fifteenth Army Group. There could have be only one Ernie Pyle. May God bless his memory. He help our soldier to victory . ''