OBITUARY Harry S. Truman : Decisive President By ALDEN WHITMAN At 7:09 P.M. on April 12 , 1945 , Harry S. Truman , the Vice President of the United States , be elevate by the sudden death of Franklin D. Roosevelt to the Presidency of the United States. He lack a month of be 61 year old , and he have be Vice President for only 83 day when Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone administer the oath in the White House Cabinet Room. It be the third time since 1900 that a President have die in office , but it be the first wartime accession. For Truman , a hitherto minor national figure with a pedestrian background a a Senator from Missouri , the awesome moment come without his have intimate knowledge of the nation 's tremendously intricate war and foreign policies. These he have to become acquainted with and to deal with instantly , for on him alone , a former haberdasher and politician of unspectacular scale , devolve the Executive power of one of the world 's mighty nations. `` But now the lightning have strike , and event beyond anyone 's control have take command , '' Truman write later. These event , over which he preside and on which he place his indelible imprint , be among the most momentous in national and world history , for they take place in the shadow and the hope of the Atomic Age , whose begin coincide with Truman 's accession. And during his eight year in office , the outline of the cold war be fashioned. In war-ravaged Europe in those year , Truman and the United States establish peace and hold back Soviet expansion and build economic and political stability through the Truman Doctrine , the Marshall Plan and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. In the Mideast he recognize the State of Israel. In the Far East the President impose peace and constitutional democracy on the Japanese enemy , try valiantly to save China from Communism and choose to wage war in Korea to halt aggression. In the United States , Truman lead the nation 's conversion from war to peace , while maintain a stable and prosperous economy. Summons to Leadership The drama and significance of these accomplishment be , of course , not readily predictable when Truman take office April 12 , 1945 , a the 33d President , but there be an element of theatricality in the way he be notify that the burden have fall on him. Two hour before Truman stand , Bible in hand , before the Chief Justice that misty Thursday , he have enter the office of Speaker Sam Rayburn in the House wing of the Capitol for a chat. Writing to his mother and sister a few day later , he say : `` . . .as soon a I come into the room Sam tell me that Steve Early , the President 's confidential press secretary , want to talk with me. I call the White House , and Steve tell me to come to the White House 'as quickly and as quietly ' a I could. `` I run all the way to my office in the Senate by way of the unfrequented corridor in the Capitol , tell my office force that I 'd be summon to the White House and to say nothing about it. . . . '' He arrive there at 5:25 P.M. and be take by elevator to Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt 's study on the second floor. As he emerge , Mrs. Roosevelt step forward and put her arm across his shoulders. `` Harry , '' she say quietly , `` the President be dead. '' For a minute Truman be too stun to speak. Then , fight off tear , he ask , `` Is there anything I can do for you ? '' With her characteristic empathy , Mrs. Roosevelt reply , `` Is there anything wecan do for you ? For you be the one in trouble now. '' In the next hour and a half Truman learn the detail of Roosevelt 's death at Warm Springs , Ga. , gather his composure and prepared to take the oath in the presence of Congressional leader , Cabinet member , his wife , Bess , and their daughter , Margaret. The person on whom the Executive power of the United States be so abruptly thrust be , in appearance , not distinctive. He stand 5 foot 8 inch tall. He have broad , square shoulder , an erect carriage , a round , apple-checked face , a long , sharp nose , deep blue eye that peer through steel-rimmed glass , and thin gray-white hair that be neatly part and carefully brushed. Apart from the plain eyeglass , the most catching feature of Truman 's face be his thin lip , which could be clamp in grimness or part , over even teeth , in an engaging smile. Dressed in a conservative double-breasted suit , with a 35th Infantry Division insigne in the left lapel and a white handkerchief peep out of the breast pocket , Truman look neat and plain. His only jewelry be a double-band gold Masonic ring on the little finger of his left hand. Aside from his speech -- it flat , clip , slightly nasal quality peg him a a Middle Westerner -- he seem a typical small-city businessman , pleasant and substantial , more at home on Main Street than on Pennsylvania Avenue. Certainly he could not have be typecast a a Senator. He be not an orator , nor even a frequent speaker , in his 10 year a a Democratic Senator from Missouri. But when he do speak , he be listen to , closely , for his remark be coherent , forceful and usually brief. He be industrious on Senate committee , and he serve with distinction and fairness a chairman of the Special Committee to Investigate the National Defense Program. He be popular ( `` Harry '' to everyone ) and a member of the Senate 's inner circle. He be know for his informal geniality , his homely language and also , on occasion , for his irascibility and brusqueness. Unlike most of his fellow legislator , Truman do not have a college degree or a fixed profession. His formal education have end with high school , and he have be in business from time to time , but mostly he have be in politics. He be a county official from 1922 until his election to the Senate in 1934. An inquisitive and retentive mind help to compensate for Truman 's lack of schooling , and he employ it in prodigious , if haphazard , read , especially in American political history. Although he have be Roosevelt 's choice a a ticket mate in 1944 and although the two men be on good term , Truman be not , even a Vice President , a White House intimate , closely inform on the progress of the war. He have support Roosevelt at home and abroad , but his personal inclination be more conservative. His private attitude toward Roosevelt be astringent , accord to Margaret Truman Daniel 's `` Harry S. Truman , '' publish this year. His daughter 's book quote a desk-pad memo of 1948 that say `` I do n't believe the USA want any more faker -- Teddy and Franklin be enough. So I 'm go to make a common-sense , intellectually honest campaign. '' From the very first , Truman have to exercise his new authority from minute to minute , while his adviser brief him as swiftly a they could. `` I do more reading than I ever think I could , '' he say after his first full day in office. But he be aware of his inadequacies. `` Boys , '' he tell a group of reporter in those first day , `` if you ever pray , pray for me now. . . . I 've get the most terribly responsible job a man ever had. '' Truman 's first decision be routine. The question : Should the San Francisco conference on the United Nations meet April 25 , a schedule ? `` I do not hesitate a second '' in give an affirmative response , he recalled. His second decision -- to meet with the Cabinet and ask it member to remain on -- be also easy. But most of the judgment that follow ( include Cabinet dismissal ) be not. `` I felt a if I have live five lifetime in those first day a President , '' he say of his `` mighty leap '' into the White House and global politics. 'The Buck Stops Here' In create and carry out his policy , Truman build a reputation for decisiveness and courage. He do not fret once his mind be make up. `` I make it clear [ to the first Cabinet session ] that I would be President in my own right , '' Truman say , `` and that I would assume full responsibility for such decision a have to be made. '' Expressing the same thought , a sign on his desk read : `` The buck stop here. '' With the war in Europe near it triumphant end , Truman have immediately to deal with Soviet intention to impose Communist regime in Eastern Europe and possibly to exploit the economic breakdown in Western Europe. Simultaneously he have to seek military and political solution in the war against Japan. Both situation involve Soviet-American relation , and both give initial shape to decade of strife and conflict between the world 's two major powers. Whereas Roosevelt tend to be flexible in cop with the Russians , Truman hold stern views. `` If we see that Germany be win the war , we ought to help Russia ; and if that Russia be win , we ought to help Germany , and in that way let them kill as many a possible. . . . '' he say a a Senator in 1941. This basic attitude prepare him to adopt , from the start of his Presidency , a firm policy. Showdown with Molotov The Polish question epitomize his approach. This thorny matter arise from the Yalta agreement of February , 1945 , when the Red Army have drive the Nazis from the plain of Poland. The accord , call for a broadly base Polish regime and eventual free election , be fuzzily worded. The Russians take it to mean a pro-Moscow Government ; Truman read it to require a Western style of government. `` I be not afraid of the Russians and. . .I intend to be firm , '' he said. `` I would be fair , of course , and anyway the Russians need u more than we need them. '' Determined to push his point on Poland a a symbol of Soviet-American relation , Truman have his first personal exchange , tart and brusque , with Vyacheslav M. Molotov , the Soviet Foreign Minister , in Washington on April 22 and 23 , 1945. The President use `` word of one syllable '' to convey his insistence that Poland be `` free and independent. '' `` I have never be talk to like that in my life , '' Molotov complained. `` Carry out your agreement , and you wo n't get talk to like that , '' his host retorted. After much pulling and hauling , Poland get a regime that the United States recognize , but not before Truman 's dislike of Russian diplomatic in-fighting have hardened. `` Force be the only thing the Russians understand , '' he conclude , and force in one guise or another be to underlay his subsequent dealing with Moscow and the Communist bloc. Even so , Truman get along rather well with Josef Stalin , the Soviet dictator , whom he meet for the first time at the Potsdam Conference in July , 1945. `` I like him a lot , '' Truman say , add that , of course , `` Uncle Joe '' ( a he call Stalin behind his back ) `` do n't mean what he say '' and consistently break his word. In the foreground of Truman 's dealing with Stalin at Potsdam and afterward be the atomic-bomb project. Started in the deep secrecy in the early day of World War II , it be on the verge of produce it first explosive when Truman become President. Although project scientist , some people in the military and a few civilian be aware of the incalculable world importance of an atomic bomb , the President himself have be tell nothing. Not only have the project be keep secret from him a a Senator and a Vice President , but also the immense scientific military , civilian and moral implication of atomic fission have not be present to him. Atomic Power Unchained Thus Truman be unprepared when Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson explain the atomic project to him on April 25 , 1945 -- 13 day after he have become President -- and tell him of the then presume fantastic power of an atomic bomb. Apart from it stagger military potential , what impress the President almost immediately be it implication for American diplomacy and world peace. `` If it explode , a I think it will , I 'll certainly have a hammer on those boy , '' he say , allude to the Russians. At the same time it be assume by Truman and Stimson and virtually everyone connect with the atomic project that the bomb would be employ a a matter of course to shorten the Japanese war. The moral implication of it use and the total effect of atomics on United States-Soviet relation , later topic of vigorous debate , be not then publicly raise or widely appreciated. Nevertheless , once an atomic device be test and it destructiveness confirm , Truman say in an interview in 1966 for this article that he have give the matter of actually use the bomb `` long and careful thought. '' `` I do not like the weapon , '' he say , `` but I have no qualm , if in the long run million of life could be saved. '' Against his critic -- and there be many in after year -- he take the responsibility for the atomic havoc inflict on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The bomb , he maintain , do shorten the war and do save million of American and Japanese battlefield casualties. With the unconditional surrender of Germany on May 8 , 1945 , a meeting of Truman , Stalin and Winston Churchill , the British Prime Minister , become necessary to consider Europe 's problem and to prepare , in accordance with Yalta , for Soviet entry into the Pacific war. Twice delay by Truman pending the plutonium-bomb test at Alamogordo , N.M. , the conference at Potsdam begin July 17 -- the day Truman learn the bomb be a success -- and last through Aug. 1. It be the President 's only meeting with Stalin and his first with Churchill , with whom he form a lasting friendship. For all the popular hope that be invest in Potsdam and for all the grinding hour that the statesman and their aide confer , few European dispute be settled. Stalin pledge , however , to invade Japanese-held Manchuria early in August , and he subscribe to a surrender appeal to Japan that imply she could retain a constitutional Emperor. Amid the Potsdam wrangle , Truman , by arrangement with Churchill , offhandedly inform Stalin of the bomb , but not that it be atomic. `` On July 24 I casually mention to Stalin that we have a new weapon of unusual destructive force , '' Truman recalled. `` The Russian Premier show no special interest. All he say be that he be glad to hear it and hop we would make 'good use of it against the Japanese. ' '' Tottering since June , Japan surrender Aug. 14 , 1945 , after the atomic-bomb toll at Hiroshima and Nagasaki have exceed a total of 100,000 life and after the Russians have storm into Manchuria. The victory be seal on the battleship Missouri , in Tokyo Harbor , when Gen. Douglas MacArthur , the United States commander , accept the capitulation of the Japanese. The global war , in which the United States have be engage since 1941 , be end , and a new and different era be emerging. In the war 's course the United States create an industrial plant of unrivaled productivity , with a Gross National Product that soar from $ 101-billion in 1941 to $ 125-billion in 1945. Its citizen , meanwhile , accumulate million in unspent cash. How to handle this new affluence without touch off a perilous inflation be the major concern of reconversion. Program for Prosperity The Truman program , give to Congress on Sept. 6 , 1945 , call for full employment , increase minimum wage , private and public housing program , a national health program , aid to education , Negro job right , high farm price and continuation of key wartime economic controls. A President generally friendly to labor ( he veto the Taft-Hartley bill in 1947 ) , Truman stoutly refuse what he consider exorbitant pay goals. In April , 1946 , he seize the coal mine when John L. Lewis 's 400,000 miner strike for more money. And in another strike that November , Lewis and his union be fined. The contest between Truman and Lewis , both stubborn men , capture the headline , with Lewis insist that mine seizure by troop be a hollow gesture , because `` you ca n't mine coal with bayonet , '' and with Truman appeal to the miner ' patriotism. It be Lewis who yield , a do the railway union when the President seize the carrier in May , 1946 , to avert a walkout. If Truman turn out to be not a pet of labor , neither be he a darling to business and industry. He lift price and profit control gingerly , veto a $ 4-billion tax cut in 1947 , seize steel plant in a labor-and-price dispute in 1952 and increase the Federal budget. Fair Deal program meet a mixed reaction in Congress , especially after the midterm election of 1946 give the Republicans a majority in both the House and the Senate. Truman proposal for broaden civil right and for Medicare be shunned. In both area he be in advance of his time , but he live to see himself vindicated. In 1965 , when Congress pass the Medicare bill , President Johnson journey to Missouri to sign the measure in Truman 's presence. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 reflect many of Truman 's aspiration for Negro equality. President Truman fare well on unification of the armed force into a Department of Defense and on establishment of an Atomic Energy Commission. On tax , price control and union regulation , his relation with Congress be not uniformly smooth. `` I discover that be President be like rid a tiger , '' he remark afterward. `` A man have to keep on riding or be swallowed. '' Truman 's individuality be also reflect in Cabinet changes. The Roosevelt Cabinet , save for James V. Forrestal a Secretary of Defense , be dismember by 1948. Some departure be summary , a with Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau Jr. and Commerce Secretary Henry A. Wallace. Wallace be discharge in the fall of 1946 in an uproar over a speech that seem to contradict the President 's hard Soviet policy. Wallace have think his remark be approve by the White House , but it turn out that Truman have only glance at the text. Other appointment bring Gen. George C. Marshall , whom Truman revere , into the Cabinet a Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense ; Dean Acheson , whose intellect Truman admire , a Secretary of State ; and John C. Snyder , whose financial acumen the President respect , a Treasury Secretary. James F. Byrnes serve briefly a Secretary of State and be drop in a personality clash. Truman 's foreign program be to combat Communist expansion and to strengthen what he call the free world. Supported by Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg and other lead Republicans , this policy become bipartisan in it major aspects. Backed by American economic and atomic power , it be remarkably successful. In China , however , the Nationalist Government collapse despite American exertion , and the Communists take over in 1949. But in the Middle East the Soviet be oblige to withdraw from Iran. In Yugoslavia a non-Stalinist regime developed. There be outstanding success in Europe , thanks to the Truman Doctrine , inaugurate in 1947. In that year Britain , for lack of money , have to halt her subvention to Greece and Turkey , nation under heavy Communist pressure. With great dispatch , Truman convince Congress it should extend cash help. This historic action , he say later , be `` the turning point '' in dam Soviet expansion in Europe , because it `` put the world on notice that it would be our policy to support the cause of freedom wherever it be threatened. '' The President 's doughty action keep Greece and Turkey in the Western orbit , and the Truman Doctrine be the logical base for the Marshall Plan , enunciate by Secretary of State Marshall in the summer of 1947. Under it , the United States invite all European nation to cooperate in their economic recovery with billion of dollar in American backing. Western Europe , on the brink of economic disaster , respond favorably , achieve stability and eventually a new prosperity. The Marshall Plan , or the European Recovery Plan a it be formally name , `` help save Europe from economic disaster and lift it from the shadow of enslavement by Russian Communism , '' Truman said. Truman 's leadership of the non-Communist world be reflect in vigorous support of the United Nations. Through it mechanism he hop to keep world peace by positive action , as well a by thwart Soviet power play and intrigues. Moscow , for it part , appear bent on trouble-making both in the United Nations and out of it. The Soviet strategy of try to humble the United States have a crucial test in 1948 , when the Russians blockade Berlin by land in an effort to force the United States to quit the city. Truman resist , and under his direction an American airlift be organize to fly food and medicine into that beleaguer city. The airlift , in which hundred of plane participate over many month , force the Russians to back down. Soviet-American clash intrude into domestic politics , especially after the Soviet Union explode it first atomic device in 1949. A vocal segment of public opinion assert that the Russians could only have master atomics by steal American secrets. Outcries lead to heat charge of Communist infiltration in high Government places. In time a loyalty-security program be set up for Government employee and defense workers. But disquiet , fear and suspicion spread in the land. In vain Truman seek to establish calm and a sense of perspective that could be gain through judicial proceeding against suspect spy and disloyal persons. As Truman 's first term come to a close , he be account successful in foreign affair and beset by domestic ones. He have win recognition a a person in his own right , but there be dispute over the degree to which the country like what he have become -- dogged , scrappy , `` right in the big thing , but wrong in the small one , '' a House Speaker Sam Rayburn phrase it. From Missouri Farm to Fame `` My first memory be that of chase a frog around the backyard in Cass County , Missouri. Grandmother Young watch the performance and think it very funny that a 2-year-old could slap his knee and laugh so loudly at a jumping frog. '' Harry S. Truman be 68 when he write that recollection of his carefree farm childhood , so secure in strong , affectionate family bonds. A product of the Middle Border and of hardy farm stock with frontier tradition , Truman be bear at 4 P.M. May 8 , 1884 , in a small frame house at Lamar , Mo. He be the first-born of John Anderson Truman and Mary Ellen Young Truman. The initial `` S '' be a compromise between Shippe and Solomon , both kinsman 's names. Within the year the family move to a farm near Harrisonville , Mo. , where another son , Vivian , be bear in 1886. A year later the Trumans be live on a Jackson County farm , near what be to be Grandview. There , Mary Jane , the third child be born. `` Those be wonderful day and great adventure , '' Truman say of his grow up on 600 stretch acres. `` My father buy me a beautiful black Shetland pony and the grand saddle to ride him with I ever saw. '' When Harry be 6 , the family move once more , to Independence , a Kansas City suburb , but John Truman remain a farmer and take up the buying and selling of cattle , sheep and hogs. The Girl With Golden Curls It be in Independence that Harry , whose mother have teach him his letter by 5 , go to school. He make friend , one in particular. `` She have golden curls. . .and the most beautiful blue eye , '' he say of Bess Wallace , the childhood sweetheart who be to become his wife. Harry be a shy boy with weak eye , who wear glass from the age of 8. Shunning rough-and-tumble sport , he read fast and furiously. By 14 he `` have read all the book in the Independence Public Library , and our big old Bible three time through. '' Poor eyesight bar him from the United States Military Academy ( to which he have an appointment ) when he be graduate from high school in 1901 ; and , since the family lack the money to send him to college , he turn to a variety of jobs. He work a a drugstore clerk , timekeeper on a railroad construction project , in a mailroom , in a bank. He speculate in zinc and oil. And he toil on the family farm. Meantime , he join Battery B of the National Guard in 1905 and become a member of the Masonic Order in 1909. When the United States enter World War I , Truman , then 32 , be a farmer. He leave the soil to help organize the 129th Field Artillery , and he become commander of it Battery D. He lead it into action at St. Mihiel , in the Meuse-Argonne offensive in France , and again at Verdun , gain the respect and affection of his men. ( At convivial reunion later , `` Captain Harry , '' use to play the piano -- he have learn a a youth , at his mother 's insistence -- while his comrade sang. ) Mustered out in 1919 , he return to Independence and marry Miss Wallace on June 28. Then 35 and without a firm station in civilian life , he open a haberdashery shop in Kansas City in association with Edward Jacobson , an Army buddy. At the start , business be excellent , but the postwar depression change all that , and Truman & Jacobson be oblige to close. Jacobson go through bankruptcy proceeding ; Truman do not , and he be still pay off his creditor ( the total be $ 28,000 ) 10 year later when he be a Senator. Truman 's entry into politics be fortuitous. It occur in 1921 , when James Pendergast , an Army friend , introduce Truman to his father , Mike Pendergast , who , with his brother , Thomas J. , run Democratic politics in western Missouri. A veteran , a Baptist , a Mason , the personable Truman be adjudge a likely officeholder , and in 1922 he be elect a judge of the Jackson County Court. The post , a nonjudicial one , have jurisdiction over the building and upkeep of the county road and public buildings. Truman be conscientious , vigorous and industrious , both a a campaigner and a an administrator. He be defeat , however , in 1924. But in 1926 he be elect preside judge and again in 1930 , both time with the help of the Pendergast organization. In 1934 Truman want to run for the House of Representatives , but the Pendergasts put him up for the Senate instead. Running on a pro-Roosevelt program in a strenuous campaign , he win with a majority of more than 250,000 votes. His record of probity a a county official and his Masonic connection help him. Although Truman never disavow his close friendship with Thomas Pendergast , the leader of the party machine , he make it clear in the Senate and elsewhere that he be not `` Pendergast 's messenger boy. '' There be never any tarnish on his reputation for personal integrity. Truman be nearly 51 when he take his Senate seat. But `` I be as timid a a country boy arrive on the campus of a great university for his first year , '' he recalled. `` I have a prayer in my heart for wisdom to serve the people acceptably. '' 'Plain Folks ' in Capital In Washington , Senator and Mrs. Truman live simply in an apartment with their daughter and only child , Mary Margaret , who be bear Feb. 17 , 1924. The family be `` plain folk , '' with Truman come home in the evening to talk to Margie , a he call his daughter , and to recount the day 's happening to his wife , whom he call `` The Boss. '' The Trumans be little evident on the social and cocktail circuit. Mrs. Truman be popular with the Congressional wife and her husband with his colleagues. For relaxation , he like to sip bourbon and water ( but never in the presence of woman , not even his wife ) and to play a bit of poker. Otherwise he work ; there be document and book and report to read , committee duty to fulfill , constituent to see and do favor for , Senate session to attend. The year Truman spend in the Senate he recall a `` the happy 10 year of my life. '' He find his fellow Senators `` some of the fine men I have ever know , '' and he use the word `` cherish '' to describe his friendship for them. He be a member of two important committee -- Appropriations and Interstate Commerce -- to whose work he devote himself with diligence. He read voluminously from the Library of Congress , but he speak seldom on the Senate floor , and then simply , briefly , without ostentation. His voting record be New Deal , which earn him the opposition of the big Missouri papers. Truman be re-elected in 1940 , but only after a hard and close Democratic primary race. Harry Vaughan , later to be a White House crony , and Robert Hannegan , later to be Postmaster General , work hard for Truman , and to them , a to other friend , he be unswervingly loyal. It be part of his creed of `` do right. '' Defense Waste Exposed When Truman be swear for his second term in 1941 , the nation be prepare for war , and the letting of defense contract be surround with rumor of favoritism and influence. Deeply concerned , Truman get into his automobile for a 30,000-mile tour of major defense plant and projects. `` The trip be an eye-opener , and I come back to Washington convince that something need to be do fast , '' he said. `` I have see at first hand that ground exist for a good many of the rumors. . .concerning the letting of contract and the concentration of defense industry in big cities. '' The result be the Special Committee to Investigate the National Defense Program , soon shorten to the Truman Committee after the name of it chairman. It save the country many million of dollar by curb waste and discourage graft. And it make Truman a minor national figure , conspicuous for his firmness and his fairness. Truman prepare his investigation by make a thorough study of similar committee in the past , especially of the record of the Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War Between the States. Defining his approach , the Senator say : `` The thing to do be to dig up the stuff now and correct it. If we run the war program efficiently , there wo n't be an opportunity to undertake a lot of investigation after the war and cause a wave of revulsion that will start off the country on the downhill road to unpreparedness and put u in another war in 20 years. '' The committee get under way slowly , with $ 15,000 appropriate for it tasks. Truman invest $ 9,000 of this in the salary of Hugh Fulton , the group 's investigator and counsel. The committee quickly turn up disquiet evidence of waste in military-camp construction and equipment. And once it first report -- sober , factual and damn -- be issue , more money for it operation be forthcoming. The dollar-a-year man come under it scrutiny , and the committee be able to produce evidence that between June 1 , 1940 and April 30 , 1941 , Army and Navy contract total almost $ 3-billion have go to 65 company whose official or former official be serve in Washington and elsewhere a unpaid adviser to Federal agencies. Truman also inquire into aluminum production , the automobile industry , the aviation program , copper , lead , zinc and steel ; into labor , plant financing , defense housing , lobbying , ordnance plant , small business and Government contracts. Scarcely any aspect of procurement escape his attention. The committee 's hearing be orderly , remarkably free of partisanship , but they produce news and , more important , correction of the abuse that the Senators have bring to light. Truman be a unsparing of industrialist a he be of union leaders. He criticize William S. Knudsen , director of the Office of Production management , for `` bungling '' ; he be just a harsh with Sidney Hillman , the union leader , who be associate director of the office. The Senator be himself a zestful investigator and a keen questioner. He say later that the committee 's watchdog role `` be responsible for saving not only in dollar and precious time but in actual life '' on the battlefield. In the course of the committee 's work , Truman be in touch with President Roosevelt , but there be no immediate serious thought of him a Vice-Presidential material. When early in 1944 some friend mention the possibility to him , Truman `` brush it aside. '' `` I be do the job I want to do ; it be the one I like , and I have no desire to interrupt my career in the Senate , '' he said. Indeed , Truman have so far remove himself from consideration that he have agree in July , on the eve of the Democratic Convention in Chicago , to nominate James F. Byrnes for Vice President , after Byrnes tell him that Roosevelt have give him the nod. Meantime Roosevelt have decide to drop Vice President Henry A. Wallace and also , it turn out , to pass over Byrnes. The choice fell on Truman. He be not so closely identify with labor a Wallace , although he be acceptable , nor be he a Southern conservative , a be Byrnes. He be without fierce enemy , have an excellent reputation , be moderate on civil right and be a Midwesterner. Truman , however , be almost the last to know of Roosevelt 's decision. `` On Tuesday evening of convention week , '' he recall , `` National Chairman Bob Hannegan come to see me and tell me unequivocally that President Roosevelt want me to run with him on the ticket. This astonish me greatly , but I be still not convinced. Even when Hannegan show me a longhand note write on a scratch pad from the President 's desk which say , 'Bob , it's Truman. F.D.R. , ' I still could not be sure that this be Roosevelt 's intent. '' It take a long-distance call to Roosevelt , then on the West Coast , to convince Truman. `` Bob , '' Roosevelt say , `` have you get that fellow line up yet ? '' `` No , '' Hannegan replied. `` He 's the contrariest Missouri mule I 've ever deal with. '' `` Well , you tell him , '' Truman hear the President say , `` if he want to break up the Democratic party in the middle of a war , that 's his responsibility. '' `` I be completely stun , '' Truman remark afterward. After walk around the hotel room , he say , `` Well , if that be the situation , I 'll have to say yes , but why the hell do n't he tell me in the first place ? '' Following the nomination , Truman stump the nation for Roosevelt and himself ; for the President campaign almost not at all. The Roosevelt-Truman slate win with ease over Gov. Thomas E. Dewey of New York and Senator John W. Bricker of Ohio , the Republican choice for President and Vice President. The popular vote be 25,602,555 to 22,006,278 , and the Electoral College tally be 432 to 99. On Jan. 20 , 1945 , a snowy Saturday , Harry S. Truman stand on the South Portico of the White House and be inaugurated. The man he be about to displace , Vice President Henry A. Wallace , administer the oath. The Glorious Comeback of 1948 `` A go goose '' be how Clare Boothe Luce describe Harry S. Truman in 1948. With that Republican assessment of the President 's chance for election on his own , many Democrats agree -- Frank Hague of Jersey City and Mayor William O'Dwyer of New York among them. Truman have his own views. `` There be no doubt of the course I have to take , '' he said. `` I felt it my duty to get into the fight and help stem the tide of reaction , if I could , until the basic aim of the New Deal and the Fair Deal could be adopt , tried and proved. '' The Republicans ' exultancy and the Democrats ' pessimism seem well founded. Early in 1948 Truman , who have always oppose discrimination , submit to Congress a series of moderate civil right proposal that include anti-lynching and anti-segregation measures. Southern Democrats be disconcerted. They organize a States Rights party , with Senator J. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina a it Presidential candidate , to sunder the Democrats ' traditional Solid South. At the other end of the political spectrum , pacifist and leftist group , alarm over the Cold War with the Soviet Union , and dissident labor group rally around Henry A. Wallace and form a Progressive party to challenge the Democrats in the big Northern and Western cities. Popularity Hits Bottom Added to those seemingly fatal Democratic rift be a generalized voter discontent over inflation , high tax , the presence of Truman 's Missouri friends in the White House and in preferred administrative jobs. Furthermore , some sophisticate think ill of a President who relax at Key West , Fla. , in brightly hue sport shirt , whose word lack scholarly elegance and who be incline to be snappish with his Republican Congress. Truman himself concede the dismal outlook for his fortunes. `` Almost unanimously the poll take before the 1948 Democratic Convention show my popularity with the American people to have hit an all-time low , '' he said. He be convince nonetheless that this `` result from the effort make by the American press to misrepresent me and to make my program , policy and staff appear in the bad possible light. '' His complaint have some merit ; most publisher be staunchly Republican , and frequently their news column give more space to Truman 's opponent than to his defenders. `` I know I have to do something , '' the President recall , and that `` something '' be to `` go directly to the people in all part of the country with a personal message. '' The consequence be a `` nonpolitical '' train trip in May to the West Coast and back. On it Truman deliver 76 speech , many at whistle stop , and the bulk of them extemporaneously. They be plain , earnest talk that expound his domestic and foreign program , and they create a favorable impression. Indeed , even those Democrats who be consider draft Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower , because of his aura a a war leader , now warm up to Truman. He be thereupon nominate with ease , and select to run with him be Senator Alben W. Barkley of the border state of Kentucky. Earlier , expectant Republicans have choose Gov. Thomas E. Dewey of New York a their Presidential candidate and Gov. Earl Warren of California a his ticket mate. Their platform emphasize that `` it be time for a change , '' and it pledge action to halt rise price , meet the housing shortage , promote civil right and aid education. The party exude confidence ; the campaign appear to be little more than a formal prelude to inauguration. Truman , however , take the offensive , start with his acceptance speech before the Democratic Convention. It be a rousing talk give from note , and it foreshadow his campaign strategy and his style. `` I make a tough , fight speech , '' he recalled. `` I recite the benefit that have be win by the Democratic Administrations for the people. '' He single out farmer and worker , tell them that `` if they do n't do their duty by the Democratic party , they be the most ungrateful people in the world. '' Then , to use his word , he `` tore into the 80th Congress '' and the Republican party , building to his climax -- an announcement that he would recall the Congress into special summer session to enact the recently adopt Republican platform. It be a masterly tactic , for the special session accomplish nothing. Its Republican leader be await what seem to them an assured Dewey victory in November , and they have no desire to give Truman credit for legislation that might well go to Dewey. In the meantime Truman take himself to the country. `` I be go to fight hard ; I be go to give them hell , '' he assure Barkley a he prepare to denounce again and again `` that no-good , do-nothing 80th Congress. '' The Long Campaign Trail His campaign cover 31,700 mile , and it include 256 speech -- 16 in one day once. More than 12 million people turn out to see him. `` I simply tell the people in my own language , '' he say later , `` that they have well wake up to the fact that it be their fight. '' He appeal to farmer not to jeopardize their prosperity. To labor he vow a fight to repeal the Taft-Hartley Act. To Negroes he promise more civil rights. And to everyone he say he would carry on his domestic program `` for the benefit of all the people. '' The response , mild at first , grow in late September and October , and at the end , wherever he appear , the crowd be large and friendly , and there be yell of `` Give 'em hell , Harry , '' and the throng applaud and cheer when he do just that. Owing to bipartisanship , however , foreign policy be not an active issue ; the concentration be on domestic affairs. Dewey , for his part , be speak in polished and euphonious generality , virtually ignore his opponent. He plead for `` unity '' among the voter , much like a man who have already win an election. The poll and the commentator all predict he would win , and he do not see how he could lose. But Truman sense something else. A homespun man without guile , he believe that he have touch the common man with simple , hortatory speech , whose theme be , `` Help me. '' Dewey 'Election ' Reversed Election eve , Truman be in Missouri. He take a Turkish bath , eat a ham sandwich , drink a glass of milk and go to bed. He awake twice during the night , both time to listen to Hans von Kaltenborn 's clipped , slightly Teutonic-voiced radio analysis of the returns. These show Truman ahead in the popular vote -- but he could n't possibly win , the commentator insisted. ( For year afterward Truman delight in imitate Kaltenborn 's remark that night , just a he enjoy poke fun at The Chicago Tribune , which `` elect '' Dewey in it early-edition headline. ) At 6 A.M. on Nov. 3 , when the California vote come in , Truman be elect in what many expert call a stunning upset. The tally give him 24,105,695 vote to Dewey 's 21,969,170 ; in the Electoral College the vote be Truman , 303 ; Dewey , 189 , and Thurmond , 39. Wallace receive no electoral vote , though his popular vote , a little more than a million , equal Thurmond's. `` I be happy and pleased , '' the President say , not only for himself but also for the Democratic Congress that be elect with him. The President open his new term with characteristic audacity , by use his Inaugural Address on Jan. 20 , 1949 , to call for fulfillment of his domestic plan and to urge reinforcement of the Western alliance against Soviet power. But the high spot of his foreign program be a proposal that the United States share it tremendous scientific and industrial experience with nation emerge from colonialism into freedom. He sum up the plan ( quickly shorten to Point Four , because it be the fourth point in the foreign program ) in these word : I believe we should make available to peace-loving people the benefit of our store of technical knowledge , in order to help them realize their aspiration for a good life. '' Help to Weaker Nations Point Four capture the imagination of the people in the underdeveloped world , and more than 34 nation eventually sign up for technical assistance. By 1953 Truman be able to report that the program `` have relieve famine measurably in many portion of the world , have reduce the incidence of disease that keep many area poverty-stricken , and have set many nation on the path of rise living standard by their own effort and by the work of their own nationals. '' Truman detail his domestic proposal in a State of the Union message. These include control on price , credit , wage and rent to fight inflation ; priority and allocation of essential material ; new civil-rights law ; a 75-cent-an-hour basic wage ; health insurance ; expand Social Security ; low-cost housing and a tax increase. `` Every segment of our population and every individual have the right to expect from our Government a fair deal , '' he declared. The `` fair deal '' phrase be pick up and become the shorthand name for his program. Meanwhile the President be confront with a fearful and insecure Europe , uncertain anew of the extent of Soviet bellicosity after the Communist take-over of Czechoslovakia in 1948. The response Truman frame be military : the mutual security system of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The treaty embrace Western Europe and the United States be sign April 4 , 1949 , and ratify Aug. 14 by the Senate. The pact , which place this country 's ally under it military umbrella , be a milestone in American foreign relation , for it dramatize United States determination to block any Soviet westward thrust by force of arms. To head the NATO command , Truman have one man in mind -- Dwight D. Eisenhower , whose organizational skills the President admired. With the general in charge , NATO quickly shape common defense measure for Europe , and by early 1950 it nation be receive the first of many hundred of shipment of American arms. Military might be reinforce the economic recovery foster through the Marshall Plan and the Truman Doctrine. Domestically business slump in 1949 , swell the jobless roll to 3.7 million and create a Federal deficit of $ 3.7 billion. Despite vigorous prod from the White House , Congress be not , on the whole , responsive to appeal for social legislation or economic pump-priming ; nor do it repeal the Taft-Harley Act , a Truman have urged. Much of it mind , instead , be on the loyalty of Federal employes , a question raise acutely by the Soviet explosion of an atomic device in 1949 and by revelation in the Alger Hiss case. A former high State Department officer , Hiss be convict of perjury in 1949. Testimony at his trial allege that he have be involve in give classified information to Soviet agents. This , and similar charge involve other former and current Federal employes , arouse demand for a finer screening of Government worker and for restraint of Communist and leftist groups. Although Truman object pungently to what he term `` the witch-hunting tactic '' of Congressional inquiry , and although he stoutly defend witness invocation of the Fifth Amendment , he do tighten loyalty-security procedure in an effort to bar Communists and subversive from Federal jobs. Nonetheless he be never entirely convince that these program be in the American tradition , because , he argue , virtually any such program give `` Government official vast power to harass all of our citizen in the exercise of their right of free speech. '' `` There be no more fundamental axiom of American freedom , '' he declare at the time , `` than the familiar statement : 'In a free country , we punish men for the crime they commit but never for the opinion they have. ' '' It be in that vein that the President veto the Internal Security Act of 1950 -- a law design to curb and punish `` subversive '' political expression. It be a courageous move , but an ineffective one , for Congress override the veto within 24 hours. Internal security problem preoccupy legislator and the public for the remainder of Truman 's term , become acute when Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , Republican of Wisconsin , begin to accuse the State Department of harbor Communists and to charge that the Administration be `` soft '' on party member and sympathizers. Truman , of course , be not `` soft '' on Communists , but neither be he `` soft '' on McCarthy , whom he scorn a a demagogue. He be especially bitter about McCarthy 's attack on Marshall and the imputation that the general , who have head a mission to China , be responsible for the Nationalist debacle there. Later the President condemn Eisenhower for his failure , in 1952 , to disavow McCarthy publicly for have criticize Marshall. Beset on the home front , Truman be soon fatefully involve again in the Far East. As one result of the peace settlement there , Japan be oblige to give up her 40-year suzerainty over Korea. The peninsula be divide for occupation purpose between the United States and the Soviet Union , with American force supervise the area south of the 38th Parallel. Shortly , however , a Communist regime be establish in the Soviet zone , and it become North Korea. In the American zone a government head by Syngman Rhee have be set up in 1948 , after election watch over by a United Nations commission. To this new republic the United States extend military and economic aid. Nonetheless pocket of discontent persist in South Korea , and these be exploit by Communists in the North. By 1950 it seem to North Korea that the Republic of Korea could be readily obliterate and the peninsula unite in a single Communist regime. The War in Korea Throughout the spring Central Intelligence Agency report indicate to Truman that the North Koreans might attack , but these report , the President note later , be vague on timing. Besides , he say , `` these same report also tell me repeatedly that there be any number of other spot in the world where the Russians 'possessed the capability ' to attack. '' Moreover , at that time , America 's first-line defense perimeter do not include Korea , a Secretary of State Dean Acheson have make clear. So it be that on Saturday , June 24 , 1950 , the President be in Independence , Mo. , on a family visit. `` It be a little about 10 in the evening , and we be sit in the library of our home on North Delaware Street , when the telephone rang , '' he recalled. `` It be the Secretary of State call from his home in Maryland. 'Mr. President , ' say Dean Acheson , 'I have very serious news. The North Koreans have invade South Korea. ' '' Truman 's reaction be swift : to request an immediate special meeting of the United Nations Security Council and to seek from it a declaration that the invasion be an act of aggression under the United Nations Charter. The next day Truman fly back to Washington for a Blair House conference with his diplomatic and military advisers. As they be meet , the Security Council ( which the Soviet Union be boycott at the moment ) approve , 9 to 0 , a resolution order the North Koreans to halt their invasion and to withdraw their forces. ( Yugoslavia abstain on the roll-call. ) `` As we continue our discussion , '' Truman write later , `` I state that I do not expect the North Koreans to pay any attention to the United Nations. This , I say , would mean that the United Nations would have to apply force if it want it order obeyed. `` Gen. [ Omar ] Bradley say we would have to draw the line somewhere. Russia , he think , be not yet ready for war , but in Korea they be obviously test u , and the line ought to be draw now. `` I say most emphatically I think the line would have to be drawn. '' With North Korean force rapidly penetrate southward , the President order Gen. Douglas MacArthur , in Tokyo , to use American air and naval force to aid the South Koreans. Simultaneously , with United States backing , the Security Council call on all member of the United Nations to help South Korea. Within the next few day , under nominal United Nations command , American ground troop enter the conflict. This decision to intervene , Truman say later , `` be probably the most important of all '' that he make in his year of office. In succeed week Truman be immerse in the conflict and it incessant demand for decision that only he could make. From the start , he do not regard the United Nations effort a a war but rather a a `` police action '' to punish aggression ; a an arm struggle with clearly limited objectives. `` Every decision I make in connection with the Korean conflict , '' he say , `` have this one aim in mind : to prevent a third World War. . . . This meant that we should not do anything that would provide the excuse to the Soviets and plunge the free nation into full-scale , all-out war. '' On the battleground itself , the North Koreans push the batter South Koreans and American force into a pocket , and disaster seem imminent until MacArthur , in a brilliant maneuver , land troop at Inchon , behind the North Korean lines. Slowly the American force regain the initiative. In October American troop be sweep up the neck of the peninsula , deep into North Korea. In Washington the President explain his objective in Korea to Congressional leader and to Dewey , a the titular head of the Republican party , and receive their support. Then he set about to put the nation on a semiwar footing. He ask Congress to remove limitation on the size of the armed force , authorize priority and allocation of material to prevent hoarding , raise tax , restrict consumer credit and add $ 10-billion for armaments. The proposal , most of which be adopt , give rise to grumble later on , in 1952 , when the conflict become stalemated. Early in the conflict there be two development that , a they mature , deeply affect the fighting and brought Truman into collision with MacArthur. These be indication that the Communist People's Republic of China might intervene in North Korea and that the general be not hew to the Truman policy that call for a neutral Taiwan. ( MacArthur doubt the likelihood of Red Chinese intervention , and he want to bring Chiang Kai-shek into the fighting. His public disagreement with Truman on that point almost cost him his command in August , 1950. ) Truman decide that the best way to handle his difference with MacArthur be in a face-to-face talk. `` Events since June have show me that MacArthur have lose some of his contact with the country and it people in the many year of his absence , '' the President wrote. `` He have be in the Orient for nearly 14 year then. . . . I have make effort through [ W. Averell ] Harriman and others to let him see the worldwide picture a we saw it in Washington , but I felt that we have little success. I think he might adjust more easily if he hear it from me directly. '' The two men meet for the first time on Wake Island in the Pacific on Oct. 15 , 1950. The general be optimistic : The Chinese Communists would not enter Korea and the fighting would end by Thanksgiving , he predicted. Truman be pleased , and again he emphasize that the `` police action '' have strictly limit objective , a prime one be the containment of the fighting to Korea. Strategists differ a to what prompt the action , but on Oct. 25 the Chinese do enter the conflict , send thousand of `` volunteer '' across the Yalu River into North Korea. Thus reinforce , the Communist force eventually beat back the American and United Nations troop to the 38th Parallel , where a front be establish that last until the truce of 1953. Truman 's policy in the face of the Chinese intervention be to continue to confine the fighting to Korea , to avoid escalation , a policy in which other member of the United Nations concurred. MacArthur , on the other hand , want to strike directly at the Chinese by air action in Manchuria across the Yalu River. Matters come to a head in March , 1951 , when MacArthur write to Representative Joseph W. Martin Jr. , the House Republican leader , criticize the President 's policy. Truman believe that he have no choice but to relieve the general of his command. `` If there be one basic element in our Constitution , it be civilian control of the military , '' he explained. `` Policies be to be make by elected political official , not by general or admirals. Yet time and again General MacArthur have show that he be unwilling to accept the policy of the Administration. By his repeat public statement , he be not only confuse our allies. . .but , in fact , be also set his policy against the President's. '' Amid mount public speculation , Truman act dramatically on April 10 , 1951. In a concise order he discharge MacArthur for insubordination. To the American public , MacArthur be an almost legendary figure a a result of his Pacific War exploit -- a general with superb aplomb who have turn the tide against Japan -- and it be difficult at first to accept the possibility that he have overstep the bound of his role in Korea. It seem logical , after all , for a general to want to win a clear-cut victory , and it be obvious to many that it must be frustrate for him to be forbid the mean to do it. Realizing this , the President go on the radio to explain his action. The United States and the United Nations , he say , could not permit the Korean conflict to become a general war. Bringing China into that conflict directly , he warn , might unleash a third World War. `` That war can come if the Communist leader want it to come , '' he said. `` But this nation and it ally will not be responsible for it coming. '' The deposed MacArthur return to the United States , and to triumphal adulation. It appear for a time that Truman , the Commander in Chief , be about to be outflank by MacArthur , the dismissed general. Senate hearing be call in an air of expectancy , but after a few week the furor subside , and the validity of Truman 's step be generally accepted. Assassination Foiled In the midst of the Korean conflict there be a crude attempt to assassinate the President. It occur Nov. 1 , 1950 , when the Trumans be live in Blair House while the White House be under repair. On the street below the President 's window , guard keep vigil. At 2 P.M. , a Truman be nap , a taxicab stop nearby , and two men get out and walk toward Blair House. Suddenly one draw a pistol and fire at a guard. The other ran toward the front door of Blair House. The guard spring into action , and when the shooting cease in a few minute , Griselio Torresola , a Puerto Rican extremist , lay dead , and Leslie Coffelt , a guard , be mortally wounded. The second would-be assassin , Oscar Collazo , be shoot in the chest. He be subsequently convict of murder and sentence to die , but the President commute the penalty in 1952 to life imprisonment. Trumans ' second term , like his first , be mark by great harmony on foreign policy -- especially economic and military aid to Europe -- than on domestic affairs. He find Congress reasonably willing to spend on foreign aid but reluctant to provide for social welfare , housing and education. This , in part , stem from home-front discontent over dislocation -- tax and a rise in living cost -- cause by the Korean fighting. Truman strove to keep the economy stable , a determination that he dramatize by seize the steel industry on April 8 , 1952 , to avert a strike and a price rise in that basic commodity. Invoking his Korean conflict emergency power , he put the industry under Government operation. The stunning move arouse the ire of the business community , but the President be prepare with an explanation. `` If we give in to the steel company on this issue , '' he say , `` you could just say goodbye to stabilization. If we knuckle under to the steel industry , the lid would be off , price would start jump all around u -- not just the price of thing use steel but price of many other thing we buy , include milk and grocery and meat. '' Steel challenge the seizure and be uphold by the Supreme Court on the ground the President have exceed his authority. He be oblige to approve a price rise. He always insist , however , that the seizure be justified and legal. As far back a 1949 Truman have decide not to run for election in 1952 , and a that year draw near , he cast about for a suitable candidate. Once , in 1945 , he have impulsively tell Eisenhower he would back him in 1948 , but by 1952 the general have be court by the Republicans. Support for Stevenson Trumans ' initial choice for 1952 be Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson , but the latter decline on ground of health in the fall of 1951. The President then turn to Gov. Adlai E. Stevenson of Illinois , who have be elect in 1948 by an impressively large vote. Stevenson reject Truman 's proffer at least twice. Then , after almost six month of uncertainty , he decide to seek the nomination. Truman , always a loyal party man , help him get the nomination and stump for him vigorously. The President , however , do not like Stevenson 's campaign tactic , and he be not greatly astonish when Eisenhower won. Afterward Truman make elaborate arrangement to acquaint the President-elect with pending problem , but the White House meeting be stiff and unproductive. Truman felt that the general be still smart from the partisanship of the campaign. Truman 's intimate and adviser , who have watch him mature in office , praise him above all for his forthrightness. He himself , review his action in December , 1952 , say : `` The Presidents who have do thing , who be not afraid to act , have be the most abused. . .and I have top them all in the amount of abuse I have received. '' If he have to do it all over again , he go on , he would not change anything. On another occasion , he be more poignant. He say : `` I have try my best to give the nation everything I have in me. There be probably a million people who could have do the job well than I do , but I have the job , and I always quote an epitaph on a tombstone in a cemetery in Tombstone , Arizona : 'Here lie Jack Williams. He do his damndest . ' ''