December 22 , 1945 OBITUARY Patton 's Career A Brilliant One By THE NEW YORK TIMES Gen. George Smith Patton Jr. be one of the most brilliant soldier in American history. Audacious , unorthodox and inspiring , he lead his troop to great victory in North Africa , Sicily and on the Western Front. Nazi general admit that of all American field commander he be the one they most feared. To Americans he be a worthy successor of such hardbitten cavalryman a Philip Sheridan , J. E. B. Stuart and Nathan Bedford Forrest. His great soldierly quality be match by one of the most colorful personality of his period. About him countless legend cluster -- some true , some untrue , but all testifying to the firm hold he have upon the imagination of his men. He go into action with two pearl- handle revolver in holster on his hips. He be the master of an unprintable brand of eloquence , yet at time he coin phrase that will live in the American Army 's traditions. `` We shall attack and attack until we be exhaust , and then we shall attack again , '' he tell his troop before the initial landing in North Africa , thereby summarize the military creed that win victory after victory along the long road that lead from Casablanca to the heart of Germany. At El Guettar in March of 1943 he win the first major American victory over Nazi arms. In July of that year he leap from a land barge and wad ashore to the beachhead at Gela , Sicily , thus begin a campaign that , a he himself observe , out-blitzed the inventor of Blitzkreig. In just thirty-eight day the American Seventh Army , under his leadership , and the British Eighth Army , under Gen. Sir Bernard Montgomery , conquer all of Sicily. But it be a the leader of his beloved Third Army on the Western Front that General Patton stake out his strong claim to military greatness. In ten month his armor and infantry roar through six country -- France , Belgium , Luxembourg , Germany , Czechoslovakia and Austria. It cross the Seine , the Loire , the Moselle , the Saar , the Rhine , the Danube and a score of less river ; capture more than 750,000 Nazis , and kill or disable 500,000 others. There be time , in those great day when the tank spearhead of the Third be race across France with almost unbelievable speed and again when they be cut the die Nazi army to piece in the final spring of the war , that not even Supreme Headquarters itself know where his vanguard were. Driven by his iron will , his advanced unit have to be supply with gasoline and map drop by air. About such a leader it be inevitable that heroic myth grow up. One eager war correspondent write that he jump onto the Normandy beachhead wave a $ 1,000 bill and offering to bet it that he would beat Marshal Montgomery to Berlin. When the tale catch up with him , he pithily remark that he have never see a bill of that denomination. One of his men bring back the story that he swim the icy , 150-foot Sauer River in January , 1945 , under machine gun and artillery fire , to inspire the men of the Third to follow him. That , too , General Patton deny , but the extent to which the story be believe be eloquent testimony to General Patton 's habit of be where the fighting be fiercest. Called `` Old Blood and Guts '' His best-known nickname -- '' Old Blood and Guts '' -- be one that he detest , but his men loved. `` His gut and my blood , '' his wound veteran use to say when they be fly back here for hospitalization. His explosive wrath and lurid vocabulary become legendary wherever American soldier fought. General Patton have a soft side to his nature , too. He compose two volume of poetry , which he stipulate be not to be publish until after his death. He be an intensely religious man , who like to sing in church and who know the Episcopal Order of Morning Prayer by heart. He seem fat to be the center of controversy. Again and again , when his fame and popularity be at their height , some rash statement or ill-considered deed precipitate a storm about his head. The most celebrated of these incident , of course , be the slapping of a soldier whom he take to be a malingerer but who be actually suffer from battle fatigue in a hospital during the Sicilian campaign. This episode result in widespread demand for his removal from the command of American soldier , in Congress and in the press , and cause the Senate to delay his confirmation to the permanent rank of major general for almost a year. General Eisenhower sharply rebuke him , but insist that his military qualification , loyalty and tenacity make him invaluable in the field. The turmoil over this incident have hardly die away when he cause another stir by a speech at the opening of a club for American soldier in London. The original version of his remark there quote him a say that the British and American people be destine to rule the world , but after this have evoke an outburst of criticism Army press relation officer insist that he have actually say , `` we British , American and , of course , the Russian people '' be destine to rule. He raise another brief teapot tempest when he come home in June , 1945 , and tell a Sunday school class that it member would be the officer and nurse of the next war. But this be nothing compare to the furore he cause by an interview he grant American correspondent after his return to Germany. Discussing condition in Bavaria , where the military government be under his command , he assert that too much fuss be be make over denazification and compare the Nazi party to the loser in an election between Democrats and Republicans back home. General Eisenhower promptly call him on the carpet for these remarks. General Patton promise that he would be loyal to General Eisenhower 's order and to the Potsdam agreement prescribe the complete and ruthless elimination of all element of Nazism from German life , but ten day later , on Oct. 2 , 1945 , he be remove from the command of his beloved Third Army. Although report be current that he might retire , General Patton take his transfer in soldierly silence. He assume command of the American Fifteenth Army , a paper organization devote to a study of the tactical lesson to be learn from the war just complete , and tell friend that this be in line with what have be his favorite mental occupation since he be 7 year old : the study of war. Although he customarily sign himself George Smith Patton Jr. , General Patton be actually the third in line of his family to bear that name. The original George Smith Patton , his grandfather , be a graduate of Virginia Military Institute , and become a colonel in the Confederate Army. He be kill in action at the battle of Cedar Creek. Expert Horseman From Childhood General Patton 's father go through V.M.I. , then study law , and move west. He marry a daughter of Benjamin Wilson , who be the first Mayor of Los Angeles , and for whom Mount Wilson be named. The future general be bear on the family ranch at San Gabriel , Calif. , on Nov. 11 , 1885 , and from childhood be an expert horseman. At the age of 18 he come east and enter V.M.I. , but after a year there he enter West Point with the class of 1909. There be a legend at the academy that he boast at his entrance that he would be cadet captain , the high post in the cadet corp , and that he would also be the first member of his class to become a general. Actually , he be cadet adjutant , the second high post , and be the second member of the class to become a general. He be a poor student -- throughout his life he remain remarkably deficient in spell -- but an outstanding athlete at the Point. He excel a a sprinter on the track team , and be also an expert fencer , swimmer , rider and shot. He continue his interest in sport and athletics after his graduation a a second lieutenant of cavalry. In 1912 he represent the United States at the Olympic Games in Stockholm , Sweden , compete in the modern pentathlon , a contest which up to that time have be almost monopolize by Swedish Army officers. He finish fifth among more than thirty contestant , immediately after four Swedes. Of the five event , swimming , rid , fencing , run and shooting , he make his poor showing in the pistol marksmanship competition , but he subsequently practice until he overcome this weakness. Early in his Army career he establish himself a a hell-for-leather cavalry man. His first post be at Fort Sheridan , Ill. , but in December , 1911 , he be transfer to Fort Myer , Va. , where he be detail to design a new cavalry saber. In 1913 he go to France to study French saber method , and on his return be make Master of the Sword at the Mounted Service School , Fort Riley , Kan. He accompany Gen. John J. Pershing a his aide on the punitive expedition into Mexico after the bandit , Pancho Villa , in 1916 , and the next year he go to France with the general a a member of his staff. He attend the French Tank School and then saw action at the battle of Cambrai , where the British first use tank on a large scale. The new weapon be one to gladden the heart of a cavalryman , and from that time on his service be closely connect with tanks. He be assign to organize and direct the American Tank Center at Langres. For his service in that capacity he be subsequently award the Distinguished Service Medal. But he be not satisfy with a training command , and seek action. He take command of the 304th Brigade of the Tank Corps and distinguish himself by his leadership of it in the St. Mihiel offensive in September , 1918. Later that autumn , during the Meuse-Argonne offensive , he be severely wound in the left leg while charge a pillbox , after 40 percent of the tank in his command have be disabled. His life be save by Pvt. Joseph T. Angelo of Camden , N.J. , who drag him to safety in a shell hole. After the first World War he serve with tank unit and then with the cavalry at various post in the United States. He be graduate from the Cavalry School , the Command and General Staff School and the Army War College. While on duty in the office of the Chief of Cavalry in Washington , he be detail a aide to the Prince of Wales on one of his visit to this country. He tell the Prince that a game call `` crap '' be very popular in this country , and teach him to play it. A Colonel in 1940 When this country begin to rearm in the summer of 1940 Patton be a colonel. He be send to Fort Benning , Ga. , for duty a commander of a brigade of the Second Armored Division , then be formed. In April , 1941 , he become it commanding officer and make the division famous a a tough and rough-and-ready outfit. Promoted to corps commander , he organize the Desert Training Center in California. When the North African invasion be plan , General Patton be place in command of the American force schedule to land on the Atlantic coast of Morocco. One of the close of the many narrow escape for which he be note come when a landing boat into which he be about to step be sunk. But he get ashore and after a brief but fierce fight take his objectives. During the Tunisian campaign that follow , General Patton become celebrate for the strictness of his discipline. He punish men who fail to wear their helmet , even in back areas. After the American reverse at Kasserine Pass in February , General Patton take command of the Second United States Corps , which force the Nazis back into a narrow corridor between the mountain and the sea , up which the British Eighth Army under General Montgomery pursue them. He win the battle of El Guettar in march , but not long thereafter disappear from the public eye. On April 16 Gen. Omar Bradley succeed him in command of the Second Corps. The reason for the shift be not make know at the time and there be rumor that General Patton have fall into disfavor. Actually , General Eisenhower have withdraw him from action in order to prepare the American Seventh Army for the invasion of Sicily in July. The invasion be brilliantly successful , and General Patton 's troop cut clear across the island to Palermo ; then fight their way along the north coast to Messina. This magnificent feat of arm be mar , however , by the slapping episode , which do not become generally know to the public until the follow November. General Patton , who drive himself as hard a he drive his men , visit a hospital not far from the front line at a time when he have be under prolonged strain and be in an overwrought condition. There he encounter two men who show no sign of visible wound , but who have be diagnose by medical authority a suffer from battle neurosis. Losing his temper , General Patton call them `` yellow belly '' and other unprintable epithet , and strike one of them so that his helmet liner fly off and roll on the ground. General Eisenhower make an investigation and sharply castigated General Patton , although he do not formally reprimand him. General Patton make personal apology to all those present at the time of the episode , and later send public apology to each division of the Seventh Army. General Patton do not appear during the campaign on the Italian mainland that follow , and some observer think he have be relegate to a secondary role because of the storm of criticism that his action have cause in this country. Actually , however , General Eisenhower have pick him for a key role in the invasion of Western Europe , and he be then in England prepare for it. Whereabouts a Mystery For almost two month after D-Day , June 6 , 1944 , General Patton 's whereabouts remain a mystery. The fact that he be in England , at the head of an army , be well know , and the inability of the Nazi intelligence to locate him force their High Command to retain the German Fifteenth Army in the Pas de Calais area , far from the Normandy beachhead , lest he head a landing there. Instead , the Third Army land on the beachhead in great secrecy , and deploy behind the First Army. When the First Army break the German line between St. Lo and the sea on July 25 , the Third Army pour through the breach to exploit it. The opportunity be ideal for a dashing , drive leader of General Patton 's talents. His spearhead roar clear across the base of the Breton Peninsula , then turn east toward Parish. While the Nineteenth Tactical Air Command of the Ninth Air Force protect the right flank along the Loire Valley , General Patton 's armor and motorize infantry force the line of the Seine and smash clear across France after the badly disorganize Nazis. The pursuit go all the way to the Moselle , with plane drop supply to the lead unit , before lack of gasoline finally halt the chase and give the Nazis a chance to make a stand. In the bitter autumn that follow , General Patton 's men make slow but steady headway against the entrenched Nazis. For almost two month -- from Oct. 3 to Nov. 22 -- they carry on a sanguinary attack against Metz , which in 1,500 year of history have never before be take by assault. They have to fight their way in , fort by fort and street by street , but they eventually take the city. Early in December the Third Army begin an attack on the Saar Basin , but the unexpected success of von Rundstedt 's offensive against the First Army 's line to the north force a swift change. General Patton be order to go to the rescue of the crumble American position on the south side of the `` bulge. '' He break off his attack and redeploy his force with astonish speed. Within three day the Third Army have begin to pound at the southern flank of the Nazi wedge. Some of it division have travel 150 mile in open truck in freeze weather , but they be still full of fight. By Dec. 28 they have fight their way to the relief of Bastogne , and the bad of the danger be over. For another month they hammer away at the bulge , until it be no more. In February the Third Army break through the Siegfried Line between Pruem and Echternach and then cross the Moselle into the triangle bound by that river , the Rhine and the Saar. Working in perfect cooperation with Lieut. Gen. Alexander M. Patch's American Seventh Army , the Third cut to piece the Nazi force in the Saar-Palatinate region. On March 17 it seize Coblenz. The Third seem head for Leipzig when it be divert to the south toward the so-called Alpine redoubt , where , it have be rumor , the Nazis plan their last stand. On April 18 the Third cross the border of Czechoslovakia and nine day later it pass the Austrian frontier. Its advance unit be in the vicinity of Linz when the cease-firing order came. On May 26 , 1910 , General Patton marry Miss Beatrice Ayer of Boston. They have two daughter and a son. In a characteristically brilliant operation , General Patton lead the Third Army across the Rhine north of Ludwigshafen on March 22. Attacking without air or artillery preparation at 10:30 P. M. , the Third take the Nazis completely by surprise and land on the east bank without the loss of a single man .