April 13 , 1945 OBITUARY : FRANKLIN DELANO ROOSEVELT : PART I OF VIII Family Of Wealth Gave Advantages By THE NEW YORK TIMES The early life of Franklin Delano Roosevelt be typical of a member of a family of wealth and assure social position -- an aristocratic family , a aristocracy be measure on this side of the Atlantic. His birthplace be a stately mansion on the Roosevelt estate , overlook the Hudson River and set in the midst of broad acre near Hyde Park. The property have be in the possession of his family for a hundred years. He be bear on Jan. 30 , 1882 , the only child of James and Sara Delano Roosevelt. His father 's family be of a Dutch descent and make it first appearance in America in 1654. The Delanos , from whom his mother sprung , be of Flemish origin and have follow a migratory group into Massachusetts even early than the Roosevelts come to New York. The god-father of Mr. Roosevelt when he be christen in the St. James Episcopal Church at Hyde Park be Elliott Roosevelt , only brother of the elder Theodore Roosevelt. His father be a fourth cousin of the elder T.R. The family , when Franklin Delano Roosevelt be bear , be moderately wealthy. James Roosevelt , his father , have be president of the Louisville & amp ; New Albany Railroad and be vice president of the Delaware & amp ; Hudson. He have inherit some wealth. His health be not of the best , he have little taste for business and retire rather early to lead the life of a country gentleman on the family estate. Like Franklin D. , his father and grandfather before him have be Democrats. Early Education at Home He receive his early education at home from tutor and be say to have master French , German and Spanish. At 14 he enter Groton to prepare for Harvard. He be 18 when he enter that ancient university and become one of the envied dweller on the `` Gold Coast. '' At Harvard Franklin D. Roosevelt become a member of the select club , include the Hasty Pudding. In Greek fraternity he qualify for Alpha Delta Phi and by the time he be graduate he have win the coveted key of Phi Beta Kappa. In his last year at Harvard he be president and editor of The Harvard Crimson. He be graduate in 1904. Turning his back on Annapolis and a prospective naval career , he enter the Columbia Law School , complete his study and pass his bar examination in 1907. He go to work a a clerk in the law firm of Carter , Ledyard & amp ; Milburn , later establish a law partnership of his own. He do not stay long at the practice of law , however. Married While Law Student While still a student of law at Columbia , Franklin D. Roosevelt marry his sixth cousin. Miss Anna Eleanor Roosevelt be the daughter of Elliott Roosevelt , who be the godfather of Franklin D. She be the favorite niece of the elder Theodore Roosevelt , who , President of the United States at the time , give the bride in marriage. The wedding be in this city on March 17 , 1905. They have five child : James , Anna , who become Mrs. Curtis B. Dall of New York and later Mrs. John Boettiger ; Elliot , Franklin D. Jr. and John A. Roosevelt. The year 1910 be a turning point in politics in this State , when after a generation of Republican rule at the Capitol the Democrats take over control of both the executive branch of the State Government and the legislative. The period find the youthful Roosevelt , then only 28 , run for State Senator from his home district , make up of the county of Dutchess , where the Roosevelts live , Columbia and Putnam. Normally a strong Republican district , Mr. Roosevelt carry it. Two year later he be re-elected by an even more substantial majority. When the time have come to stand for re-election , Mr. Roosevelt be confine to a sickbed and the fight be make for him by the late Col. Henry McHenry Howe. Colonel Howe who become secretary to the President when Mr. Roosevelt assume office , be largely instrumental , through management of the pre-convention campaign activity , in obtain for his chief the Presidential nomination in 1932. Colonel Howe die in 1935. Leads Insurgent Group Almost unknown outside the district , the young Democratic Senator from Dutchess go to Albany to take his seat soon after Jan. 1 , 1911. Before many day he have attract nation-wide attention by assume the leadership of a group of insurgent in the Legislature which he have muster and which revolt against Tammany Hall and it leader , Charles F. Murphy , then at the heyday of his power , over a Tammany proposal to send William F. ( Blue-eyed Billy ) Sheehan to the United States Senate. It be the last time a United States Senator be elect in this State by joint ballot of the Legislature. The Republicans , in a minority , be pledge to the re-election of Chauncey M. Depew. At it begin the fight start by young Roosevelt seem a forlorn hope. The insurgent group be in a small minority and , with the caucus resort to , the election of Mr. Sheehan seem certain , despite a State-wide wave of protest against his election on the ground that he be too close to Mr. Murphy and , indeed , to the Tammany organization. But prior to the caucus the nineteen Democratic legislator of the insurgent group bind themselves to oppose the election of Mr. Sheehan to the end. They hold the balance of power on a joint ballot. They remain out of the caucus. Nothing that Mr. Murphy could do or say make any difference to Mr. Roosevelt and his insurgent flock. For sixty ballot and almost three month the conflict raged. The insurgent have a candidate of their own , Edward M. Shepard. With Mr. Sheehan he be kill off in the contest , which end in an honorable compromise with the election of James A. O'Gorman on the sixty-fourth ballot. From this period date the first acquaintance of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Alfred E. Smith , who be Democratic floor leader and later become speaker of the Assembly. Fought Tammany a Senator All through his service in the State Senate Franklin D. Roosevelt fight Tammany , then firmly in control of both branch of the Legislature. He vote for a direct primary bill , although it be but a half-way measure , grudgingly support by Tammany. He oppose a number of Tammany grab bills. Tammany Hall be oppose to the nomination of Woodrow Wilson for President and the delegation from this State be line up for Champ Clark , then speaker of the House of Representatives. Anti-Tammany Democrats throughout the State , however , favor Mr. Wilson , and Franklin D. Roosevelt take his stand with this group. At Baltimore , where the 1912 Democratic National Convention be hold , Mr. Roosevelt , although not a delegate , be active in behalf of Mr. Wilson , who be nominate and elect in that year of the Bull Moose exodus from the Republican party lead by another Roosevelt. His reward , after Woodrow Wilson have take office , be the appointment to be Assistant Secretary of the Navy. The World War break out in 1914 , about fifteen month after Mr. Roosevelt have become Assistant Secretary of the Navy. But in advance of hostility in Europe and the entry of the United States into the great conflict , the Wilson Democrats in this State have a score to settle with Tammany Hall. He be the candidate of the anti-Tammany wing for the United States Senator in the Democratic primary , hold Sept. 28 , 1914 , but be defeat by James W. Gerard , later Ambassador to Germany. Sought to Sway Hoover In Washington during the year that follow he be draw into close and friendly relation with Herbert Hoover , who be to be an opponent in the 1932 fight over the Presidency. Mr. Roosevelt seek to prevail upon Mr. Hoover to become a Democrat with a view to groom him for the Democratic nomination for President in 1924 , and actually think he have succeed when Republicans of prominence manage to persuade Mr. Hoover that he would profit politically by become a Republican. The rest be history. Came 1920 and another Presidential contest. The Democrats nominate Gov. James M. Cox of Ohio for the first place on their ticket. Mr. Roosevelt draw second place. The campaign that follow be fight on the Wilson record during his two administration and on the League of Nations , the Republicans have take their stand definitely against the United States join the League. A keen believer in the Wilson policy and the peace mission of the League , Mr. Roosevelt take up the party fight. He tour the country in a special train and keep up the fighting until the eve of the election. Friends of Mr. Roosevelt give him credit for something like 1,000 speech , short and long , in the course of his campaign for the Vice Presidency. The Republican landslide mark Mr. Roosevelt 's second defeat for public office. He have win two. With five child to rear , Mr. Roosevelt return to the practice of law , resume a partnership with the firm of Emmet , Marvin & amp ; Roosevelt. He also accept a position a vice president with the Fidelity and Deposit Company of Maryland. At about that time , too , he be elect an overseer at Harvard. He also undertake the task of reorganize the Boy Scout organization in the country , and he become chairman of a committee create to raise fund for the Woodrow Wilson Foundation. Stricken by Paralysis Then , in August , 1921 , come his tragic illness of infantile paralysis , which at first threaten to end his career and possibly even his life , but which later come to be regard a the turn point from which begin his upward climb to the White House. With member of his family he be swim near his summer home at Campobello , N.B. , when he be stricken. The next day he felt a stiffness , a if a cold be come on. On the second morning he could not get out of bed. His leg muscle be paralyzed. The attack be serious. It be with extreme difficulty that he be bring back to New York , where he could receive the most skillful medical treatment obtainable. For month his life be despair of , then the progress of the dread disease be arrested. After a truly epic fight for health he begin to recover. The optimism which be a cardinal trait in his make-up , his patience and his courage be powerful ally in the battle. He be paralyze from the waist down. It be almost a year before he could move about at all with the aid of crutches. But he never give in. To a man in love with outdoor life , swimming , sailing , tennis and riding , the ordeal be doubly trying. It be at this time that he `` discover '' Warm Springs , Ga. , and the health-giving quality of it water in case such a his. He go to Warm Springs and spend much time swim in the pool. Gradually he regain in part the use of his legs. He discard his crutch and be able to move about with the aid of cane and steel brace which have be fit to his low limbs. The process of recovery , however , take years. NEXT PAGE