May 2 , 1945 OBITUARY Hitler Fought Way to Power Unique in Modern History BY THE NEW YORK TIMES Adolf Hitler , one-time Austrian vagabond who rise to be the dictator of Germany , `` augmenter of the Reich '' and the scourge of Europe , be , like Lenin and Mussolini , a product of the First World War. The same general circumstance , born of the titanic conflict , that carry Lenin , a bookish professional revolutionist , to the pinnacle of power in the Empire of the Czars and clear the road to mastery for Mussolini in the Rome of the Caesars also pave the way for Hitler 's domination in the former mighty Germany of the Hohenzollerns. Like Lenin and Mussolini , Hitler come out of the blood and chaos of 1914-18 , but of the three he be the strange phenomenon. Lenin , while not know to the general public , have for many year before the Russian Revolution occupy a prominent place a leader and theoretician , of the Bolshevist party. Mussolini be a widely know Socialist editor , orator and politician before make his bid for power. Hitler be nothing , and from nothing he become everything to most Germans. Lenin dream of world revolution. Mussolini thunder of the coming world victory of fascism. Hitler actually challenge the earth to combat by unleash another war of nations. Emerging from the field in 1918 a an obscure lance corporal , he lead Germany twenty-one year later a supreme Fuehrer and War Lord. Subdued Many Nations Before the climax of a career unparalleled in history , he have subdue nine nation , defy successfully and humiliate the great power of Europe , and create a social and economic system found upon the complete subjection of score of million to his will in all basic feature of social , political , economic and cultural life. Sixty-five million Germans yield to the blandishment and magnetism of this slender man of medium height , with little black mustache and shock of dark hair , whose fervor and demagogy swept everything before him with outstretched arm a the savior and regenerator of the Fatherland. Austria , with 7,000,000 inhabitant , succumb helplessly to his invasion. More than 2,000,000 Germans in the Sudeten country be add to his domain when he threaten to invade Czechoslovakia , and 10,000,000 Czechs and Slovaks be tie to his chariot wheel , their nation strip of it defense , their State destroy , while all of Central Europe tremble before what appear to be the irresistible advance of the goose- stepping Nazi horde of his adopt country. For more than six year after his advent to power in January , 1933 , there seem to be no one who would dare to challenge Hitler 's progress from victory to victory until he meet resistance from Poland , back by the Anglo-French alliance. Shortly after his dismemberment and subjugation of Czechoslovakia Hitler be report to have say , `` My time be short. '' His blow against Poland and challenge to France and England less than a year later be take a indication that he have determine deliberately to stake all he have achieve and all that he still yearn for -- domination of Europe -- upon one card , war , sense , perhaps , that time be against him , that he have unleashed force of hatred and opposition throughout the world that might eventually destroy him. Series of Broken Promises Those who have hop that success at home and extension of his power abroad would make him more circumspect and reluctant to pursue the program of conquest he have outline for himself in `` Mein Kampf '' and in his speech have abandon that hope when , in violation of his promise to respect the integrity of Czechoslovakia after Munich , he march on Prague and reduce that nation to a German protectorate. It be not the first promise he have broken. His whole course at home and abroad have be mark by broken promise and he do not hesitate to massacre many of his own closest adherent , a he do in the purge of June , 1934 , when he personally direct the killing of Capt. Ernst Roehm and a group of lead Nazis who have venture to interfere in his plan for a close association of the Reichswehr with the regime and insist upon fulfillment of the original Nazi party promise in the economic field. The world-wide condemnation of his method be feed by the system of terrorism he have establish at home and in the country he have conquer , the jailing of score of thousand in prison and concentration camp , the secret murder of opponent and those suspect of opposition , the ruthless destruction of the Jews and the persecution of the Catholic and Protestant Churches in his drive for nazification of the nation. Churches Persecuted Under Nazis ' Paganism ; Pastor Niemoeller Pre-Eminent in Opposition It be not long after his come to power that the church find themselves at war with Hitler and his regime when they discover that what he aim at be no less than the substitution of a pagan German god for Christ. Some brave representative of the church defy Hitler when all others have be broken. Of these Pastor Niemoeller be pre-eminent. In his prison cell Niemoeller become the symbol of Christianity struggle to maintain it truth and identity against the Nazi State. Mass Unrest His Springboard The social , political and economic condition , a they develop in post-war Germany , smart painfully under humiliation and defeat and struggle for nearly fifteen year with internal dissension and mass unemployment , supply the springboard for Hitler 's leap to power in 1933. Having become disappointed in all other party , a sufficient number of Germans have accept the Nazis when the latter , by mean of force and propaganda ingeniously direct by Hitler , have maneuver themselves into a position from which they could strike for seizure of the Government. But an understanding of Hitler 's conduct both before and after his advent to power have be seek by student of the man in study of his youth and family history. One of the most striking contradiction be the discrepancy between the magnetism he exercise over million and the unprepossessing appearance of this champion of Aryan race purity. Professor Max von Gruber , noted German authority on race hygiene , give the following description of Hitler when he meet him for the first time at a political trial in a German court in 1923 : `` Face and head , bad -- mongrel. Low , recede forehead , unhandsome nose , broad cheekbone , small eye , dark hair. Expression of the face not that of one command full self-control , but of one instantly excited. At the end -- the expression of happy complacency. Many who watch Hitler from the time when he first make his appearance on the political scene notice his megalomania , his gambler 's readiness to take risk , his habit of wild exaggeration and inability to grasp the full implication of thing he say and did. It be this failure to measure the significance of his word and deed that be consider responsible for the coolness he display at critical moment after violent outburst of thought and temper , although on occasion he be report to fall into tear and hysterics. Propaganda a Basic Weapon At the same time , however , he possess an uncanny shrewdness in his estimate of the conduct and psychology of mass and individual , and develop to a fine degree the art of sway their emotions. The success he achieve in this field enhance his contempt for the people , whom he call a `` flock of sheep and blockhead , '' a `` mixture of stupidity and cowardice. '' He be convince that well-directed propaganda by a determined minority back by force at the strategic moment , constitute a sure road to victory. `` By shrewd and constant application of propaganda , heaven can be present to the people a hell and , vice versa , the wretched existence a a paradise , '' he write in `` Mein Kampf. '' This contempt for the people and his unbounded capacity for hatred , which find expression in his merciless treatment of opponent and persecution of the Jews , accord to psychologist who have study the man 's career closely , emanate in Hitler from the poverty , wretchedness and frustration of his youth. Hitler be bear in an inn at Braynau , Austria , close to the German frontier , April 20 , 1889. His father be Alois Schickelgruber , the illegitimate son of Alois Hitler. The future Fuehrer 's parent be originally a peasant , but later enter the Austrian custom service. He be marry three time , his third wife , who be also his niece and ward , be twenty year young than her husband. She be the future dictator 's mother. Seven child be bear of the three marriage contract by Hitler 's father , who die of pulmonary hemorrhage at the age of 66. His three wife die of weak chests. Two of Hitler 's brother and a sister die in childhood. A niece of the Fuehrer commit suicide. A half-brother have no progeny. The German dictator himself never married. At the age of 16 he suffer from lung trouble. On his mother 's side there be several eccentric in the family. In general , the family show definite tendency to illness and mental instability. German Adherent From Youth Unlike his father , who be a fervent supporter of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy and want his son to follow him in the Government service , Adolf Hitler be from early youth a strong adherent of Germany. He be convince that it be the historic mission of the Germans to rule the Austrians and the complex of race inhabit Franz Josef 's land. Hitler have no love for his father and resent his insistence that he prepare himself for the Government service. Not venture to defy his father openly , he adopt a policy of passive resistance by idle away his time at school. At the age of 14 , after his father 's death , Hitler go to live with his mother at Linz. There he stay until he be 19 , pamper by his mother , who cater to his habit of idling. Upon her death he find himself alone and friendless , without any mean of earn a living and quite unprepared for the battle of life. He have be a failure at school and be unable to pass examinations. While his parent be still alive Hitler have go for a short time to Munich , where he have take some course in drawing. With his mother 's passing he betook himself to Vienna , where he apply for admission to the Academy of Arts. He think of become an architect. The few drawing he present to the director be so mediocre , however , that his application be deny for lack of qualification. From 1909 to the outbreak of the First World War , Hitler lead a wretched existence. For a while he live in a Vienna `` flophouse , '' among beggar and vagabonds. He spend night on park bench , harass by the police. He be an outcast among outcast , eat at a monastery soup kitchen. This existence continue for three year , during which he manage to earn a precarious living by paint picture postcard for tradesman and do minor carpenter work. Nevertheless , he consider himself to be an artist of talent and hat the world for not accord him recognition. He spend his leisure hour day-dreaming and brooding over his frustration. He himself admit in his autobiography that up to his twenty-fifth year he be what be know a a good-for-nothing , a spoiled idler. Moved by a sensitive ego , a restless spirit and a quick mind , he yearn passionately to make an impression , to gain recognition , to attain to great achievement , to know everything , to attract attention , to master the world. Politics His Ruling Passion His great passion be for politics. A shy and beat youth , Hitler would become transformed as soon a conversation turn on matter political. His tongue would loosen and a torrent of word would rush from his lips. In those day before the First World War Hitler never form friendship , male or female. He never communicate with his family , who think him dead. Jeered at by acquaintance , he wept. The one thing that give him hope and courage be the disintegration of the Austro- Hungarian Empire , which he foresee , and evidence of which have become apparent to many long before the war. Considering himself a German , he felt superior to those around him. For the Slavs of the empire he felt contempt. For the Jews he felt hatred. As for the worker , he believe them to be not much better. This feeling he express to Otto Strasser , one of his early collaborator in the Nazi movement , in 1930 , when he say : `` The worker , they want nothing but bread and games. In the great mass they be not worth consideration. We must build a master class from element of a good race. '' And it be he who would build that master class and lead it ! In addition to divide mankind into inferior and superior race , he divide it also into inferior and superior human beings. He stand out in his classification a the superman. Long before he have dream of achieve power he have develop the principle that nation be destine to hate , oppose and destroy one another ; that the law of history be the struggle for survival between people ; that the Germans be choose by destiny to rule over others , and that the great mass of the people be mediocrity immerse in a low materialism and destine to be dominate by a high social type. The Jews he regard a particularly inferior and a danger to all other peoples. Violated His Party 's Own Basic Principles Governing Society , Economics and 'Race' These , it may be say , be the only principle to which Hitler remain true , for he violate the basic principle of the Nazi economic and social program , throw overboard the principle , so often proclaim by him a Nazi party leader and Fuehrer , that what he desire be the union of all Germans and not the incorporation of other race in the Reich , and abandon , temporarily , a a tactical maneuver his repeatedly proclaim unalterable opposition to bolshevism , with which he consummate a treaty of non- aggression in the midst of the Polish crisis of August , 1939. Hitler leave Vienna in 1913 for Munich , where he support himself by do odd job a a painter and barely manage to earn his keep. He share a room with a Viennese engineer , but have no real friend and no contact with women. Those who come in contact with him be strike by his passion for politics and political wrangles. He drift , unable to find regular employment of the kind his father have want him to have. Hitler himself disclose later his father 's prediction that no good would ever come of his son. He be poor , miserable and hopeless. War Came a a Deliverance Then come the war. It lift Hitler from obscurity into a state of exaltation. `` To me those hour be like a deliverance , '' Hitler write of the outbreak of the war in `` Mein Kampf. '' `` I be not ashamed to say that , overcome by a storm of enthusiasm , I fell on my knee and thank Heaven from an overflow heart. '' A year before , in Salzburg , the Austrian doctor have reject him for military service because of physical weakness. He now volunteer for the German Army , and , when accept , felt a sense of power and of great thing to come. At the front , where he serve a a dispatch carrier , he be friendless. No one write to him. No one send him parcels. His service be recognize by his superior , however , and he be reward with the Iron Cross. Regarded a an eccentric by his comrade , he reply once , `` You will hear much of me some day. '' Because his superior do not take him seriously he be not advanced beyond the rank of lance corporal. He be gas , and the end of the war find him in a hospital in Passewalk , Pomerania. He view with pain the collapse of the German Empire. His hour have not yet strike , but , enrage at the revolution and the revolutionist , bitter at the Kaiser and Field Marshal von Hindenburg because of their failure to suppress the revolution , he felt that his day would come. His confidence in himself be as great a his sense of frustration. Aster the war Hitler do not return to civilian life. Though officially demobilize , he remain in the service of the Reichswehr. His work be in the political intelligence division. In those day the Reichswehr have already begin to dream of revenge. In addition to the illegal group maintain inside the Reichswehr conspiring for the overthrow of the German Republic and planning for a military resurgence of the country , many officer and former officer attach themselves to various conspiratory `` free corp '' organization form for political purpose and the spreading of terrorism. Some of these organization help stage revolt or `` Putsches '' against the Government , the most notable of which be the monarchist Kapp `` Putsch '' of August , 1920 , when the insurgent capture Berlin , but be compel to yield by a general strike proclaim by the Ebert Government. These `` free corp '' organization be finance by some industrialist , who likewise seek to undermine the Government and thwart the work of the Interallied Military Commission establish in Germany to keep her disarmed , in accordance with the provision of the Versailles treaty. A Spy for Conspirators Against Republic ; Joined 'German Labor Party ' Band in 1919 Hitler act a an intelligence officer or spy for these `` free corp '' bands. He establish relation with influential military circle both inside and outside the Reichswehr. When the latter suppress the Communist regime in Bavaria in 1919 , Hitler furnish information that lead to the execution of many Communists and Socialists. The activity of the militarist insurgent lead , among other thing , to assassination of republican leader , notably the killing of Erzberger and Rathenau. In 1919 Hitler be assign to the task of keep an eye on a little band call itself the German Labor party. Hitler join this group and be follow soon thereafter by several hundred officer and former officer whom Ernst Roehm , at that time a captain on the staff of the Military governor of Bavaria , have instruct to become member of the organization. This little party develop ultimately into the German National Socialist party , the organization forge by Hitler a the instrument for the achievement of power. Among the men Hitler meet when he join the German Labor party be Dietrich Eckhart , a journalist , from whom he obtain the basic principle of the ideology later adopt by the Nazis. Eckhart die in 1923. Others whom Hitler meet a member of the German Labor party be Rudolph Hess , who later become Deputy Fuehrer , and who be name second by Hitler in the line of succession to supreme power upon the outbreak of hostility with Poland in 1939 , and Alfred Rosenberg , another of those who subsequently play a leading role in the Nazi regime a ideologist and theoretician. Hess fly to England in 1941 , presumable on a `` peace mission , '' and remain there a prisoner. Roehm also be a member of the organization. Altogether , there be only six men in the German Labor party before Hitler join it. These half dozen men , with Hitler in the lead , be the group that prepare the second world catastrophe of our time. By force of eloquence , ruthless method and daring of idea , Hitler forge ahead in the movement found by the little band. He go about make speech bewail the wrong do to Germany , appeal to audience and stir them with the promise of new power and greatness to come. The extremism of his utterance and promise make little impression at first. The poor lance corporal be treat a a circus performer. People laugh at him and his dreams. Germany lay crush and prostrate after her defeat in a four-year war. Poverty and misery be abroad in the land. It seem a if many decade would have to pass before the nation could pull itself together on the basis of a new order. But Hitler persevered. Strategy Formula Simple His strategy be base on a simple principle : to obtain the support of powerful and influential element in the army , industry and finance and to buttress that with support among the masses. He address himself first to the middle class , ruin by inflation , and manage to obtain some assistance from element among the worker disappoint in the revolution. To the middle class he promise relief from what he call the tyranny of big business , particularly the department store , with which small tradesman find it difficult to compete. He promise them that when in power he would dissolve the department store and abolish all interest. To the worker he promise dissolution of the trusts. Neither of these promise be kept. Added to his economic program , design to appeal to the ruin middle-class element , he put forward his slogan of extreme nationalism and racism -- the union of all Germans on the basis of self-determination in a great Germany. It be not until 1928 that he come forward with a program for the farmer , who have become rich during the war on high price result from the blockade. In 1932 , when mass unemployment assume unprecedented proportion in Germany , he promise work for all the unemployed. Stubbornly , persistently , Hitler toil at the task of build his movement. Believing the mission of national and social regeneration be to be realize by what he call a vigorous minority , a desperate elite , he gather around him a group of intellectual , officer , former officer , penurious student and ambitious youth without prospect in the Germany of that time. All these be in the main men of humble origin who have go through the war and find themselves socially shipwreck when it be over. Like Hitler , they be ready for anything. They have nothing to lose and felt they have everything to gain if only they could grasp the instrument of power. Like Hitler , they be impel in their thought and action by a superiority complex , the satisfaction of which become the propel ambition of their being. Like Hitler , they identify the regeneration of Germany with the realization of their dream. They declare war on the republic , on the Versailles Treaty , on the Communists , whose method of professional revolutionist , of propaganda and of force , they make their own. As Goebbels , who be to become Hitler 's Minister of Propaganda and Enlightenment , explain it in later year , `` Propaganda should not be decent -- it should be effective , '' and `` We fight with Marxist method , but we shall do thing good than the Marxists. '' Munich Beer-Cellar Putsch of 1923 Failed ; Imprisoned for Treason , He Was Soon Freed In line with this conception , there be a distinct class element in the organization Hitler set up in those early year of his activity. All the officer and leader be below the rank of major and captain. Army general , active and retired , regard him with suspicion because of his lowly origin and demagogic appeal to the middle classes. They join him openly after he have make an impression and show that his chance of success be not to be minimized. It be this distinction that be primarily responsible for the failure of Hitler 's first `` Putsch '' on Nov. 8 and 9 , 1923 , in Munich , know a `` the beer-cellar Putsch. '' Believing his `` Tag '' have arrive , Hitler force his way into an assembly of high-ranking Bavarian general , Ministers , Government official and politician in the rathskeller of the Munich City Hall on the evening of Nov. 8 and , brandish a revolver , fire a shot into the air , announce that his revolution have begun. He call for a march on Berlin and plead with those present to give him their blessing. They be take aback by this sudden move , for while they have pretend to encourage Hitler they know that the time for action be not ripe and have make him promise that he would do nothing reckless , and would not use violence that might endanger their own positions. His action be a violation of his promise. But his men be outside , and , yield to the importunity of General Ludendorff , who be among those present and with whom Hitler have make a working agreement , the Bavarian militarist and reactionary , head by von Kahr , Minister-President , and General von Lossow , Chief of the Bavarian Army , pretend to give their assent. The army and State official return to their office and promptly proclaim Hitler a traitor to the State. There follow a skirmish next day in the center of the city between several thousand of Hitler 's follower and the police , back by Lossow 's troops. Hitler be lead his men , wave his revolver , with Ludendorff beside him. Confident that the police would not fire upon see Ludendorff , Hitler march on. But the police fire nevertheless. The thousand of Nazis scatter in all direction , with Ludendorff alone march forward defiantly. He be arrested. Goering , who be also in the van , be wound , but escape and later flee the country. Hitler fell to the ground. Testimony at the trial that follow the affair be almost unanimous that Hitler be the first man to get up and run for cover. He dash toward his automobile and fled. He be catch , however , and try for treason. The sentence be five year ' imprisonment in a fortress. He serve only a few month and be parole , return to political activity. Rebuilt Power After Defeat After the fiasco of the Munich `` Putsch '' it seem a if Hitler 's cause be irretrievably lost. Throughout the country he be the butt of ridicule. The Government and it supporter felt he could no longer be a danger and that there be no use make a martyr of him by keep him in prison or take special measures. For some time Hitler appear to go into retirement. He be at work on `` Mein Kampf , '' begin in prison , but at the same time continue quietly at the task of rebuild his shattered group and develop the foundation for his mass movement. Within the next seven year he obtain a huge following , which come to number 3,000,000. It be build along military line , with army corp , regiment and companies. The men wear uniform and be subject to strict military discipline. This army consist of the Storm Troops , who wear brown shirt , and the Black Guards , represent more carefully picked formation , wear black shirts. These troop act a the Hitler police at public meeting and demonstration , attack Jews in the street of Munich , break up meeting of the opposition , stag street brawl with Communists and republican , beat up leader of other party and , in general , conduct a reign of terror with which the authority find it increasingly difficult to cope , in proportion a the political aspect of the Nazi movement gather strength. The nation be throw into a state of veritable civil war. The Socialists and Democrats take counter-measures by form their semi-military Reichsbanner , while the Communists , fight the Socialists and the republican , organize their Red-Front Fighters League. The authority in Bavaria , Thuringia and other German States openly side with the Hitlerites and facilitate their work. Soon the authority in Prussia begin to find it more and more difficult to cope with them. Thus the movement gather force a the final showdown be approaching. Powerful Elements Allied The same method that Hitler subsequently use against other nation -- intimidation , violent and abusive propaganda , coercion and terror -- be apply by the Nazis to their political opponent in Germany. With increased support from the army and industrialist , a gigantic propaganda machine be set up , which , back by million of throat , blare wild accusation in an unending stream against the Government and leader of other parties. Men like Gustav Stresemann , to say nothing of Socialists and Democrats , be denounce a traitor and hold up to public ignominy. Their life be in constant danger. An atmosphere of disorder be create with the intent of feed popular demand for a `` strong hand. '' All this be stag with tremendous dramatic effect by the able propaganda organization direct by Dr. Joseph Goebbels. In the meantime , through Captain Roehm , Hitler strengthen his tie with the Reichswehr , which come to realize more and more that he could not be resist without offend those million of the population upon whom the Reichswehr itself , seek the rearmament of Germany , have to depend. With a positive genius for political strategy of the kind necessary for his triumph , Hitler cement the structure of his movement by amalgamate the support of the most powerful element , the army and industrialist , with the enthusiasm and blind approval of his masses. Reich Army Generals Became His Captives ; His Political Power Increased After 1930 Already in those day , five year before his advent to power , the army general have become his prisoners. Those who , like General von Schleicher , later attempt to withdraw to an independent policy , pay for it with their life or with oblivion. But great a be his success in the year after the Munich putsch , it be not until 1930 that Hitler emerge definitely a a mighty political power in Germany. As late a 1928 , in the Reichstag election of that year , Hitler be able to obtain only twelve seats. But in the election hold in the fall of 1930 he receive 6,000,000 vote and capture 107 seats. It be one of the great upset in the turbulent history of the struggle German Republic. By this time Hitler have become the veritable idol not only of the active Nazi party member but of the mass who cast their ballot for him. The factor that give his movement this great impetus be the economic crisis that break over the world in 1929 and strike Germany with particular severity. Nearly 7,000,000 unemployed , add to the million of impoverished middle-class people and the hundred of thousand of professional and jobless intellectual , provide a setting make to order for Hitler. Crisis Spurred Extremism The crisis fed with unprecedented force the extremist element on the right and on the left. The army of Hitlerism and communism grow to proportion that make it increasingly difficult for the democratic republic to function. While profess uncompromising hostility to each other , the extreme Red and Brown element cooperate in the Reichstag , the Prussian Diet and other provincial Legislatures in undermine the power and stability of republican institutions. In 1932 the Hitlerites and Communists work together in stag a great transportation strike in Berlin. Electoral Victory Followed by Careful Steps To Consolidate His Position With Military After his electoral victory of 1930 Hitler move to consolidate his position with the Reichswehr. Appearing a a witness at a trial of three Reichswehr officer for further a fascist plot in the army , Hitler make his famous declaration in which he flatter the army and promise that when his party attain power the `` November criminal , '' those who make the German revolution and set up the Weimar Republic , would be exterminate , and that `` head would roll. '' In his testimony Hitler pay tribute to monarchist Germany , thus lull the monarchist and their army general into the belief that he plan to restore the old imperial order. Meanwhile , the government of Chancellor Heinrich Bruening , a Centrist leader , be fight desperately to stem the tide of economic and political dissolution. For many month Bruening be rule by decree base upon emergency law hastily pass by the Reichstag. Social service be radically curtail , tax be raise to a degree never know before , and popular discontent continue to mount in ever more threatening degree. There be talk of Hitler 's be take into the Government , but he persistently refuse , say he would not rule unless he be able to command all authority. At the same time , however , he declare that he would attain that power by `` legal '' mean only , that he have no intention of carry out a coup d'etat. In 1931 Hitler be receive by President von Hindenburg for the first time. Until that moment the age President have steadfastly refuse to meet the man whom he regard a an `` upstart. '' Hitler take good advantage of that interview. He appear to have win the President 's confidence by speak enthusiastically of the army and express his profound interest in it welfare , while pledge fealty to the age executive. The `` old man '' be move and subsequently try to bring about some basis of unity between Hitler and Bruening , against whom the Nazis have be wag a vitriolic campaign. Hitler Against Hindenburg The situation become more acute when Hitler , despite his flattering of Hindenburg , who , he have hop in vain , would call him to the Chancellorship , announce his own candidacy for the Presidency in the spring of 1932. In that campaign he intensify his agitation against the republic , the Versailles Treaty and the Government 's fulfillment policy. The whole world saw in the campaign a life-and-death struggle between the Nazis and the republic , a , indeed , it was. Hindenburg , run for a third term , emerge victorious , with 19,000,000 vote against 13,000,000 for Hitler. At the same time , however , Hitler register his great electoral triumph from the point of view of vote received. From then on he be , indeed , a power not to be ignored. The Bruening Cabinet fell shortly after the Presidential election and in the consequent Reichstag election of July 31 , 1932 , the Nazis increase the number of their seat to 229 , become the large single political party. Twice before the end of the year Hitler demand the Chancellorship , and each time Hindenburg refused. Hindenburg offer him a Cabinet post in a reconstituted Government but that be not enough for him. He be bid his time for the final blow at the republic. `` The Chancellorship or nothing ! '' he demanded. With the Reichstag unable to form a new Government because of the multiplicity of war party and the impossibility of agree on a coalition , it be again dissolve and new election be call for Nov. 6 , 1932. In that election the Hitlerites lose 2,000,000 vote , and it appear a if the Nazi tide be receding. What follow be a series of intrigue behind the scene that ultimately land Hitler in the Chancellorship. Bruening resign and Franz von Papen , a Catholic and a diplomat remember in the United States for his espionage and sabotage work during the First World War , be appoint in his place. Von Papen 's Ministry be know a `` the Cabinet of monocles. '' It have no basis of support in the Reichstag or in the population and be obviously a stop-gap. General von Schleicher , army chief , fear a union of the Hitlerites and Communists , against whom the army would be unable to stand , force von Papen 's resignation and himself assume the Chancellorship. Von Schleicher 's be `` the second Cabinet of monocles. '' Powerful element in the army and around von Papen , bent on help Hitler to the Chancellorship , refuse to support von Schleicher , however , who thereupon demand another dissolution of the Reichstag and a general election. Hindenburg refuse , and on the advice of his son , Oskar , and General von Blomberg , who subsequently become Minister of War in Hitler 's government , call Hitler to Schleicher 's place. This be on Jan. 30 , 1933. Hitler 's goal be attained. Upon call Hitler to the Chancellorship , Hindenburg instruct him to form a coalition Government with other party of the right. He be to observe the Constitution and rule only with the consent of the Reichstag. Hitler accept these term , with the proviso that new Reichstag election be to be call so he might once more seek the approval of the electorate. Hindenburg be please by this ostensible desire of Hitler to seek the support of the majority. In fact , he be delighted. The Reichstag be dissolve and in the campaign that ensue the Nazis unleash a flood of propaganda eclipse anything that have go before. With the machinery of Government in their hand and in command of the National Treasury , with the prestige of authority behind them , the Nazis be able to terrorize the electorate and so cripple the campaign activity of other party a to command the advantage. In vain do the Nationalists , head by Hugenberg , who suspect what be come , object to the dissolution of the Reichstag and the call of a new election. Having help Hitler to power , they now saw themselves completely outmaneuver by the Nazi chieftain. The Burning of the Reichstag One of the most shocking event in the history of the Nazi regime come on the evening of Feb. 27 , 1933 , a week before the elections. On that even the Reichstag building suddenly go up in flames. Part of the building collapsed. The fire , it be determine , be of incendiary origin , for a great deal of inflammable material be use to start the conflagration. Hitler announce that Communists be the incendiary , while Goering proclaim that documentary material to prove this charge would soon be make public. The burning of the Reichstag produce a profound impression. Masses of people believe the Communists be actually responsible. More than ever they look to Hitler a the savior of the nation , and , indeed , in the election a week later he win his great victory , but with only 43 percent of the vote cast. Later , at a trial conduct by the Nazi Government itself , a group of Communists accuse of start the fire be acquitted. Among them be the German Communist leader , Torgler , and the Bulgarian Communist , Dimitroff. The latter subsequently become the general secretary of the Communist International. The only man convict be Marinus van der Lubbe , a former Dutch Communist of distinctly queer mind , who be suppose to have be find in the Reichstag Building at the time of the fire. Widespread belief in Germany and abroad , on the basis of extensive investigation , be that the Hitlerites themselves set fire to the Reichstag , with van der Lubbe a their tool , to enhance their chance in the election. After the election Hitler proceed at full steam toward establishment of his dictatorship. Decrees issue by him and Goering , who be Minister-President for Prussia , vest the Government with dictatorial power. All Communist member of the Reichstag be order arrest , a be many Social Democrats. They be thus prevent from attend the Reichstag session call for March 23. Bills be introduce affirm and extend the Government 's absolute authority. Storm Troopers , display pistol , be station in the Reichstag , meeting now in the Kroll Opera House , fill the aisle between the member ' benches. `` Choose between peace and war ! '' shout Hitler to the terrorized representative of the people a he demand passage of the bills. The Social Democrats alone vote in the negative , but Hitler have his majority. He be now the `` legal '' dictator of Germany. On June 27 he throw Hugenberg , leader of the Conservatives , out of the Government and the Nazis rule supreme. Ostensibly , the dictatorial power wrest by Hitler from the Reichstag be for four year , until April 1 , 1937 , but actually it mean the end of democracy in Germany. On March 12 , 1933 , President von Hindenburg decree that the Nazi swastika , Hitler 's party emblem , should be incorporate in the black-white-red ensign a part of the official flag of Germany. With supreme power in his hand and million of Storm Troopers rule the country like an army of occupation , Hitler then proceed to destroy the last vestige of opposition. He abolish the Socialist , Communist and Democratic party , smash the trade union , suppress the entire opposition press , drive all Republicans from Government and civil service position , fill all available post with his party friend and supporters. Even the Nationalist party , the party of the conservative Junkers and industrialist , be dissolve , while the Centrist party , the great party of German Catholics , announce it own `` voluntary dissolution. '' Arrests and Terror Established Control ; Unity of Nazi Party and State Was Decreed There be mass arrest of Socialists , Communists , liberal , Catholics and others , many of whom be take to concentration camp , where they be severely beat and maltreat in brutal fashion. Some of the lead statesman and labor chieftain of Germany be among the prisoners. Many be murder by prison guard and Storm Troopers. At the same time a wave of anti-Semitic outrage spread all over the country. Decrees deprive Jews of civil right , of property and the right to work in various profession be issued. These find expression later in even severe form in the Nuremberg laws. On April 1 , 1933 , the Nazis carry out a one-day boycott on Jewish shop and store , place guard in front of the establishment and keep customer from entering. Jews be degrade to an inferior position in German society and virtually deprive of opportunity for existence. Throughout the world , Jews , support by Gentiles , counter with an economic boycott against Germany. This fail , however , to abate Hitler 's merciless campaign. One of the most shocking episode of the early period of the Hitler regime be the burning of the book of outstanding German and foreign authors. The book consign to funeral pyre in the street and public square of Berlin and other lead city represent the scientific , artistic and liberal heritage of the ages. Their burning be suppose to symbolize the break between the new Nazi Germany and what the Nazis characterize a the `` shameful '' past. The spectacle serve to emphasize the divorce of Nazi Germany from Western culture and civilization. On Dec. 1 , 1933 , a decree proclaim the `` unity of the Nazi party and the State. '' By this decree Hitler meant that all labor organization , youth organization , university , school , party and individual have lose their identity and be merge , so far a the Nazis be concern , in the State. But despite the great power already wield by him , his position be not yet entirely secure , not even in his own party , where the so-called left wing , lead by Captain Roehm , be manifest dissatisfaction over Hitler 's inclination to seek coordination of the State with the army a against the Storm Troopers , who regard themselves a the real force that carry the Nazi party to victory. Around Captain Roehm , who at one time aspire to supreme leadership of the party , have gather also Nazi element disappoint in Hitler 's failure to make good on his economic policy , policy akin to bolshevism , and his inclination to play politics with the big trust and industrialist , against whom he have rag in the day when he be denounce `` capitalism '' in effort to gain the ear of the workers. Fearing a revolt of the Storm Troopers , or rather of that group under Roehm that threaten a breach between the Reichswehr and the Government , Hitler announce in June , 1934 , that the Storm Troop organization would take a vacation for a month begin July 1. During that period it be intend to disband those formation consider unreliable and reorganize the entire Brownshirt army. This meet resistance and Roehm demand a showdown. On June 30 and the following day Roehm receive it. Under Hitler 's personal direction Roehm and his associate be murdered. Among the victim of the `` purge '' be also General von Schleicher. In a Reichstag speech on July 13 , Hitler seek to justify the purge a punishment for revolt against his authority and declare that the welfare of the German people require drastic action. He say the number kill be seventy-seven , but other source declare it exceed 1,000. Scarcely have the consternation cause by these execution die down when the nation be treat to another surprise. On Aug. 2 , 1934 , President von Hindenburg die on his estate at Neudeck , Prussia. He have be ill for some time. Within a space of a few hour , Hitler announce that he have take over the power of President in addition to those of Chancellor , thereby vest himself autocratic authority never wield by any German ruler. He proclaim himself Fuehrer and order a plebiscite for approval of the consolidation of the power of the President and Chancellor under that title. The plebiscite be hold on Aug. 19. The approval vote be overwhelming. From that moment Hitler embark upon his bold program in the domain of internal and foreign affair , a program that lead to the mass rearmament of Germany , make her once more a great military power , reoccupation and militarization of the Rhineland , the annexation of Austria , the occupation of Czechoslovakia , the seizure of Memel , Danzig and the Polish Corridor , the destruction of Poland , seizure of Denmark and Norway , the conquest of Holland , Belgium , Luxembourg , France and the Balkans , the invasion of Russia , and the long domination of the European Continent by Nazi Germany. It all end , however , in the confirmation of Napoleon 's dictum : `` Empires die of indigestion. '' With the fall of Hitler 's empire under the blow of Allied arm Germany fell to the low estate experience by any nation in modern times. That be Hitler 's contribution to the history of the `` master race. '' Hitler 's 'Intuition ' Strategy Helped Hasten Defeat of Germany on East and West Fronts History will determine Hitler 's exact degree of responsibility for the conduct of military operation during the war. It be know that he be frequently in disagreement with his general , who have be incline to urge great caution than he have exhibit on many critical occasions. He be encourage in his daring at crucial moment before the war by what appear to him the unwillingness or unreadiness of France and England to enter into collision with Germany. Thus it be at the time of the German invasion of the Rhineland , of the occupation of Austria and during the Czechoslovak crisis of 1938. It be probable that at the time of the diplomatic conflict with Poland , immediately precede the outbreak of hostility , Hitler felt that Britain and France would accept another Munich and yield to his demand on Poland. This may be regard by the future historian a his first great mistake. The long series of sweeping victory win by the German army in the early year of the war buttress his self-confidence , fan by the adulation heap upon him by his press , which picture him a a great military genius. After the fall of France in June , 1940 , he give vent to his exultation by dance an impromptu jig on the sidewalk of Paris , an act that the newsreel record for the entire world to see. His personal responsibility for the invasion of Russia in June , 1940 , be never denied. The great initial victory of the Germans in Russia be also attribute to his allege uncanny military talents. Less than two year later , however , it have become clear that his invasion of Russia , which cost Germany million of life , be another and perhaps the great of his errors. For a few month it have seem that his plan in Russia would be crown with success , but after the revers that compel the German retreat from Moscow he seek to cover up the setback by place the responsibility on the German general , remove Field Marshal Gen. Walther von Brauchitsch a Commander in Chief and announce that he would take personal charge of military operations. The development of the campaign in Russia lead subsequently to one disaster after another. The loss of a German army of 300,000 at Stalingrad in February , 1943 , be attribute directly to Hitler 's bad strategy in order the German force to hold on to the end when a timely retreat might have save that army. His declaration of war on the United States , in support of Japan and in agreement with Italy , on Dec. 11 , 1941 , mark another fateful day in his career. It be at least a grave a mistake a his invasion of Russia. He be apparently convinced that he would be able to bring Russia to her knee before the United States could make it power felt in Europe. Moreover , he believe that the United States would be too busy in the Pacific to take any decisive part in the European struggle. He be also report to believe that Japan would strike at Russia immediately after Germany 's declaration of war on this country and thus help drive Russia out of the war within a few week or months. Later he be report to have accuse Japan of treachery in not do so. As the military situation grow more ominous for Germany , Hitler sweep aside the authority of his general and announce that he would exercise complete direction of the war , guide by his `` intuition. '' He minimize the importance of the Allies ' landing in French North Africa in November , 1942 , and try to make his people believe that the invasion of Italy and the overthrow of Mussolini in July , 1943 , would likewise fail to prevent German victory. To buttress the tottering structure of the Italian front and repair the political blow dealt to the Axis in Italy he send a squad of parachutist in September of that year to rescue Mussolini from his confinement behind the Allies ' lines. The rescue enable Hitler to establish a puppet Mussolini government in northern Italy , which function until the entire Italian front collapse under Anglo-American blows. On April 28 , 1945 , Mussolini be capture by Italian Partisans and executed. At that very time Hitler be report dead or die or in Berlin. While Hitler 's public appearance decline in frequency with the progress of the war toward the climax of Germany 's defeat , his utterance against her opponent grow in violence and vituperation. He ridicule the Allies ' leader a `` military idiot '' and boast that their army would never be able to land on the Continent. Proof of the fatal effect of Hitler 's interference with his general in the conduct of military operation be obtain in document capture by the Allies shortly after their invasion of Normandy on June 6 , 1944. By the middle of 1944 it have become clear to German military and civilian leader that their country have lose the war and that the elimination of Hitler be essential to salvage what be possible from the wreck. A group of conspirator resolve to remove him from the scene. On July 20 , 1944 , he be painfully burn by a bomb. The assassination attempt be attribute to a band of general and other officers. Hundreds of person , include some distinguish military men involve in the conspiracy , be execute and the Government 's terror against `` defeatist '' be intensified. Hitler gradually disappear from view , although order and proclamation continue to be issue in his name. In the last few week of the war it have become apparent that he have lose control of the situation. Hitler Heartened by Deal in Munich Sudeten Grab Strengthened Illusion He Could Act With Entire Impunity The fortnight end with the cession of the Sudeten region to Germany , at the end of September , 1938 , and mark the prelude to the destruction of the Czechoslovak State , give Europe the most acute crisis it have experience up to that time since the end of the First World War. Encouraged by his triumph over France and England in the Sudeten dispute , Hitler occupy the whole of Czechoslovakia less than six month later and begin almost immediately to prepare for the showdown with Poland. The latter development bring him into arm conflict with the Western democracy and , ultimately , with the United States. The Sudeten crisis be precede by month of violent agitation by the Sudeten Nazis , under the leadership of Konrad Henlein. Originally the Henleinists demand only autonomy with the Czechoslovak State. Gradually , however , under incitement from Berlin , they expand their demand to a scope which make agreement with Prague extremely difficult , if not impossible. Moved by the desire to facilitate a settlement in the hope of prevent a European war , for which the great democracy be unprepared , Great Britain dispatch Lord Runciman to Czechoslovakia with instruction to bring about an adjustment that would avert German arm intervention. He labor in vain for many weeks. Finally , it appear that the Henleinists be determine to reject any plan of settlement except direct annexation of the Sudeten country to Germany. After fan their agitation and disorder to the point of civil war , Henleinists informed Lord Runciman that the Sudeten question be no long an internal one for Czechoslovakia. Hitler Talks Self-Determination At the same time , in an address at Nuremberg , Hitler frankly raise the question of `` self- determination '' for the Sudetens. It become clear that the conflict be one between Czechoslovakia and Germany. The situation reach a climax on Sept. 14 , when the concentration of German troop on the Czech frontier make Hitler 's invasion appear a matter of hours. In a move unprecedented in British diplomacy , Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain rush by airplane to Berchtesgaden for a conversation with Hitler in an effort to avert a military invasion of Czechoslovakia and the embroilment of England and France in war with Germany. Upon his return to London Mr. Chamberlain report to the House of Commons that he have no doubt that `` my visit alone prevent an invasion for which everything have be prepared. '' It appear that the sole hope of avert a conflict that threaten to engulf Europe consist in give Hitler what he demand , the incorporation of the Sudeten country into Germany. A plan for effect this transfer be then work out by French and British expert , delimit the new frontier. With this plan , to which Czechoslovakia be compel to assent , Mr. Chamberlain return to Germany. He again meet Hitler , this time at Godesberg. To Mr. Chamberlain 's surprise , Hitler be not satisfy with the plan of settlement. He simply hand to the Prime Minister a map indicate the territory he propose to occupy beyond the confines embody in the plan agree to by the French and the British , together with a memorandum , which Mr. Chamberlain characterize a an ultimatum , announce Hitler 's intention to march into Czechoslovakia on Oct. 1. Nor be Hitler willing to agree to a guarantee of the integrity of the remain part of Czechoslovakia. The last phase of the crisis follow quickly. It end in Munich. Hitler get what he want , and in some section of the territory in dispute even more. On Sept. 29 an agreement be sign end the crisis. Within the next few day , march in accordance with the condition agree upon at Munich , German army occupy the Sudeten country and such other strip of territory a have be cede by the Czechs. Shocked by these development , the world sit back to see whether peace actually have be saved. One immediate consequence of Munich be the resignation of the Czechoslovak Government , include President Eduard Benes. A new Government take over. The rest of the world hop that within it narrow territorial confines Czechoslovakia would find it possible to live in peace. A New Crisis Follows But a new crisis soon make itself manifest. It come from Slovakia , where the Hlinka party and Hlinka Guards , similar to Nazi Storm Troopers , agitate continually for autonomy , a demand which soon be extend to independence. German agent , active among the Slovaks , do their best to fan these sentiment , until finally , early in March , 1939 , the Prague Government take step to crush the Slovak movement. Slovak Premier Tiso , a tool of Germany , appeal to Hitler. Events then follow rapidly. On March 12 anti-Czech demonstration , provoke by German agent , break out at Bratislava , Slovak capital. Simultaneously the German press and radio unleash the usual blare of denunciation against the Czechs. Then Dr. Tiso , who meanwhile have be drive from office by the Czechs , take a plane for Berlin. He be receive with full military honors. He confer with Hitler. German troop be order to the Czech border. On March 13 , after a demand serve upon him by Hitler , President Hacha of Czechoslovakia summon a meeting of the Slovak diet , assemble at Bratislava. The diet proclaim the independence of Slovakia. Tiso become President. The Slovaks learn in astonishment that they be no long part of Czechoslovakia. Hungary move up into the Carpatho-Ukraine. On March 14 , on command from Berlin , President Hacha and Dr. Frantisek Chvalkovsky , Foreign Minister , arrive in Hitler 's capital. They meet with Hitler for three hours. There follow a communique declare that President Hacha have `` trustfully lay the fate of the Czech people and country into the hand of the Fuehrer of the German Reich. '' Already German troop be across the border , march into Bohemia on the excuse of restore `` order. '' The Czechs submit under threat of aerial bombardment of Prague. Hitler proclaim that Czechoslovakia `` have cease to exist. '' On the morning of the same day the German troop arrive in Prague , greet with jeer from the populace. With them come the Gestapo. German clerk take over the National Bank. In the late afternoon Hitler himself arrive in the Czech capital to sleep in the Hradschin Castle , seat of the Bohemian king , the Habsburgs and of the Czech democracy. On March 15 Moravia and Bohemia be annex to the Reich. They be make German protectorates. The Hitler swastika be raise over public buildings. Persecutions of Jews be unleashed. Mass arrest of prominent liberal began. From the Hradschin , Hitler issue a proclamation set forth the new status of the country. Bohemia and Moravia be proclaim to be German protectorate on the ground that they be once , many century ago , part of the Holy Roman Empire. Germany now need them for her `` lebensraum. '' Meanwhile , Slovakia request that she , too , be take under Germany 's rule a a protectorate. Hitler grant the `` request. '' Only one portion of Czechoslovakia thus remain outside the German Reich. This be the Carpatho-Ukraine , which Hungary now annexed , thus obtain a common frontier with Poland. Hitler permit the annexation because of the grow influence of the Nazis in Budapest. He be plan to do to Hungary what he do to Czechoslovakia. On March 16 , after a hurried tour of Bohemia and Moravia , Hitler ride into swastika- bedeck Vienna. Behind him , at Prague and in other Czechoslovak city , stay the Gestapo. Another wave of arrest , estimate at several thousand , followed. Many suicide of Jews and liberal be reported. The occurrence be a repetition of what happen with the annexation of Austria and the occupation of the Sudeten country. On March 18 Hitler name the `` Reich Protector '' for Bohemia and Moravia. He be Baron Konstantin von Neurath , former Nazi Foreign Minister , president of the Nazi secret Cabinet Council. Polish Invasion Climax of 6 Months Of German Bullying and Threats Browbeating Over Corridor and Danzig Began in March , 1939 , Followed by Charges of 'Oppression ' of Reich Nationals The Polish crisis , which serve a the immediate prelude to the second World War , begin to manifest itself not long after Hitler 's seizure of Czechoslovakia , follow the annexation of the Sudeten territory in September , 1938. The Poles have a non-aggression treaty with Hitler , conclude by the Fuehrer with Marshal Pilsudski , the Polish dictator , on Jan. 26 , 1934 , under which both nation be obligate not to go to war over any dispute that might arise between them. The treaty be for ten years. The signing of this treaty bring a cooling in the relation between Poland and her old ally , France. Polish policy thereupon seek to balance itself between Germany and France , with Poland govern by the obvious desire to keep out of any embroilment between the two. On Sept. 23 , 1938 , Hitler declare in a speech in Berlin that `` Germany have no further territorial ambition in Europe. '' With the ostensible aim of reassure Poland , he add that his 1934 nonaggression pact with Warsaw would `` bring about lasting and continuous pacification. '' In November he again stress this idea , and in January , 1939 , he praise the Pact of Warsaw in an address before the Reichstag. In that month Foreign Minister Joseph Beck of Poland visit the Fuehrer at Berchtesgaden. It be report that they have reach an agreement on various question then under discussion between the two countries. Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop return Beck 's visit by go to Warsaw. But the end of the idyll be approaching. In March Hitler seize Bohemia and Moravia after reduce Slovakia to the role of a vassal of Berlin , and the campaign against Poland began. Abuse of Germans Alleged The `` heat '' be first turn on the Danzig issue. In accordance with the practice the Nazis have use so effectively in Austria and in the Sudeten region , they launch a campaign of propaganda charge mistreatment of Germans by Poles in territory hold by Germany before 1918. At the same time a drive be inaugurate for the annexation of Danzig , the municipal administration of which have in the meantime come under Nazi rule , with Poland , however , still retain the right she hold there under the Danzig statute. It become clear that Hitler be about to embark upon a new adventure , in violation of the statement he have make as late a Sept. 12 , 1938 , when he declare , refer to his treaty with Pilsudski : `` When in Poland a great statesman and patriot be ready to conclude a pact with u we immediately accept the treaty recognize our respective frontier a inviolable. This treaty have do more for peace than all the chattering in Geneva put together. '' Frontiers Became 'Unbearable' In 1939 the frontier , which Hitler have declare `` inviolable '' less than a year before , become `` unbearable. '' From March , 1939 , the relation between Germany and Poland begin to deteriorate rapidly. The situation in Danzig grow tense. The controlled German press set up a hue and cry about Polish `` oppression. '' On April 28 , 1939 , Hitler address a memorandum to Warsaw announce the abrupt abrogation of the 1934 nonaggression treaty. There be no provision in the pact for such unilateral action. Soon Nazi arm band begin to seep into Danzig a preparation be begin by both side for armed action. For five month Poland live in a state of semi-mobilization , and by the time the crisis reach an acute stage in August million of men have be mobilize on both sides. The German press intensify it campaign against Polish `` atrocity , '' demand the unconditional surrender of Danzig and of the Polish Corridor , where the inhabitant have for century be 90 per cent Polish. The subsequent event that lead to the advance of the German troop into Poland on Sept. 1 , 1939 , and the ensue declaration of war by England and France against Germany in defense of Poland and , a late event show , also in defense of Russia , develop a follow : On Aug. 8 Hitler summon to Berchtesgaden Albert Foerster , Danzig Nazi leader , for final instructions. On Aug. 11 Italian Foreign Minister Ciano meet Hitler at Berchtesgaden , where , it be believe , the Fuehrer inform him of his determination to march on Poland if she remain unyielding. On Aug. 15 official in Berlin let it be know that `` any attempt to minimize the significance of the Italo-German conversation will be a fatal illusion. '' On Aug. 16 Hitler receive the Hungarian Foreign Minister , and German source declare that Berlin would insist upon unconditional surrender of Danzig and a corridor through the Corridor to connect Germany with East Prussia. On Aug. 18 German troop occupy Slovakia , a move interpret a part of the military plan for the encirclement of Poland. On Aug. 19 mobilization of the Slovak Army be announce to be incorporate in the German forces. On Aug. 20 come the announcement of the conclusion of a commercial pact between Germany and Soviet Russia. On Aug. 21 Berlin spring it great coup with the announcement that Germany and Soviet Russia have conclude a nonaggression treaty. Poland Left Alone in East On Aug. 23 Foreign Minister von Ribbentrop arrive in Moscow to sign the treaty. It be sign within twelve hours. Poland be leave alone to fight her battle in the east. By the treaty Soviet Russia obligate herself not to come to the assistance of Poland in the event of war with Germany. Hitler intensify his pressure on Warsaw. On Aug. 24 Hitler confer in Berlin with Sir Nevile Henderson and `` leave no doubt in the mind of the British Ambassador that the obligation assume by the British Government ( to come to the defense of Poland ) could not induce Germany to renounce the defense of her vital interests. '' Hitler let it be know that his army be ready for action. It be also report , two day later , that Hitler have tell Henderson that Britain must abandon her alliance with Poland. On Aug. 25 Hitler take another step toward the annexation of Danzig by proclaim Foerster his Staathalter. War seem imminent. On Aug. 27 Hitler address a `` man-to-man '' letter to Premier Edouard Daladier of France in which he assure the Premier of his love for peace but insist upon his `` minimum demand , '' Danzig and the Corridor. The same day Berlin announce the cancellation of the Nuremberg Nazi party `` peace congress , '' set for early in September , and rush completion of German mobilization. On Aug. 28 Great Britain inform Hitler through Sir Nevile Henderson that she be determine to stand by her obligation to defend Poland , but at the same time urge direct negotiation between Warsaw and Berlin. France likewise reiterate her determination to defend Poland. On Aug. 29 Hitler reply to London , insist upon the satisfaction of Germany 's `` minimum demand '' before any negotiation could take place. Great Britain Stands Pat On Aug. 30 Great Britain reiterate her position , and again appeal for negotiations. Hitler 's answer be an order set up a council for the `` defense of the realm. '' On Aug. 31 Danzig announce it rejoining of the Reich. Ribbentrop summon Henderson and read to him a sixteen-point program for settlement of the Polish dispute. The same day Warsaw disclose that the program have never be submit to the Polish Government. On Sept. 1 German troop move into Poland. Broken Promises Fill Hitler Record Pledges Repeatedly Flouted a Fuehrer Pursued His Career of Conquest Hitler 's record of broken promise stand out a one of the conspicuous feature of his career. When he first come into power the question of most immediate concern to Europe be that of the Saar Basin , the part of Germany hold by France and administer by the League of Nations in accordance with the Versailles Treaty for fifteen years. After that period the people of the Saar be to vote on whether they desire to return to Germany , become part of France or remain under the League. Speaking in the Reichstag on Jan. 30 , 1934 , on the Saar issue , which be become acute because of the approach plebiscite , Hitler say : `` After the solution of this question , the German Government be willing and determine to accept in it innermost soul , as well a external formulation , the Pact of Locarno. '' March Into Rhineland On March 1 , 1935 , after the plebiscite , in which Germany receive more than 90 per cent of the vote , sovereignty over the region be return to Germany. One year later German troop march into the Rhineland zone create by the Treaty of Versailles and guarantee against remilitarization by the Locarno pact enter into voluntarily by Germany in 1925. To reassure Europe a to his purpose in march into the Rhineland , Hitler declare : `` I have remove the question of the everlasting European revision of frontier from the atmosphere of public discussion in Germany. '' He give this assurance in a speech in the Reichstag : `` After three year I believe I can today regard the struggle for German equality a over. We have no territorial demand to make in Europe. '' Speaking again in the Reichstag , this time on the Austrian question , on May 21 , 1935 , Hitler say : `` Germany have neither the wish nor the intention to mix in internal Austrian affair or to annex or unite with Austria. '' On Jan. 30 , 1937 , he buttress this promise by say : `` With this declaration I wish to announce that the era of so-called surprise have be concluded. '' Within a little more than a year after these declaration Hitler march into Austria and incorporate the country in the German Reich. A week after German troop have drive into Austria Hitler declare : `` The eternal dream of the German people have be fulfilled. Germany want only peace. She do not want to add to the sorrow of other nations. '' Conquest After Conquest The conquest of Austria be barely two month old when Hitler raise the question of Czechoslovakia by mobilize and threaten to invade her. On that occasion the Czechs counter with their own mobilization , and Hitler appear to hold back his blow. But in September , 1938 , he raise the question of the annexation of the Sudeten country to Germany , after instigate , a he have in Austria , a state of civil war in that region a an excuse for intervention. This crisis end in the Munich pact of Sept. 30 , 1938 , by which Germany obtain the Sudeten and other German region of Czechoslovakia. Referring to a speech make by Hitler in Berlin after he have go to see him at Berchtesgaden , the visit that lead to the Munich pact , Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain say : `` He tell me privately , and last night he repeat publicly , that after the Sudeten German question be settle , that be the end of Germany 's territorial claim in Europe. '' Less than six month after these word be speak , Hitler march his troop into Czechoslovakia and reduce the entire country to a German protectorate. On Jan. 26 , 1934 , Hitler conclude a ten-year non-aggression treaty with Poland. Under that pact war be absolutely exclude a a mean of solve any question that might arise between the two country and both nation pledge themselves to maintain the status quo a between the two. On April 28 , 1939 , follow an address foreshadow the action , Hitler send a note to Poland abrogate the treaty and make demand that lead on Sept. 1 , 1939 , to the march of German troop into Poland and the unleashing of the Second World War. At the time of the abrogation of the treaty with Poland Hitler also inform Great Britain that the naval treaty he have conclude with her on June 13 , 1935 , limit the German navy to 35 per cent of the British , be null and void. The treaty provide for no such unilateral action. Hitler 's sudden invasion of Russia in June , 1941 , in violation of his pact with Stalin , be another breach of faith , one that cost him dearly. Fuehrer Ascetic in Personal Life Celibate and a Vegetarian , He Neither Smoked Tobacco Nor Drank Liquor Adolf Hitler be an ascetic , a celibate and a vegetarian and he neither smoke nor drank. From his early youth he be an eccentric. At the age of 16 he suffer from lung trouble and his passionate ambition to become a great historical figure impel him to take good care of himself. Careful diet be his deliberately chosen method. He lead a simple life even after he have attain to the dizzy height of Fuehrer and Chancellor. He have three residence : the official residence in the Chancellor 's Palace in Berlin , a modest apartment in Munich and his chalet near Berchtesgaden. In Berlin he maintain only five servant , carefully choose from among old party comrades. One of these , Brigadier Schreck , be his chauffeur. The others include his chef , pick for the post because he know how to cook Hitler 's favorite vegetarian dish and could be rely upon to guard against poisoning ; his major-domo and aide-de-camp. The Fuehrer like to drive fast in an open automobile and be an aviation enthusiast. When drive he prefer to sit in front with the chauffeur. Had a Passion for Neatness His favorite costume consist of black trouser , khaki coat and neat tie. His only decoration be the Iron Cross he win in the First World War. He dislike jewelry but have a passion for be neat. Hitler never go shopping and have all the thing he want to purchase sent to him at the Chancellery. He suffer from insomnia , and for this reason have no regular hour for go to bed or rising. Luncheon be always promptly at 2 P. M. , however. He entertain modestly , the guest usually be party official and leader from the provinces. He do not expect his guest to eat his vegetarian food , however , and serve their favorite meat and fish dishes. Hitler dislike festive banquet but enjoy eat out frequently , particularly when in Munich , where he have several haunts. He love onion soup , prepare accord to his own recipe. When in Nuremberg , attend the spectacular Nazi party congress , he stay in a modest apartment at the Deutscher Hof , a second-rate hostelry. He shrewdly eschew personal extravagance a politically unwise. He be fond of film and like to give private showing of favorite screen production before guest at the Chancellery after dinner. He enjoy look at newsreel of himself and entertain his guest also with some foreign films. On such occasion he would seat himself on the floor in the dark and appear to be have a good time. Although he become the idol of many million he have no talent for real friendship or intimacy. He have few woman friends. His feminine associate , too , be choose for political purposes. His only passion be politics. Women of the people do not rally to him until after he have achieve a large degree of prominence. He never become a hero to his valet because he do not have any. Long before housemaid flock to his support , his feminine supporter be woman of the upper class. But he could be very charm to woman when he choose and , after achieve power , even learn the art of kiss their hand in the salon manner. He be not without humor but of a rather heavy sort. Although he have acquire considerable poise , he be violent in argument. Hitler make what may be call his social debut in the early day of his career in the drawing room of Frau Katherine Hanfstaengl in Munich , but his great woman friend be Frau Victoria von Dirksen , widow of a millionaire who build the Berlin subway. She spend a large portion of her husband 's fortune in help to finance Hitler 's propaganda. Although in late year she fell out with the party , he continue to regard her a a favorite and for a long time regularly take tea with her at her Berlin home every fortnight. As a youth Hitler develop a passion for Wagnerian music. In Munich , where he lay the foundation of his movement , he meet Frau Winifred Wagner , widow of Siegfried Wagner , the composer 's son. Frau Wagner become an enthusiastic Hitlerite and this , together with Hitler 's devotion to Wagner , make them fast friends. At one time there be report that they would marry , but these be denied. Perhaps because of these report Hitler draw away from her. To Frau Wagner , however , he owe much of his early financial aid. She be not wealthy , but because of her social position she be able to raise considerable sum for the Nazi movement when Hitler most need money. Another woman who have his favor be Leni Riefenstahl , a former movie actress , whom he entrust with the task of edit the propaganda film `` The Triumph of Will , '' the photographing of the 1935 Olympic Games in Berlin and various Nazi meeting and spectacles. English Women His Friends There be also two English woman who be his friend , the daughter of Lord Redesdale -- the Hon. Diana Freeman-Mitford , a supporter of Sir Oswald Mosley 's Blackshirts in England , and the Hon. Unity Freeman-Mitford. The latter be Hitler 's favorite and they often lunch together in Munich. Frau Victoria Ursuleac , a member of the Berlin Opera , also enjoy Hitler 's friendship. Hitler like well-dressed woman and admire French styles. On one occasion he scotch a movement launch by Frau Joseph Goebbels , wife of the Minister of Propaganda and Enlightenment , for a boycott on French dress models. Hitler detest even clothes and wear full dress only on rare visit to the opera. Though merciless to political opponent , he be kind to animals. A militarist , he be sicken by the sight of blood. A Wagnerian mystic , he love spectacle of heroic and death. He be simple , Spartan and vain to the point of megalomania. While he take good care of his loyal lieutenant he have no real loyalty to anyone , and in his party he know how to thwart opposition by set friend against one another. His enemy he suppress ruthlessly. While endow with vast energy , he be a procrastinator in minor matter and be give to hasty decision on important things. He talk with great rapidity. An interviewer usually find that it be himself who be be interviewed. While pretend to listen to advice , Hitler always make his own decisions. He read little , although he possess a library of 6,000 volumes. His outburst of furious energy would be precede by long period of indolence. When rouse to anger he become dangerous , even for his close associates. He brook no contradiction. His neurasthenia frequently drive him to tear and hysterics. Hitler be truly devote to music not only a an art but a a tonic for his nerves. His favorite be Schubert , Beethoven and Wagner. One of the many disappointment of his youth be his rejection by the Vienna Academy when he apply for admittance to study art and architecture. He find satisfaction for this rebuff a leader of the Nazi party when he supervise the plan for the Brown House in Munich , party headquarters. He also interfere much in the designing of new museum and Government buildings. To show his appreciation of thing beautiful he like to make gift of expensively bind book and object of art. When the Chancellor 's Palace in Berlin be be redecorate for him he superintend the work in several modernistic room and pay special attention to the installation of Nordic mythological tapestry depict Wotan create the world. Munich His Favorite City His Munich flat , which he redecorate in 1935 in his favorite baroque blue , white and gold , be in an unfashionable section of the Prinzregentenstrasse. To this flat he would retire when he want privacy. Munich be his favorite city , not only because of it architectural beauty but because it be there that his career be launched. The apartment be run by a half-sister , Frau Angella Raubal , who , until her marriage to a Professor Martin Hammisch , also supervise Haus Wachenfeld , Hitler 's mountain retreat at Berchtesgaden overlook a magnificent vista in the Bavarian Alps , at a point from which the Fuehrer could look across into his native Austria .