September 27 , 1945 OBITUARY Bela Bartok Dies In Hospital Here BY THE NEW YORK TIMES Bela Bartok , Hungarian composer , die yesterday morning at the West Side Hospital after a long illness at the age of 64. One of the most important composer of modern music , he be also an outstanding specialist in musical folklore and a teacher of wide repute. He be a leading spirit of the `` revolutionary '' generation of musician bear in the early Eighties and rank a the chief and most representative Hungarian composer of his epoch. Bartok be bear March 25 , 1881 , at Nagyszentmiklos , in the Hungarian district of Torontal , now in Yugoslavia. His father be director of the school of agriculture in that community and his mother a schoolteacher. When his father die , Bartok , who be 8 at the time , already have begin to compose. His mother give him his first piano lesson and his progress be so rapid that at 10 he make his initial public appearance a composer-pianist. From 1893 to 1899 he be in Pressburg , where he study piano and composition with Lazlo-Erkel and Janos Batkai and write a number of unpublished work influence by Brahms. In 1899 Bartok enter the Royal Academy of Music in Budapest , remain there until 1903 a a pupil of Janos Koessler in composition and Istvan Thoman in piano. While at the academy he come under the spell of the music of Liszt , Wagner and Richard Strauss , but his `` Kossuth '' symphony , write the year he leave the school , be Hungarian in essence. Collected Folk Music Bartok , in cooperation with Zoltan Kodaly , begin collect Hungarian folk music soon after he leave the Academy. Their first joint publication , `` Hungarian Folk Songs for Voice and Piano , '' appear in 1906 , be follow by Bartok 's own `` Twenty Songs '' and `` Szekely Ballads. '' His research be extend to the folk music of Slovakian , Rumanian and Turkish language group , both a collector and a a serious scientific investigator. In all he gather more than 6,000 folk song of Magyar , Slovak , Rumanian and Transylvanian origin and later , in 1913 , bring back 200 Arab melody from a visit to Biskra , Algeria. The research in the field of the indigenous music of his people not only result in his volume `` Hungarian Folk Music , '' the standard work on the subject , but also permanently influence his creative output. In 1907 Bartok be make Professor of Piano at the Royal Academy of Music in Budapest and in 1911 he and Kodaly found the New Hungarian Music Society. But his talent a composer be not recognize in Hungary until the performance in Budapest of his ballet , `` The Wooden Prince , '' and his opera , `` Prince Bluebeard 's Castle , '' in 1917 , and the premiere there of his Second string quartet the next year. Influenced by Debussy Shortly after his appointment to the academy he meet Debussy , and a a result of this contact become more radical in his compositions. From then on he abandon romanticism and become one of the first to write in the `` neo-classic '' manner. Simultaneously , he begin to use the ancient scale he discover in Hungarian folk music , and in so do find himself bring new harmony into existence that lead to his adoption of a twelve-tone scale capable of all sort of new harmonic combination , but he never become an atonalist. Bartok come to the United States for the first time in December , 1927. He make his American debut , Dec. 22 , 1927 , with the Philharmonic Orchestra , under Willem Mengelberg , in Carnegie Hall , when he be hear a soloist in his own `` Rhapsodie , '' Op. 1 , instead of his First piano concerto originally scheduled. The latter work receive it American premiere with the composer a soloist at a concert of the Cincinnati Symphony , under Fritz Reiner , in the same hall in February , 1928 , and that same month Bartok be hear with his compatriot Joseph Szigeti , the violinist , in a concert devote largely to his own composition present by the Pro-Musica Society at the Gallo Theatre. Later that year he return to Hungary. Appeared Here With Wife A concerto for violin and clarinet , write in Hungary by Bartok for Mr. Szigeti and Benny Goodman , be hear for the first time with those two artist a soloist in 1939 in Carnegie Hall. The next year Bartok return to this country and make his first appearance in Washington , D.C. , at a concert in the Congressional Library feature the American premiere of his `` Rhapsody , '' No. 1 , for violin and piano. He participate in a program give in his honor by the League of Composers at the Museum of Modern Art , April 24 , 1940. Shortly thereafter he go to Europe , return to New York in October , 1940 , with his wife Ditta Pasztory Bartok , with whom he be hear in the world premiere of his `` Music for Two Pianos and Percussion , '' in Town Hall on Nov. 3 of that year. Later in the month the two artist give a two-piano recital in the same auditorium. It be also in November , 1940 , that Columbia University confer the degree of Doctor of Music upon the composer and commission him to transcribe the vast Millman Parry collection of Yugoslav folk music recordings. Bartok be a prolific composer. His stage work , which suffer from unfortunate libretto , but contain some of his fine music , comprise the one-act opera , `` Prince Bluebeard 's Castle , '' and two mime-ballets , `` The Wooden Prince '' and `` The Miraculous Mandarin. '' For orchestra he write two Suites , a `` Dance Suite , '' two set of `` Hungarian Folk Songs , '' `` Two Portraits , '' `` Two Pictures '' and other work , as well a the `` Music for Strings , Percussion and Celesta , '' for small orchestra. His chamber music comprise six string quartet and several unpublished works. He also compose a large amount of piano music and write a large number of song , many base on Hungarian folk melody , and choral works. Some 450 song from his collection be publish , as well a his two books. From 1940 until his death Bartok live in New York. He add several extensive work to his long list of composition , include a violin sonata compose last winter for Yehudi Menuhin and not yet played. Bartok make his last appearance before the public Jan. 21 and 22 , 1943 , when he and his wife be the soloist in a new orchestral arrangement of the `` Music for Two Pianos and Percussion '' a a concerto. According to As Ember , New York Hungarian newspaper , the American Control Commission in Hungary recently notify the Foreign Minister that it have give permission to Bartok to return to Budapest. Bartok recently be elect a member of the Hungarian Parliament. Besides his widow , he leave two son , Bela and Peter. A funeral service will be hold tomorrow at 2 P.M. at Universal Chapel , Lexington Avenue and Fifty-second Street. Burial will be in Ferncliff Cemetery , Hartsdale , N.Y .