July 28 , 1946 OBITUARY Gertrude Stein Dies In France , 72 By Wireless to THE NEW YORK TIMES PARIS , July 27 -- Gertrude Stein , famed woman writer and one of the most controversial figure of American letter , die at 6:30 o ' clock tonight ( Paris time ) at the American Hospital in Neuilly , a suburb of Paris. Her age be 72. She have be suffer from cancer and have be in the hospital about a week. PARIS , July 27 ( U.P. ) -- Death come to Miss Stein one hour after she have enter a coma. Doctors work for an hour to revive her. At the bedside be Miss Alice B. Toklas , Miss Stein 's nephew and niece and a physician identify only a Colonel Rogers. The body be remove to the hospital 's chapel. Funeral arrangement will be delay until after the writer 's relative in the United States have be notified. [ Writers say recently that Miss Stein have plan to return to the United States in the autumn , accord to The Associated Press. ] Miss Stein 's nurse declare that the author have be seriously ill for a considerable time , suffer from a run-down condition. The first indication that she have take a turn for the bad , the nurse add , be a telephone call from the hospital this afternoon say that her condition have become suddenly grave. Emphasized Sound in Language Although Gertrude Stein could and do write intelligibly at time , her distinction rest on her use of word apart from their conventional meaning. Her emphasis on sound rather than sense be illustrate by her oft-quoted `` A rise be a rise be a rose. '' Devotees of her cult profess to find her restore a pristine freshness and rhythm to language. Medical authority compare her effusion to the ranting of the insane. The Hearst press inquire , `` Is Gertrude Stein not Gertrude Stein but somebody else living and talk in the same body ? '' Sinclair Lewis conclude she be conduct a racket. Born Feb. 3 , 1874 , in Allegheny , Pa. , the daughter of Daniel Stein , who be vice president of a street railway , and Amelia Keyser Stein , she spend her infancy in Vienna and Paris , and her childhood in Oakland and San Francisco. She be , in her own word , `` an omnivorous reader , go through whole library , read everything. ? Pupil of William James From 1893 to 1897 she be a student at Radcliffe College , where `` like almost everyone else I want to be a writer but nobody encourage me much. '' Miss Stein be , however , a favorite pupil of William James and specialize in psychology. When she sit down to write her final examination for him , she be tire , have be to the opera the night before. `` Dear Professor James , '' she write on her paper , `` I be so sorry but I do not feel a bit like an examination paper in philosophy today. '' William James reply by postcard : `` Dear Miss Stein , I understand perfectly how you feel. I often feel like that myself. '' He give her the high mark in the course. During this period she publish in a psychological journal a paper record her experiment in spontaneous automatic writing -- the method , accord to some critic , by which her book be produced. She then study medicine four year at Johns Hopkins University , specialize in brain anatomy , but take no degree , explain that she be interested only in her study and that she be bore by tests. After a year in London study Elizabethan prose , she remove in 1903 to Paris with Alice B. Toklas , a San Francisco friend , who be to be her lifelong secretary-companion. Knew Famous Artists On her arrival in Paris , she meet the artist , Picasso , Matisse and Bracque. Possessed of an independent income , she become a patron of these men , be influence by them and hand along that influence to young artist and writer , among them Ernest Hemingway and the late Sherwood Anderson. Her hobby be collect the work of painter before they be famous. She claim to have discover Picasso , Juan Gris , Matisse and Bracque and introduce them to the French and American public. Her shrewd connoisseurship be indicate by the fact that her collection of painting be worth more than ten time what she pay for it. Her first book , `` Three Lives , '' 1909 , write in completely intelligible style , contain realistic tender portrait of two servant girl and a more difficult study of the unhappy love affair of a Negress. Carl Van Vechten , the critic , class it with the great book of the age in his introduction to the Modern Library edition , which be a best seller. Also write with more or less lucidity be her two biography of herself , entitle , `` The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas '' and `` Everybody 's Autobiography , '' contain chitchat about Paris artist and American writer in Paris , with discourse on celebrity , art , literature , history and life in general and the genius of Gertrude Stein in particular. During the first World War , Miss Stein drive a Ford down the line disturb supply to soldier and visit hospitals. Her publication include `` Making of Americans , '' 1926 , and `` Prayers and Portraits , '' 1934 , the latter described a `` unadulterated `` Steinese '' and compare by John Chamberlain in The New York Times to `` the Chinese water torture ; it never stop and it be always the same. '' Another critic once remark that Miss Stein `` elect to write in a manner which much of the time make her concrete mean inaccessible to the reader. . . . She push abstraction to it farthest limits. '' Clifton Fadiman dismiss Miss Stein a `` the Mamma of Dada. '' Wrote Opera Libretto Perhaps the peak of her publicity be reach in 1934 when she come here on a lecture tour , and her opera `` Four Saints in Three Acts , '' with music by Virgil Thompson , contain the famed line `` Pigeons on the grass ala , '' as significant a the rest of the libretto , be produced. As a lecturer , Miss Stein demonstrate her genius for self-press agentry by at once limit her audience to 500 because she `` do n't wish to be star at a a marvel. '' Her lecture go off well. Her audience , if addle and bewilder by her pronouncement , be also entertain by this roughly dress woman , with close-cropped hair that set off her strong features. Among her most recent work be `` Paris , France , '' `` a love letter to France , '' and `` Wars I Have Seen , '' her experience in occupied France until the arrival of the Americans. For this last book , her publisher , Bennett Cerf , have to abandon his amiable custom of remark on the blurb of a Stein book that he have no idea what it be about. For in it she forget herself and her genius in follow life in a French village from day to day in defeat and after liberation. She write the book in Culoz beyond Grenoble , under the nose of the Nazis whom she lodge at their insistence. She have to walk seven and a half mile to town for food during this period. Writing of this book , Francis Hackett , Times reviewer , conclude , `` Hers be a powerful personality , but it need the American Army to liberate her. '' Her Talks With U.S. Soldiers In June , 1945 , write in The New York Times magazine section , Miss Stein analyze the moral and intellectual fate of the young men of this generation. She base her comment on the frequent talk she have have in Paris with American soldier and conclude that they would not become dissolute in the manner of the generation that live in the wake of the first World War. Miss Stein 's late book be publish only a week ago under the title `` Brewsie and Willie '' and be describe by Charles Poore in last Sunday 's Times Book Review a a book about what the GI 's talked of when they gather around her foot in Paris. `` * * * or rather , '' Mr. Poore remark , `` what she would like to think they talk about , for Miss Stein be a very powerful character and thing be apt to change dizzily when translate into Steinese. '' A new Gertrude Stein play , `` Yes Is for a Very Young Man , '' which the author have describe , despite the title , a `` a perfectly simple , straightforward play , completely understandable , '' be schedule to be present on Broadway this fall. Apparently base in some degree on her `` Wars I Have Seen , '' the play will deal with the emotional conflict which divide France and much of the world during the heyday of fascism. Her other book include `` Geography and Plays '' ( 1922 ) , `` How to Write '' ( 1931 ) , `` The World Is Round '' ( 1939 ) , and `` Ida '' ( 1941 ) .