April 22 , 1946 OBITUARY Lord Keynes Dies of Heart Attack By Wireless to THE NEW YORK TIMES LONDON , April 21 -- John Maynard Lord Keynes , distinguish economist , whose work for restore the economic structure of a world twice shatter by war bring him world-wide influence , die of a heart attack today at his home in Firle , Sussex. His age be 63. Exhausted by the strain of the International Monetary Conference at Savannah , Ga. , he return to Britain a fortnight ago , tire and ill. Lady Keynes be with her husband at his death. Lord Keynes be ill when he return in December from the financial talk in the United States on a loan to Britain. Noted a a political and social economist who influence both specialist and general public , his name be link with that of Adam Smith. He be a protagonist of the theory that make full employment the override aim of financial policy. Active in Many Fields His genius a a prodigy of intellect express itself in many other sphere of activity. He be a Parliamentary orator of high order , a historian and devotee of music , the drama and the ballet. While at Cambridge University , he found an art theatre there because he want to go to a good theatre. A successful farmer , he be an expert on development of grass feeding stuffs. He also be a book collector , and his collection of unpublished Newton manuscript on alchemy be particularly noteworthy. Happiest in the company of artistic person , Lord Keynes at one period be the center of a literary circle that be know a `` Bloomsbury '' -- Lytton Strachey , Virginia Woolf and their intimate friends. Among the many who pay tribute to him tonight be Prime Minister Attlee , who say : `` I have hear with very great regret of the sudden death of Lord Keynes. The country lose in him it most brilliant economist and a man of distinction in many and varied field of activity. His service to the state a an adviser on economics and financial matter and a a negotiator be invaluable. I lose in him a personal friend of great charm. '' The Times of London will say tomorrow in a long editorial that the `` death of Lord Keynes yesterday deprive the world of one of it great men. '' Book Caused Controversy Lord Keynes first win public attention through his resignation from the British Treasury 's mission to the Paris Peace Conference and his subsequent prediction that the Treaty of Versailles would prove more harmful to the nation dictate it than to Germany. The reason for his opposition be set forth in a book , `` The Economic Consequences of the Peace , '' publish in 1919 , and include his premise that the reparation clause be too severe and that other measure in the treaty be equally unwise. The book create a storm of controversy but be so widely in demand that it run five edition the first year and be translate into eleven languages. Lord Keynes be not again associate with the British Government in any official capacity until the spring of 1940 , by which time much of what he have prophesy have come true. After he have visit the United States in 1933 , the British press report that his idea have `` captivate Mr. Roosevelt. '' His place in economics and finance be formally recognize in 1942 with publication of the King 's Birthday Honors name him first Baron of Tilton. Vice President of World Bank Lord Keynes have participate in the first meeting of the governor of the World Bank and Fund , set up under the Bretton Woods agreement , in Savannah , and be elect a vice president of the World Bank and Fund. Just before that he have be much in the news a British negotiator of the loan agreement , now pending in the United States Senate. Born on June 5 , 1883 , in Cambridge , Lord Keynes enter government service at the age of 23 , but continue his association with Cambridge University throughout his life and become High Steward of the city of Cambridge. His father , John Neville Keynes , be Registrary Emeritus of the university and his mother be a one-time Mayor of Cambridge. Lord Keynes ' first position be a a minor official in the Revenue Department of the India Office , where he remain two year , then return to Cambridge to teach and in 1912 become editor of The Economic Journal , a post he hold throughout his life. In 1915 he join the Treasury Department , remain until his resignation. In 1913-14 he have serve a a member of the Royal Commission on Indian Finance and Currency. His official designation at the peace conference be a the principal representative of the Treasury and Deputy for the Chancellor of the Exchequer on the Supreme Economic Council. The sensation create by Lord Keynes ' book , `` The Economic Consequences of the Peace , '' be due in large part to it lucid literary style as well a to it revelation of the inside story of the Paris conference. Criticism of His Book Referring to that period , Kingsley Martin , editor of The New Statesman and Nation , a British publication , write several year ago : `` Those who know nothing of economics could appreciate , if only from quotation in the press , Mr. Keynes ' brilliant picture of M. Clemenceau , Mr. Lloyd George and President Wilson at Versailles. `` It successfully put over the point that the American President have keep his puritanical conscience clear by insist on verbal consistency with the Fourteen Points , while allow cunning men to find way of get around them. `` It convince u all that , whatever the other merit or evil of the treaty , it real vice be it failure to treat Europe a an economic whole and to reconstruct it for the benefit of the common people. It be a treaty of strategy and national greediness -- with the League of Nations thrown in to make it look pretty. '' Lord Keynes ' theory about why the treaty would fail be largely reflect in his sketch of the principal participant in the conference. He describe M. Clemenceau a `` by far the most eminent member of the Council of Four , '' who alone know `` what he want -- namely , to cripple Germany. '' He claim that President Wilson , who wield tremendous moral influence over the people of Europe and have the physical backing of powerful American army , lack the intellectual equipment to match wit with either Clemenceau or Lloyd George in the give-and-take of the conference table. His characterization of the principal be sum up a follow : `` These be the personality of Paris -- I forbear to mention other nation or less men : Clemenceau , aesthetically the noble ; the President , morally the most admirable ; Lloyd George , intellectually the subtlest. Out of their disparity and weaknesses the treaty be bear , child of the least worthy attribute of each of it parent , without nobility , without morality , without intellect. '' The book in a certain sense be the turn point in Lord Keynes ' career. Thereafter he be no long a mere economist but a prophet and pamphleteer , a journalist and the author of a best seller. Sought Spending Program Although contemptuous of Wilson , Lord Keynes be lavish in his praise of President Roosevelt. He seek , without success , to get the British Government to launch a spending program similar to that which President Roosevelt have establish in the United States. He ask for a $ 500,000,000 a year employment fund to provide for 500,000 men , a $ 500,000,000 housing plan and a $ 500,000,000 public work fund. `` It be a complete mistake , '' he say in 1932 , `` to believe that there be a dilemma between scheme of budget balancing and that we must proceed cautiously with the former for fear of injure the latter. `` Quite the contrary be true. There be no possibility of balance the budget except by increase the national income , which be the same thing a increase employment. '' In the fall of 1935 , when criticism be be level against President Roosevelt , Lord Keynes be ask if his theory of a nation spend it way back to prosperity be a failure. `` It be actually succeed in the United States now , '' he maintained. `` Its critic be short-sighted. '' On Aug. 4 , 1925 , he marry Lydia Lopokova , a Russian ballerina. She be eleven year young than her husband and have be marry previously to Randolpho Barrocki , her ballet manager , in the United States. She divorce Signor Barrocki in England seven month before her surprise marriage to Lord Keynes. Frequently when Britain have be face with a perplex financial issue , particularly in recent year when international problem be involve , Lord Keynes ' advice have be rely on heavily. As a forerunner to matter take up at Bretton Woods , N.H. , in July , 1944 , a White Paper , author a year earlier by Lord Keynes and issue by the British Government , outline a plan for a banking system between nation similar to a banking system within a nation. He take a leading role in help to crystallize the idea for a world bank and stabilization of international currency at the monetary conference at Bretton Woods. Some of his other book be `` Indian Currency and Finance , '' 1913 ; `` A Treatise on Probability , '' 1921 ; `` A Revision of the Treaty , '' 1922 ; `` A Tract on Monetary Reform , '' 1923 ; `` A Short View of Russia , '' 1925 ; `` The End of Laissez Faire , '' 1926 ; `` A Treatise on Money , '' 1930 ; `` Essays in Persuasion , '' 1931 ; `` Essays in Biography , '' 1933 ; `` The General Theory of Employment , Interest and Money , '' 1936 , and `` How to Pay for the War , '' 1940. Lord Keynes be the brother of Air Commodore Geoffrey Langdon Keynes , a British surgeon of note. He belong to the Athenaeum Club , membership in which be restrict to men of outstanding distinction in the art , science and public service .