April 25 , 1947 OBITUARY Author of 'Lost Lady ' Won the Pulitzer Prize in 1922 for Writing 'One of Ours' By THE NEW YORK TIMES Willa Sibert Cather , note American novelist , die at 4:30 P.M. yesterday in her home at 570 Park Avenue. After Miss Cather 's death a secretary , who be with her at the time , be too upset to talk about it. It be report that death be due to a cerebral hemorrhage. The author be 70 year old in December. Surviving be two brother , John E. Cather of Whittier , Calif. , and James Cather of Long Beach , Calif. , and two sister , Mrs. Jessica Auld of Palo Alto , Calif. , and Elsie Margaret Cather of Lincoln , Neb. One of the most distinguished of American novelist , Willa Sibert Cather write a dozen or more novel that will be long remember for their exquisite economy and charm of manner. Her talent have it nourishment and inspiration in the American scene , the Middle West in particular , and her sensitive and patient understanding of that section of the country form the basis of her work. Much of her writing be conceive in something of an attitude of placid reminiscence. This be notably true of such early novel a `` My Antonia '' and `` O Pioneers ! '' in which she tell with minute detail of homestead life on the slowly conquer prairies. Perhaps her most famous book be `` A Lost Lady , '' publish in 1923. In it Miss Cather 's talent be say to have reach their full maturity. It be the story of the Middle West in the age of railway-building , of the charming wife of Captain Forrester , a retired contractor , and her hospitable and open-handed household a see through the eye of an adore boy. The climax of the book , with the disintegration of the Forrester household and the slow coarsening of his wife , be consider a masterpiece of vivid , haunt prose. Won Pulitzer Prize in 1922 Another of her famous book be `` Death Comes for the Archbishop , '' 1927 , in which she tell in the form of a chronicle a simple story of two saint of the Southwest. Her novel , `` One of Ours , '' win the Pulitzer Prize in 1922. In 1944 , Miss Cather receive the gold medal of the National Institute of Arts and Letters , the institute 's high award and design not to honor a specific work , but the sustained output of a writer or artist. Although generally think of a a Western writer , Miss Cather be bear on a farm near Winchester , Va. , on Dec. 7 , 1876. Her ancestor , on both side , have be Virginia farmer for three or four generations. They come originally from England , Ireland and Alsace. When she be 8 year old , her father take his family to Nebraska and buy a ranch near Red Cloud. The little girl do not go to school at first but spend many hour read the English classic with her two grandmothers. Later , when her family move into Red Cloud proper , she attend high school and then the University off Nebraska , from which she be graduate in 1895. She spend a few year in Pittsburgh teaching and do newspaper work , choose that city rather than New York because she have many friend there. Each summer she visit in Nebraska , Colorado and Wyoming. Meanwhile , she have start writing , and her first publish book be a volume of verse. `` April Twilights , '' reissue in 1923 a `` April Twilights and Later Verse. '' Editor on McClure 's Magazine Miss Cather 's first volume of story be `` The Troll Garden , '' publish in 1905 by McClure-Phillips. Two year later she become an associate editor in New York of McClure 's Magazine. She then be manage editor of the publication for four years. During this period she write very little but travel a great deal in Europe and the American Southwest , Arizona and New Mexico. In 1912 she give up editorial work to write her first novel , `` Alexander 's Bridge. '' This be follow by `` O Pioneers ! '' `` The Song of the Lark '' and `` My Antonia. '' In `` The Professor 's House , '' 1925 , she begin experiment with a new technique of story- telling , construct her tale of an intellectual 's soul development accord to the familiar method of music. The next year she write `` My Mortal 'Enemy , '' which be compare by many with `` A Lost Lady '' but , for the most part , suffer by the comparison. A reviewer in The New York Times say of the book that while it be inferior to the former work it do impress a a `` later '' book. In 1931 Miss Cather write `` Shadows on the Rock , '' which be consider the most popular novel in America during that year in the annual Baker & Taylor survey , and win for her the Prix Femina Americaine. Miss Cather , who in 1931 be rank by J.B. Priestley , the English author , a this country 's great novelist , receive the honorary degree of Litt.D. in 1924 from the University of Michigan. Columbia University confer the same distinction on her in 1928. Yale follow suit in 1929 and Princeton two year later. Among her other novel be `` Lucy Gayheart '' and , her last , `` Sapphira and the Slave Girl , '' publish in 1940. She also write two book of short story , `` Obscure Destinies '' and `` Youth and the Bright Medusa , '' and a collection of essay under the title , `` Not Under Forty. '' For many year her publisher have be Alfred A. Knopf .