January 26 , 1947 OBITUARY Capone Dead At 48 ; Dry Era Gang Chief By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS MIAMI BEACH , FLA. , Jan. 25 -- Al Capone , ex-Chicago gangster and prohibition era crime leader , die in his home here tonight. `` Death come very suddenly , '' say Dr. Kenneth S. Phillips , who have be attend Capone since he be stricken with apoplexy Tuesday. `` All the family be present. His wife , Mae , collapse and be in very serious condition. '' Dr. Phillips say death be cause by heart failure. Six Years of Power Alphonse ( Scarface ) Capone , the fat boy from Brooklyn , be a Horatio Alger hero -- underworld version. More than any other one man he represent , at the height of his power from 1925 through 1931 , the debauchery of the `` dry '' era. He seize and hold in thrall during that period the great city of Chicago and it suburbs. Head of the cruel cutthroat in American history , he inspire gang war in which more than 300 men die by the knife , the shotgun , the tommy gun and the pineapple , the gangster adaptation of the World War I hand grenade. His infamy make international legend. In France , for example , he be `` The One Who Is Scarred. '' He be the symbol of the ultimate in American lawlessness. Capone win great wealth ; how much , no one will ever know , except that the figure be fantastic. He remain immune from prosecution for his multitudinous murder ( include the St. Valentine Day Massacre in 1929 when his gunner , dress a policeman , trap and kill eight of the Bugs Moran bootleg outfit in a Chicago garage ) , but be bring to book , finally , on the comparatively sissy charge of evasion of income tax amount to around $ 215,000. For this , he be sentence to eleven year in Federal prison -- serve first at Atlanta , then on The Rock , at Alcatraz -- and be fin $ 50,000 , with $ 20,000 additional for costs. With time out for good conduct , he finish this sentence in mid-January of 1939 ; but by then he be a slack- jawed paretic overcome by social disease , and paralytic to boot. Native of Naples Capone be bear in Naples on Jan. 17 , 1899 , the son of an impoverished barber. The family move to New York and settle in the Mulberry Bend district near Brooklyn Bridge. Here , after he quit school in the fourth grade to knock about the street , he meet Johnny Torrio whom he be to succeed , many year later , a head of the bootleg and vice syndicate in Chicago. The parent , devout people , move to South Brooklyn and Al , barely out of his teen , one day bully one of the neighbor , an undersized , quick temper Sicilian , in a Fourth Avenue barber shop. His victim back Capone into a corner and slash him twice with a razor. He and Capone never cross trail again , nor do Capone , on his infrequent visit to the old neighborhood after he reach great power , ever seek him out or order his destruction. In 1910 John Torrio leave the Five Points and Mulberry Bend to try his evil genius in Chicago. The advent of prohibition in 1920 saw great expansion of the Torrio interests. He take to bootleg in a big way. Torrio need more men , tough men. He send for the fat boy and Capone take the next train for Chicago to join Torrio at $ 75 a week. This be big money for him at the time. He have manage to stay out of the World War because he do n't like that type of fighting. Later he encourage the legend that he have be a machine gunner in the AEF , but this be Capone poppycock. Served a `` Rod '' in Chicago For three or four year after Capone 's arrival in Chicago he serve a a `` rod , '' or professional killer , for Torrio and at the same time prove himself unusually good at organize the vice and bootleg phase of the Torrio chain. Greed begets great greed. Torrio want a hog 's share of the `` take '' and short-change his men. This result in a split , the opposition take form under the leadership of Dion O'Banion , a murderous fellow who , paradoxically , have an inordinate love for flowers. Most of his men be Irish ; most of Torrio 's Italian , and the war take on a bitter racial angle. On Nov. 10 , 1924 , three Capone men walk into the florist shop open by O'Banion more for a hobby than for profit. They riddle him with shot and he fell back among his rose and carnations. Capone and Torrio attend the burial , send load of wreath a a sentimental gesture and try to look innocent. Later in 1925 a gang catch up with Torrio and fire five shot into him. He decide , at this juncture , that he have have enough. He pull out and Capone be leave in command. Immediately Capone begin a campaign of expansion. He establish agent along the east coast to handle his rum cargo , he have men in Florida and in the Bahamas ; he have men along the Canadian border. Capone caravan crisscross the nation with valuable load of contraband to slake the thirst of the Middle West. By the end of 1925 Capone be rid high. He have a magnificent home on Prairie Avenue , where he live with his wife , Mae , and their Sonny , six year old. His brother , Ralph ( Bottles ) Capone , be on his staff. Another brother , Frank , have die in a brawl in Cicero. Matthew , his young brother , keep out of it entirely. Word come to Chicago at this time that Peg-Leg Lonergan , head of the downtown Brooklyn waterfront bad men , be plague some of Capone 's old friends. Peg-Leg 's idea of sport be to lead a handful of longshoreman into the Adonis Social Club in Twentieth Street , near Fourth Avenue , and badger the Italian customer , all old neighbor of Capone's. The Adonis Club have sentimental attachment for Capone. In the cellar of the club , in his 'teens , he have perfect his pistol work by shoot at beer bottles. He be in the place on Christmas night , 1925 , with five furtive-looking man-at-arms from Chicago , when Peg-Leg and his boisterous crew come in awhooping , to take down the regular patrons. At 3 o'clock next morning police of the Fifth Avenue station reach the club on the run , attract by a fusillade of gunfire. Peg-Leg lay dead near the door , Aaron Harms and Needles Ferry , two of his pal , lay dead under the piano , star with unseeing eye at the orange , red and green paper twist that bedeck the ceiling and fixtures. A fourth Lonergan man crawl on the sidewalk , badly wounded. Capone and eight other men , together with a couple of girl patron of the Adonis Club be round up and question by the Fifth Avenue detectives. The fat man from Chicago , blaze with diamond , assume an air of injured innocence. He insist he have come all the way from the Windy City to pay a Christmas call on his mother and that he have merely happen to be in the night club when the shooting started. He be turn out with the rest because all the other witness , like himself , relate that they do not happen to be look at the particular moment when the gun open fire. Without witness the police have no case. Capone , have pay his Christmas call and have deliver three neat homicide a gift , return to Chicago. Emboldened by frequent success , Capone come out in the open to support Big Bill Thompson in 1929 in what be know a the `` pineapple '' primary. Opposition candidate be subject to all the little violent trick in the Capone bag , include the tossing of this iron fruit. His men have shoot and kill William McSwiggin , State 's Attorney for Cook County , and if they could get away with that ( a they do ) he felt he could get away with anything. Before the pineapple primary he have also stag the cruel murder in the annals of American gangster crime. He have hire Fred ( Killer ) Burke of the Egan 's Rats , a St. Louis gang , to perform this particular job. The Killer dress three of his men in police uniform , walk in on seven Moran men in the SMC Cartage Company Garage on St. Valentine's Day , 1929 , and spray them with Thompson sub-machine gun and sawed-off shotgun until the last of the seven stop twitching. The Capone crowd lose the pineapple primary , in spite of terroristic tactics. Dissension , subsurface but sinister , get to work in the organization. The fat boy try to stem it with a brutal show of power at a hotel banquet where he brain the guest of honor -- two defect brother who think their plotting have be secret -- with a baseball bat. He have also be warn of a double-cross by Frankie Uale , his Brooklyn agent , and Uale have be shoot to death by Killer Burke and his crowd. In May , 1929 , Capone surrender to the police in Philadelphia to get a year 's peace from the increase threat of the Moran guns. The charge in the Philadelphia case be carry concealed weapons. In October , 1931 , he go on trial for income tax evasion , guard in the Federal court chamber by one of his own men. A court attendant spot the bodyguard 's shoulder holster and the thug be sentence for contempt. His highly pay counsel try to persuade a grim-lipped jury that their client be a persecuted man. The plea fell on deaf ears. When Judge Wilkerson pronounce sentence the fat man 's face go dark and the ugly scar go white. Capone enter Atlanta penitentiary on May 5 , 1932 , to work in the prison overall shop. In August 1934 , he be chain and fetter and take , with other felon , to forbid Alcatraz. This be the beginning of the end for America 's `` Public Enemy Number One , '' a title in which he have gloried. In February , 1938 , he become violent. Word come out of Alcatraz that the prison doctor have decide that the great Capone be do ; `` subject to intermittent mental disturbances. '' In November , 1939 , Capone be release from prison and be admit to the Union Memorial Hospital in Baltimore to take treatment for paresis. Later he settle at Miami Beach .