September 21 , 1947 OBITUARY La Guardia Is Dead ; City Pays Homage To 3-Time Mayor By THE NEW YORK TIMES Fiorello H. La Guardia die in his sleep at 7:22 A.M. yesterday. He be 64 year old. At the bedside be his wife , the former Marie Fisher , who have be his secretary while he be in Congress ; their adopted child , Jean , 18 year old , and Eric , 15 , and Mrs. La Guardia 's sister , Miss Helen Fisher. The three-time Mayor of New York have be in a coma since last Tuesday night. Dr. George Baehr , his friend and personal physician , know late Friday that the end be approach and remain through the night. At 5 A.M. Mr. La Guardia 's breathing become labored. Shortly before 7:30 A.M. Dr. Baehr come to the door of the La Guardia home at 5020 Goodridge Avenue , in the Riverdale section of the Bronx , and announce to reporter who have keep the vigil with him : `` Mr. La Guardia pass away at 7:22 A.M. His family be at his bedside. '' Underwent Operation in June The former Mayor 's lose fight begin last June when he undergo surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital. The operation confirm fear that the ailment that have trouble him on and off for many year be cancer of the pancreas. It have reach the incurable stage and his day be numbered. A city of which he be as much a part a any of it public building awake to find the little firebrand dead. Its people have laugh with him and at him , they have be entertain by his antic and they have be sober by his warning , and they find it difficult to believe that the voice he have raise in their behalf in the legislative hall of city and nation , on street corner and over the radio , be still forever. Mayor O'Dwyer , his successor , express this feeling. Although Mr. La Guardia 's death be expect , the Mayor say , his pass brought with it `` a shock of awful finality. '' `` In his death the people of the city , the State and nation have lose a great , patriotic American citizen , '' the Mayor said. Fire Department Tribute Sounds The Fire Department 's 5-5-5-5 signal , repeat four time , be hear in fire house throughout the city at 8:06 A.M. It be sound a a mark of respect on the death of a fireman kill in line of duty or on the passing of a high official. At 8:15 the announcement of Mr. La Guardia 's death go out over the police teletype system. Custodians of all city building be direct to lower flag to half staff. During the morning the facade of City Hall , nerve center of Mr. La Guardia 's multifarious activity for the twelve year he be Mayor , be drape in black. The body be remove to a funeral home. In the afternoon it be take to the Cathedral of St. John the Divine , 112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue , where the funeral service will be hold at 2:30 P.M. tomorrow. At 3:40 P.M. yesterday it lay in state in the St. James Chapel of the cathedral , where it be view by member of the immediate family and present and former city official , head by Mayor O'Dwyer and Police commissioner Arthur W. Wallander. A throng of several hundred person have gather , and they be permit to view the body when the immediate family , which include Mrs. La Guardia 's mother , Mrs. Alberta Martin , leave at 5:10 P.M. It have be announce that the public would be admit begin at 12:30 P.M. today. At 5:30 this afternoon the body will be move from the chapel to the nave of the cathedral , to which the public will be admit as long a there be a queue waiting. It will be on view again from 7:30 A.M. tomorrow until the time of the funeral. Funeral service will be conduct by the Right Rev. Charles K. Gilbert. Protestant Episcopal Bishop of the Diocese of New York. He will be assist by the cathedral clergy and the Rev. Gerald V. Barry , rector of Christ Church , Riverdale , Mr. La Guardia 's home parish. Burial will take place at Woodlawn Cemetery , it be announced. In a proclamation , Mayor O'Dwyer set aside tomorrow a a day of mourn and direct that flag on all public building fly at half staff for a period of thirty days. Expressions of sorrow be voice by President Truman in a message send to Mrs. La Guardia. Diplomats attend the United Nations General Assembly pay tribute. Assembly President Oswaldo Aranha say that the world have lose `` a champion of democracy. '' Trygve Lie , Secretary General , say the United Nations would `` miss the benefit of his remarkable administrative efforts. '' A minute of silence , a delegate and spectator bow their head in prayer , be observe by the Assembly. Set Modern City Record Fiorello H. La Guardia be the first man elect Mayor of New York for three consecutive term in modern times. He be the first reform Mayor ever re-elected in the domain which Tammany Hall have rule almost continuously for many year until the fiery little man with the black hat and the angry tongue crash in to put the old-line politician to rout. He be probably New York 's most colorful Mayor since Peter Stuyvesant. Dynamite and aggressive , he appear to be everywhere at once , rush to fire at time and at other time fly all over the country by airplane. A fighter by nature he be always ready to take on all comer , big or little , from Hitler to the man in the street. He have tell friend -- and many student of politics agree with him -- that he regard a his great accomplishment an increase in efficiency and honesty in municipal government throughout the United States by force of the example of his administration in the nation 's large city. This remain true even though he later become an international figure a Director General of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration , a post he hold from March to December , 1946. In that capacity he lead the fight against famine in many country of Europe and , characteristically , involve himself in numerous controversies. In the first World War he be the pilot of a bomb plane on the Italian front , and he keep on drop bombs all his life -- on `` reactionary , '' prohibitionist and Ku Klux Klanners in Congress during the Nineteen Twenties , and on Tammany Hall during his long Mayoralty service. Son of an Italian father , Mr. La Guardia , when he take office a Mayor on Jan. 1 , 1934 , have climb higher on the political ladder than any other American of Italian descent. Until that time Mayor Rossi of San Francisco have hold the distinction of be the only Italian-American to be elect to a comparable position. Belligerent in Independence The man who rout Tammany from City Hall and send that organization , more than a century old , into a period of decline be only about 5 foot 2 inch in height , a rotund little man with a swarthy skin and a belligerent independence that often verge on irascibility. A forelock of black hair invite comparison with Napoleon. His voice be high , and in debate often become a screech. On the platform he illustrate his speech by act and gesture to emphasize his most telling point , an advantage deny him in address by radio. He be a glutton for work and act a chairman of the United States section of the United States- Canadian joint defense board during the second World War and a president of the United States Conference of Mayors , besides devote his day and night to his duty a Mayor of the big city in America. For a time during the early part of the war he also serve a Director of the Office of Civilian Defense , but this be too much even for him , and he have to give it up , although it be one of the great disappointment of his life. A crusader all his life in the interest of the underprivileged and the oppress , the `` Little Flower '' be a clever showman whose campaign be always spectacular and whose battle against corruption and special privilege be usually successful. His enemy sometimes call him a demagogue , but to his follower he be a latter-day St. George , bent on slay the Tammany Tiger rather than the fabled dragon. He be a New Dealer even before the New Deal come into be and be associate with some of the most progressive legislation in Congress , include the Labor Anti-Injunction Act in the pre-Roosevelt day , and later the TVA Act. He be generally in revolt against his party leadership. Elected Mayor for the first time the year after Franklin D. Roosevelt 's first election a President , Mr. La Guardia prove much more of a New Dealer than most old-school Democratic politicians. He sometimes refer to himself a have be a `` Socialist , '' and join the American Labor party when it be organize during the New Deal. His enemy often accuse him loosely a be a `` Communist. '' But he refuse to stay hitch to any party line , right , leave or middle-of-the-road , and be more of an independent political force than anything else. Although he profess disdain and contempt for `` politician , '' call them `` clubhouse loafer '' and `` tin-horn gambler , '' and even use choicer bit from a vocabulary of invective surpass only by that of Harold L. Ickes among his contemporary in public life , the Mayor be himself one of the shrewd politician in the country. He be clever enough at this great American game to play a lone hand and win against old politician with strong political machine behind them. Partly because of his good relation with the New Deal , Mr. La Guardia be able to get large amount of Federal money for public work , and his administration leave New York with many improvement in the way of park and playground , health clinic , public market , bridge , housing development and other project , include the La Guardia Airport and the Flushing Meadow Park , on the site of the 1939-40 New York World 's Fair. Parents Came From Italy Mr. La Guardia 's parent come to the United States from Foggia , Italy. The municipal archive there disclose that his father , Achille Luigi Carlo La Guardia , marry Irene Coen on June 3 , 1880. The elder La Guardia say he have no religion , but his bride profess the Jewish faith. Although he be bear on the East Side of Manhattan Dec. 11 , 1882 , Mr. La Guardia be not a product of the city street , a be former Governor Alfred E. Smith and former Mayor James J. Walker. While he be still an infant , Mr. La Guardia 's father , a musician , become a bandmaster in the United States Army and the La Guardias from that time live on government reservation , chiefly in the West. The future Mayor of New York pass his boyhood day at Fort Whipple , Ariz. , and finish his boyhood 's education when he receive his diploma from the high school at Prescott , Ariz. During the Spanish-American War the elder La Guardia be send to Tampa , Fla. , with his regiment , and his family accompany him. While there , young Fiorello , then 15 year old , obtain a job a correspondent of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch. One of the item he send to the newspaper at that time be a brief notice of his father 's death. The elder La Guardia die from eat `` embalm '' beef , issue a part of the Army rations. The genesis of La Guardia 's zeal in expose official corruption may be trace to this tragedy of his youth. While in Congress he introduce a bill provide the death penalty for anyone convict of fraud in sell material to the government in wartime. Because of his father 's service a bandmaster of the Eleventh United States Infantry , La Guardia be make the only honorary member of the Eleventh United States Infantry Association , 1898- 1902 , an organization of men who serve in that outfit during the Spanish-American War period. A Consul in Fiume at 20 Soon after his father 's death , young Fiorello accompany relative to Budapest , where his mother 's body be bury in the Jewish Cemetery. There at the age of 19 he obtain employment in the United States Consulate. A few month later he be send to the consulate at Trieste a interpreter. When he be 20 he become consul at Fiume , then part of Austria-Hungary. After a row with official at Fiume because of his refusal to line up emigrant for a reception to the Archduchess Josepha , he decide to resign and to return to America. Working his way home , Mr. La Guardia , through his knowledge of Yiddish , German , French , Italian and several Croatian dialect , obtain a job a interpreter at Ellis Island. He attend New York University Law School at night , and eventually be transfer to the legal department of the immigration service. In 1914 Mr. La Guardia obtain the Republican nomination for Representative in the old Fourteenth Congressional District in low Manhattan , a nomination for which he have no competition because the district be regard a overwhelmingly Democratic. He be beat but cut his Democratic opponent 's plurality to a record low. Turned Defeat Into Victory Undiscouraged by his defeat , Mr. La Guardia establish a sort of one-man legal-aid bureau , often offer professional advice and appear in court without fee in behalf of those too poor to pay for legal service. In this way he make many friend , and two year later he surprise local politician by be elect Representative in this district by a small plurality. As a new Representative , Mr. La Guardia align himself with the liberal element in Congress , join in a successful fight for the liberalization of the rule of the House. Although his district be regard a strongly pacifist , he vote for war with Germany and for the draft. Rejecting offer of appointment to several non-combatant post in the Army , Mr. La Guardia apply for admission to the training camp at Plattsburg. Rejected a too short , he get his friend , Giuseppe Bellanca , to teach him to fly and be commission in the Army Air Service with the rank of lieutenant. He be send overseas with a bomb squadron to the Italian front. The morale of the civilian and arm force of Italy at that time be at a low point a the result of a series of military reverses. The young Italian-American aviator , who have rise to a place in the American Congress , be choose to deliver a series of `` pep '' talk and to tell the Italians that a horde of American soldier be on the way to help Italy and her ally crush the enemy. The young officer be inform that his speech would receive official endorsement only if successful. Mr. La Guardia be unbelievably successful a a propagandist. He address mass meeting in Milan , Genoa , Rome , Turin , Naples , Bologna and a dozen other Italian city , and stir up tremendous enthusiasm. For his service a a spellbinder the Italian Government make him a commendatore. His war service , however , do not consist entirely of speech-making. He come home with two wound stripe , the result of crack-up while bomb the Austrian lines. He receive the Italian War Cross and be promote to major. His observer on bomb expedition be Major Negrotto , a member of the Italian Parliament. The biplane they fly be nickname the Congressional Limited. Headed Board of Aldermen After his return home from the war he be draft by Samuel S. Koenig , then New York County Republican chairman , to run for President of the old Board of Aldermen to fill the vacancy cause by the election of Alfred E. Smith a Governor. He be elect in 1919 and for the next two year engage in frequent wordy controversy with John F. Hylan , then Mayor , and Charles L. Craig , then Controller. He give up the city Republicans who welcome `` the return to normalcy '' of President Harding and , in the day of Harding 's successor , `` keep cool with Coolidge , '' join the `` progressive '' group in Congress. Denied a Republican renomination , he support the elder Senator Robert M. La Follette , Farmer-Labor party candidate for President , in 1924 , and be re-elected to the House a the nominee of the Socialist and Progressive parties. In the House , Mr. La Guardia be an active member of the progressive group. He have favor woman suffrage and oppose child labor. He be strongly oppose to prohibition and gain headline in the newspaper by make what he declare to be a legal beverage by pour together two-thirds of a bottle of malt tonic and one-third of a bottle of near-beer with one-half of 1 per cent of alcoholic content. Two Federal judge resign under the fire of his attack and a third be censured. It have be estimate that he save the government million of dollar by object to score of small pork- barrel bill and demand proof of their need from their sponsors. Beaten by Walker for Mayor It be in 1929 that Mr. La Guardia first run for election a Mayor. Because he have be a bolter throughout his political career , conservative Republicans show no hesitancy in desert him. Attacked a a `` Red '' and characterize a `` a sawed-off Mussolini '' during the campaign , his record in Congress a a chronic dissenter from Republican policy be too much for resident of the `` silk stocking '' Fifteenth Assembly District and Old Guard Republicans. He be beat by Mayor James J. Walker by a few vote short of a half a million. Three year later , in 1932 , he be defeat for re-election to the House of Representatives in the landslide that saw the election of Franklin D. Roosevelt to the Presidency. If Tammany believe that it have put Mayor La Guardia on the political shelf by his defeat for Representative in 1932 and if conservative Republicans believe they be rid of him by his defeat for Mayor in 1929 , both be doom to disappointment. In the interim the Hofstadter legislative committee , with Samuel Seabury a counsel , have uncover many instance of graft in the Walker administration and the debonair Mayor have resign while under charge , and John P. O'Brien , Tammany Democrat , have be elect Mayor for the rest of the Walker term in the Roosevelt landslide of 1932. Mr. Seabury have take the position that he would support only Mr. La Guardia for Mayor. Although a Republican-Fusion committee have pick Major Gen. John F. O'Ryan a their candidate , General O'Ryan withdraw , clear the way for Major La Guardia 's candidacy. The campaign which follow be one of the most hard-fought in many years. Tammany renominated Mayor O'Brien , and the Roosevelt wing of the Democratic party , head by James A. Farley , then Democratic National Chairman , nominate Joseph V. McKee , Aldermanic President , on the independent Recovery party ticket. Mr. La Guardia , take advantage of an opening give him by Mr. McKee , at first regard a the probable winner , reveal an article which the former Aldermanic President have write eighteen year earlier express a low opinion of the then rise generation of Jews. The charge of anti- Semitism against Mr. McKee , couple with the popular uprising against machine-controlled politics , result in the election of Mayor La Guardia by a plurality of 281,850 over McKee and a plurality of 259,469 over Mayor O'Brien. From the beginning of his term a Mayor Mr. La Guardia make it apparent that he be sincere in his determination to give New York City an honest , non-partisan administration. His cabinet appointment be mostly on a non-partisan basis. He go outside the city to get expert to head the Health and Correction Departments. Head of the Hospital Department , internationally famous in his field , be a brother of the law partner of Edward J. Flynn , Bronx Democratic leader and subsequently Democratic National Chairman. At the head of the Parks Department Mayor La Guardia place Robert Moses , whose work in rehabilitate the city 's park and in building playground come to be one of the major asset of the administration. He retain John H. Delaney , a Democrat but an experienced and efficient official in his particular field , a chairman of the Board of Transportation. Mayor La Guardia attempt -- and even his opponent credit the honesty of his effort -- to give the city an honest administration , to eliminate graft and to rid the city payroll of unneeded employes. Never do Mayor La Guardia swerve in his announced determination to make New York a good place in which to live. He pay unexpected inspection visit to city institutions. He personally investigate complaint by citizens. He devote long hour to mediation of labor disputes. Settled Many Strikes Although his peppery temperament bring some criticism , Mayor La Guardia be instrumental in settle many strike in the city , notwithstanding he sometimes be charge with favor the labor side of the controversy. He repeatedly caution the police against use club or pistol in disperse group of unemployed or striking worker , but instructed police officer to maintain law and order and prevent violence by either side. He support President Roosevelt for re-election in 1936 , 1940 and 1944 , vote a a member of the American Labor party , which he be largely instrumental in organize in 1936. He be a leader in the successful campaign for a new city charter and adoption of the proportional representation method of elect member of the City Council , which win on a referendum in 1936. He aid the drive for slum clearance and low-cost housing through cooperation of the State and Federal Governments. He improve the efficiency of the Police and Fire Departments , replace General O'Ryan , who have resign a Police Commissn , order know gangster arrest whenever they appear in public and conduct a continuous war against slot machine and all gamble rackets. Early in 1937 , Mayor La Guardia create an international incident by a speech before the woman 's division of the American Jewish Congress in New York , characterize Adolf Hitler a a fanatic menacing the peace of the world and suggest that he be make a central figure in the World 's Fair Chamber of Horrors. The German Embassy twice make formal complaint at Washington , and Secretary of State Hull twice apologized. Interested in music from boyhood , Mayor La Guardia seek an anthem for this city , frequently attend the opera and concert and on occasion lead symphony orchestras. He establish a series of Summer City Halls , at the Bartow Mansion in the Bronx , in the old Chisholm mansion in College Point Park , and at the former Arrow Brook Golf and Country Club in Queens. When the city purchase the Gracie Mansion on the upper East Side of Manhattan , it become the Mayor 's residence. His reputation for conduct what a majority of New York resident regard a an honest administration stand him in good stead in 1937 when he be make the Fusion candidate for re- election , despite early Republican opposition. He win re-election easily , defeat Jeremiah T. Mahoney , Democratic candidate , by 453,374. A major achievement of Mayor La Guardia be purchase by the city of the rapid transit line of the Interborough Rapid Transit Company and the Brooklyn-Manhattan Transit Company. This be accomplish in June , 1940 , at a total cost of $ 326,000,000 bring about a unification of these line , which have be seek unsuccessfully for many years. In 1941 Mayor La Guardia again be the Fusion nominee. In a bitterly contest campaign , during which he be criticize for intemperate speech , Mayor La Guardia be elect for his third term by a plurality of 132,283 over William O'Dwyer , the District Attorney of Kings County , the Democratic candidate. Long before Pearl Harbor , Mayor La Guardia foresee the probability of war with the Axis powers. In speech and statement he frequently assail Hitler and Mussolini. At the time of the Japanese attack on Dec. 7 , 1941 , he already have organize the air warden and other civilian defense agency , and act at once to put the city in readiness for a possible air raid. Started Civilian Defense With Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt , wife of the President , who be his assistant a Director of Civilian Defense , Mayor La Guardia go at once to the Far West to organize defense in the Pacific Coast cities. Seemingly unfit by temperament for a post in which calmness be desirable , and probably overwork by his manifold duty , Mayor La Guardia be subject to some criticism and ridicule for his method a Defense Director , and the President replace him with James M. Landis. It be the one job in his entire career up to that time in which he be not successful. Eager for a commission in the Army since the day that the United States enter the war , Mayor La Guardia succeed in bring about passage by the Legislature of the Ostertag bill grant him leave of absence on his entrance into the arm forces. This bill , which be sign by Governor Dewey , be pass without the large number of the member of the Legislature realize it purpose , and , a it would have prevent an election the following November , be schedule to receive a court test of it validity. At the time the bill be pass , it be believe that Mayor La Guardia be schedule to receive a commission a brigadier general and would be send to North Africa to be assign a military Governor in one of the occupied country with considerable Italian population. Opposition develop in the War Department , the high command of the Army and among member of the Senate , to which a nomination for brigadier general must have go for confirmation. First , President Roosevelt say at a press conference that he have no plan to nominate the Mayor for a commission. Then Secretary of War Stimson announce that Mayor La Guardia have offer his service to the armed force but that it be very difficult to find any place in the Army in which he could be as helpful a in the mayoralty. Secretary Stimson add that he felt the Mayor be render directly to New York and indirectly to the nation service of great value. Backed OPA Aims As Mayor , Mr. La Guardia work vigorously for the maintenance of the Office of Price Administration ceiling on food , rent and other necessity , but he frequently quarrel with the administration of that agency. On several occasion he threaten to end the cooperation of the city government with the OPA unless it adopt policy to his liking. He come under fire from two powerful teacher group for alleged interference with the Board of Education. The National Education Association and the American Federation of Teachers both accuse him of have injure the public school system by such activity , and the NEA , after a series of public and private hearing , declare he have exercise illegal influence over the schools. Mr. La Guardia retort that the member of the NEA investigate panel lack the intellectual capacity to understand anything of the magnitude of the New York City public school system. Two Kings County grand jury criticize the Mayor sharply in the autumn of 1943. In November the sit grand jury condemn him for tolerate a `` most unusual and extremely deplorable state of lawlessness '' in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn. A month later the July grand jury , which have be hold over while it carry on an extensive investigation , declare in a presentment that he have fail to provide adequate police protection to Brooklyn. These accumulate criticism begin to have some effect and political observer speculate over whether the Mayor would run for a fourth term in 1945. With his usual disregard for party loyalty , the Mayor campaign vigorously for President Roosevelt 's re-election to a fourth term in the fall of 1944 , thereby far antagonize the Republican party organization , which have support him in his three successful mayoralty races. In the winter and spring of 1945 Mayor La Guardia make two move that turn out to be extremely unpopular and bring him widespread criticism. One be his alleged intervention in the case of an American Navy petty officer who have be accuse of the seduction of an Italian girl. The sailor 's wife protest that her husband be be condemn without a hearing. The case cause a wide furor , and the City Council adopt a resolution censure the Mayor for his part in it. Defied Wartime Curfew A more serious matter be his public defiance of the midnight curfew impose by War Mobilization Director James F. Byrnes on bar , night club and other place of amusement in March , 1945. Mayor La Guardia announce on his own authority that he would allow an `` hour of tolerance '' to New York City establishments. This bring nation-wide criticism on his head. In the end he be balk when the Army and Navy forbid men in uniform from enter such place , and station shore patrol and military police outside them to enforce the ruling. Virtually all of the affected place decide that it would be unwise to remain open to serve civilian , with men in uniform barred. The death of President Roosevelt in April and the accession of President Harry S. Truman , who have be sharply critical of Mayor La Guardia when his appointment to a high post in the Army be under consideration , be a severe political blow to the Mayor. In previous campaign he have be able to count on at least the benevolent neutrality of the White House , but this be no long true. On May 6 , 1945 , Mayor La Guardia announce in the course of his regular Sunday broadcast oveation in office and to personal considerations. He add that it be his personal conviction he could be elect `` without any trouble , '' and without the backing of any regular political party. Many qualify observer of the political scene conclude , however , that Mr. La Guardia have decide that it would be impossible for him to obtain renomination by the Republican party , or to be elect without it. The attitude of the Liberal party be a contributing factor. It have be form by right-wing dissident from the American Labor party , who be bitter at the Mayor for not have support them in their intraparty fight with the left wing. Mayor La Guardia back the campaign of Newbold Morris for the Mayoralty on the No Deal party ticket. It be widely believe that he have instigate it. In the three-cornered race that develop , O'Dwyer , the regular Democratic candidate , win an easy victory. On Dec. 31 , 1945 , Mr. La Guardia move out of City Hall after have serve twelve year a Mayor. In that time he have drastically alter the city in many ways. Its physical plant , it governmental structure and it political and social pattern have all be change tremendously. A new city charter have be adopt in 1938 ; appointee of Mr. La Guardia fill the board of magistrate and virtually every other long-term appointive office , and the power of Tammany Hall have be reduce to a shadow. Began Radio Broadcasts He begin two series of radio broadcast under commercial sponsorship. In one of them , under a contract with a dairy concern , he comment on local affair ; in the other , under the sponsorship of Liberty Magazine , he discuss the national scene. This latter , however , come to an abrupt end after a few month , when Liberty release him from his contract for more than $ 100,000 a year because of alleged `` reckless and irresponsible statements. '' Meanwhile , in January , 1946 , Mr. La Guardia attend the inauguration of Gen. Eurico Caspar Dutra a President of Brazil , represent President Truman a his special Ambassador. Two month later , on March 21 , he be nominate to be Director General of UNRRA in succession to Herbert H. Lehman. Assuming the new post on March 29 , Mr. La Guardia find many nation of Europe be in danger of famine. With characteristic energy he spearhead an international drive to get food for the starving countries. He travel widely through this country and Europe in this connection , conferring , among others with Marshal Stalin in Moscow , the Pope in Rome and Marshal Tito in Yugoslavia. He become engage in several controversy in his new role. The one that attract most attention be his removal of Lieut. Gen. Sir Frederick Morgan , a distinguished British soldier , a director of UNRRA work in Germany , on the ground that Sir Frederick have inspire newspaper story of alleged Russian spying endeavor in the British and American zones. In December , 1946 Mr. La Guardia retire a Director General of UNRRA , after it have become evident that the government of the United States and Great Britain , which have provide most of the money and food for the organization , would no longer continue to support it. Mr. La Guardia vainly argue for a $ 400,000,000 emergency food fund to be administer through the United Nations. On April 8 , 1947 , Mr. La Guardia be name a the winner of the annual One World Award for press and radio. Mr. La Guardia marry twice. His first wife be Thea Almerigotti. After her death he marry in 1929 , Marie Fisher , who have be his secretary while he be a member of the House of Representatives. They adopt two child , Jean Marie , now 18 year old and Eric , 15. Said His Own Generation Lacked Courage , Vision The last public appearance of former Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia at an official event be believe to have be a a speaker at commencement exercise June 3 at the Horace Mann School for Boys in Fieldston , the Bronx. He tell the graduate class : `` My generation have fail miserably. We 've fail because of lack of courage and vision. It require more courage to keep the peace than to go to war. '' The former Mayor have be schedule for eight lecture on government and citizenship at Town Hall. The series would have start in October. It be also announce that he would advise Congress this fall about reorganize the District of Columbia government .