October 5 , 1947 OBITUARY Max Planck Dead ; Noted Physicist , 89 BY THE NEW YORK TIMES BERLIN , Oct. 4 ( AP ) -- Dr. Max Planck , Nobel Prize-winner and originator of the Quantum Theory which provide one of the basic proposition underlie the splitting of the atom , die last night , the Goettingen University clinic announce today. His age be 89. Intellectual Giant Max Planck be one of the intellectual giant of the twentieth century and one of the outstanding intellect of all time. As father of the Quantum Theory he rank with the immortal of science , such a Archimedes , Galileo , Newton and Einstein. Modern physical science rest on two pillar -- the theory of relativity and the quantum theory. The one give man a new and more profound understanding of space and time , matter and motion ; the other have provide man with a master key to the universe within the atom , to the nature of light and radiant energy in general. Relativity give man a key to the universe at large ; the quantum theory give him a key to the atom. Like the theory of relativity , the quantum theory be universally regard a one of the outstanding scientific achievement of the twentieth century and one of the great intellectual contribution of all time. As expand later by Einstein , Niels Bohr , Prince de Broglie , Schroedinger and Dirac , it have become one of the two foundation of modern physic , and particularly of the physic of the atomic nucleus. Discovery of Quantum In 1900 Planck make the fundamental discovery that energy be not a continuous entity , but come in discontinuous small bundle he name quanta. These quantum , he discover , be not all of the same size but vary with the frequency of the radiation of which they be a part. This discovery , fully corroborate later , provide man for the first time with an understanding of the nature of light and of radiation in general , phenomena that could not be explain on the basis of classical Newtonian physic or of relativity. One of his major discovery , rank a one of the great discovery of all time , be that of a universal constant of nature know a Planck 's Constant , or `` h. '' Each quantum of radiant energy , he find , be equal to this universal constant `` h , '' time it frequency. This constant be a very small factor indeed , be equal to 6.55 billion-billion-billionths erg- seconds. Thus when apply to big scale phenomenon it make no practical or observable difference ; but it make a profound difference when apply to thing on the scale of atoms. Very few scientist be honor during their lifetime a be Max Planck. He win the Nobel Prize in physic in 1919. Many other high honor come to him. When the Physical Society of Berlin confer on him a special medal , he hand a duplicate of it to his friend , Einstein. The Royal Society of Great Britain give him the Copley Medal and Cambridge University confer on him it honorary doctorate. He lecture at Columbia University in 1909 , and be make rector of the University of Berlin in 1913. Unafraid of Nazis During the Nazi regime he show his independence of spirit when he preside at the memorial service for Fritz Haber , one of Germany 's great chemist , who die an exile in Switzerland. Throughout his life , Planck remain a modest , simple man. He always travel third class and think nothing of carry home the family supper from the delicatessen store. He be a talented pianist , and delight in play duet with musical friends. In the introduction to Dr. Planck 's book , `` Where Is Science Going ? '' publish in 1932 , Albert Einstein pay him the follow tribute : `` One of those few worshiper in the Temple of Science who would still remain should an angel of God descend and drive out of the temple all those less scientist , who under different circumstance might become politician or captain of industry. '' Dr. Planck be bear on April 23 , 1858 , in Kiel , the son of Johann Julius Wilhelm and Emma von Planck. His father be a professor of law. After the elder Planck be call to Munich the son attend the university there , and he obtain his Ph. D. from the University of Berlin by the time he be 21. From 1880 to 1885 he be private-dozent in physic at Munich and then be make a professor at Kiel , four year later succeed Gustav Kirchoff in Berlin. Subsequently he be appoint to the chair of the famed Herman Helmholtz in the Academy of Sciences. The Quantum Theory be describe by Dr. Planck himself a follow : `` Radiant heat be not a continuous flow and indefinitely divisible. ... It must be define a a discontinuous mass , make up of unit all of which be similar to one another. '' He say the new unit be a quantum of action ; and call these the `` penny of the atomic world. '' Dr. Planck 's first wife , Marie Merck , die twenty year after their marriage. He then marry Margarethe von Hoesslin. He be the father of three son and twin daughters. Even in old age he cling to his hobby for mountain climbing , and retain vigorous good health. On Dr. Planck 's seventieth birthday President Paul von Hindenburg present to him the silver eagle shield of the Reich. In 1930 he be appoint president of the Kaiser Wilhelm Society for Scientific Research. This organization have be finance by wealthy Germans in 1911 , when they fear that the Rockefeller and Carnegie Foundations might make this country the leader in science. The Rockefeller Foundation , however , with no such nationalistic view , would donate to Dr. Planck 's society as much a $ 1,500,000 in a year. The German press have say this be because the Rockefellers be of German descent. Among Dr. Planck 's book be `` Principles of Conservation of Energy , '' 1887 ; `` Lectures on Thermo-Dynamics , 1897 ; `` Lectures on the Theory of Heat Radiation , '' 1906 ; `` Introduction to the Theory of Physics , '' 1930 , and `` Where Is Science Going ? '' , 1932 .