April 8 , 1947 OBITUARY Henry Ford Is Dead at 83 in Dearborn By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS DETROIT , April 7 -- Henry Ford , note automotive pioneer , die at 11:40 tonight at the age of 83. He have retire a little more than a year and a half ago from active direction of the great industrial empire he found in 1903. When he retire Mr. Ford be in excellent health , but turn over the management of the vast empire to his grandson. Henry Ford 2d , because , he say , he want to devote more time to personal interests. Death come to the famed industrialist at his estate in Fairlane , in suburban Dearborn , not far from where he be bear in 1863. At the Ford Company news bureau office it be say that the exact cause of death would not be know until Henry Ford 2d , his grandson , could reach the family home , perhaps within an hour. Mr. Ford be report to have be in excellent health when he return only a week ago from his annual winter visit to the Ford estate in Georgia. Kept Interest in Research The automobile industry leader drop completely out of the management of the far-flung Ford Company when he resign a president late in 1945. He have be able to spend some time each week at the Ford engineering laboratory , where he maintain a private office and workshop , but be rarely see about the administration building , where affair of the big company be directed. There be many report that the elder Ford have give up his leadership of the Ford interest at the insistence of other member of his family , particularly the widow of his only son , the late Edsel B. Ford. Although never confirm officially , report have it that she be dissatisfy with the course of company affairs. He leave a widow , the former Clara Bryant , whom he marry in 1887 , and two grandson , Henry 2d and Benson. Father of Mass Production Henry Ford be the founder of modern American industrial mass production method , build on the assembly line and the belt conveyor system , which no less an authority than Marshal Josef Stalin testify be the indispensable foundation for an Allied military victory in the Second World War. Mr. Ford have many other distinctions. As the founder and unchallenged master of an industrial empire with asset of more than a billion dollar , he be one of the rich men in the world. He be the apostle of an economic philosophy of high wage and short hour that have immense repercussion on American thinking. He be a patron of American folkways and in late year acquire a reputation a a shrewd , kindly sage. But these be all relatively minor compare with the revolutionary importance of his contribution to modern productive processes. His career be one of the most astonishing in industrial history. Nearing the age of 40 he be look upon a a failure by his acquaintance -- a a day-dreaming mechanic who prefer to tinker with odd machine than to work steadily at a responsible job. Yet within a dozen year he be internationally famous , and his Model T automobile be effect change in the American way of life of profound importance. He live to see the Ford Motor Company , which he found with an initial investment of $ 28,000 put up by a few friend and neighbor who have faith in him , produce more than 29,000,000 automobile before the war force the conversion of it gigantic production facility to weapon of war. Then he direct it production of more than 8,000 four-motored Liberator bomber , as well a tank , tank destroyer , jeep and amphibious jeep , transport glider , truck , engine and much other equipment. Struck a cruel blow shortly before his eightieth birthday by the death of his only son , Edsel Ford , on May 26 , 1943 , Mr. Ford unfalteringly return to the presidency of the Ford Motor Company , which he have yield to his son twenty-four year previously. He remain at it helm a it reach the peak of it gigantic war production , direct the war-expanded force of 190,000 workers. Mr. Ford be bear on July 30 , 1863 , on a farm near Dearborn , nine mile west of Detroit. He be the eldest of six children. His mother die when he be 12 year of age. He go to school until he be 15. Throughout his schooldays he work on the farm after school hour and during vacations. His mechanical bent first show itself in an intense interest in the mechanism of watches. When he be 13 he take a watch apart and put it together again so that it would work. He have to do this work secretly at night , after he have finish his chore on the farm , because his father want to discourage his mechanical ambitions. His tool be home-made and be limit to a screwdriver and a pair of tweezer , fashion respectively from a knit needle and an old watch spring. In 1879 , at the age of 16 , he take the step that foreshadow his remarkable career. He run away from home. Walking all the way to Detroit , almost penniless , he go to work a an apprentice in a machine shop. He do this in order to learn all he could of the making of machinery. He receive $ 2.50 a week for ten hour a day , six day a week -- a far cry from the wage pay in the Ford factories today. As he have to pay $ 3.50 a week for board and lodging , he take another job , work from 7 to 11 o'clock every night for a jeweler , for $ 2 more a week. Built a Steam Tractor Returning to his father 's farm to live , he spend his spare time for several year endeavor to evolve a practical farm tractor of relatively small size and cost. He succeed in build a steam tractor with a one-cylinder engine , but be unable to devise a boiler light enough to make the tractor practicable. For several year he confine himself to cut the timber on forty acre his father have give him ; operate a sawmill and repair farm machinery for his neighbors. Convinced that the steam engine be unsuited to light vehicle , he turn to the internal combustion engine , which he have read about in English scientific periodical , a a mean of locomotion for the `` horseless carriage '' of which he and other automobile inventor have dreamed. For several year he spend most of his spare time read about and experiment with the gasoline engine. In 1890 he get a job a engineer and machinist with the Detroit Edison Company at $ 45 a month , and move to Detroit. He set up a workshop in his backyard and continue his experiment after hours. He complete his first `` gasoline buggy '' in 1892. It have a two-cylinder engine , which develop about four horsepower , and he drive it 1,000 miles. The first , and for a long time the only automobile in Detroit , it be too heavy to suit Mr. Ford , who sell it in 1896 for $ 200 , to get fund to experiment on a lighter car. Later , when he become successful , he repurchase his first car for $ 100 a a memento of his early days. Named Chief Engineer Meanwhile , he have become chief engineer of the electric company at $ 125 a month , but his superior have no more use for his gas engine experiment than have his father. They offer to make him general superintendent of the company , but only on condition that he give up gasoline and devote himself entirely to electricity. He have the courage of his conviction , and he quit his job at the age of 36 , on Aug. 15 , 1899 -- a most important date , in view of late development , in the automotive industry. Mr. Ford have no money , but he persuade a group of men to organize the Detroit Automobile Company to manufacture his car. The company make and sell a few car on his original model , but after two year Mr. Ford break with his associate over a fundamental question of policy. He already have envision the mass production of car which could be sell in large quantity at small profit , while his backer be convince that the automobile be a luxury , to be produce in small quantity at large profit per unit. Rented One-Story Shed Built Car for Barney Oldfield Which Won All Its Races Renting a one-story brick shed in Detroit , Mr. Ford spend the year 1902 experiment with two- cylinder and four-cylinder motors. By that time the public have become interested in the speed possibility of the automobile , which be no longer regard a a freak. To capitalize on this interest , he build two racing card , the `` 999 '' and the `` Arrow , '' each with a four-cylinder engine develop eighty horsepower. The `` 999 , '' with the celebrated Barney Oldfield at it wheel , win every race in which it be entered. The result publicity help Mr. Ford to organize the Ford Motor Company , which be capitalize at $ 100,000 , although actually only $ 28,000 in stock be subscribed. From the begin Mr. Ford hold majority control of this company. In 1919 he and his son , Edsel , become it sole owner , when they buy out the minority stockholder for $ 70,000,000. In 1903 the Ford Motor Company sell 1,708 two-cylinder , eight horsepower automobiles. Its operation be soon threaten , however , by a suit for patent infringement bring against it by the Licensed Association of Automobile Manufacturers , who hold the right to a patent obtain by George B. Selden of Rochester , N.Y. , in 1895 , cover the combination of a gasoline engine and a road locomotive. After protract litigation , Mr. Ford win the suit when the Supreme Court hold that the Selden patent be invalid. From the beginning of his industrial career , Mr. Ford have in mind the mass production of a car which he could produce and sell at large quantity and low cost , but he be balk for several year by the lack of a steel sufficiently light and strong for his purpose. By chance one day , pick up the piece of a French racing car that have be wreck at Palm Beach , he discover vanadium steel , which have not be manufacture in the United States up to that time. With this material he begin the new era of mass production. He concentrate on a single type of chassis , the celebrated Model T , and specify that `` any customer can have a car paint any color he want , so long a it be black. '' On Oct. 1 , 1908 , he begin the production of Model T , which sell for $ 850. The next year he sell 10,600 car of this model. Cheap and reliable , the car have a tremendous success. In seven year he build and sell 1,000,000 Fords ; by 1925 he be produce them at the rate of almost 2,000,000 a year. He establish two cardinal economic policy during this tremendous expansion : the continued cutting of the cost of the product a improved method of production make it possible , and the payment of high wage to his employes. By 1926 the cost of the Model T have be cut to $ 310 , although it be vastly superior to the 1908 model. In January , 1914 , he establish a minimum pay rate of $ 5 a day for an eight-hour day , thereby create a national sensation. Up to that time the average wage throughout his work have be $ 2.40 a nine-hour day. Devised Conveyor Line Each Workman Performed One Specialized Operation These policy be make feasible by the revolutionary organization of production devise by Mr. Ford. Under the old factory system , a single workman construct an entire spring , use several different tool and perform many different operation in the process. Mr. Ford substitute an arrangement under which each worker perform a single specialized operation , which be simplify to the utmost by scientific study. To make a single leaf of a spring , for instance , eleven workman stand in line , each use a single tool. A move conveyor belt carry the steel from which the leaf be make along the line , at waist-high level. The worker never have to stoop or move to get anything , and the speed at which they work be control by the speed of the conveyor rather than the desire of the workmen. Every part of the automobile have it own conveyor line , carefully integrate to bring the various part to completion in the proper ratio. In late year Mr. Ford find it wasteful to assemble the car at the great River Rouge plant in Dearborn , Mich. , which instead be limit to the manufacture of parts. These be ship to assembly plant scatter throughout the United States and in many foreign countries. Bought Own Mines and Forests In order to reduce cost and eliminate intermediate profit on raw material and transportation , Mr. Ford purchase his own coal mine , iron mine and forest , his own railway and his own lake and ocean steamship , all of which he operate on the Ford system of high wage , high production and low cost. Ownership of these collateral industry enable Mr. Ford to keep down waste in men , time and material. At the River Rouge plant , for example , iron from the furnace go directly into the foundry and be pour without reheating. The slag from the furnace be use in a cement plant and all the steel scrap be convert by a combination of electric furnace and a large roll mill. In the Ford sawmills the part be saw directly from the log , instead of convert the log into lumber first. All the wood-working be do at the forest mill , the waste go to a wood-distillation plant , and there be no waste in shipment. The phenomenal success of the new system of production make Mr. Ford not only fabulously rich , but internationally famous , within a comparatively few years. His own very positive and often unusual opinion add to his reknown. In the winter of 1915-16 he be convince by a group of pacifist , of whom Rozika Schwimmer be the best known , that the war nation in Europe be ready for peace and that a dramatic gesture would be enough to end the war. Chartered Peace Liners Mr. Ford charter an ocean liner , the Oskar II , with the avowed purpose of `` get the boy out of the trench by Christmas , '' and sail from New York on Dec. 4 , 1915 , with a curiously assort group of companions. The mission be ridicule and fail to achieve anything. Mr. Ford himself leave the party at Christiania , now Oslo , and return home. `` We learn more from our failure than from our success , '' be his comment. When the United States declare war on Germany in April , 1917 , Mr. Ford place the industrial facility of his plant at the disposal of the Government , although he have previously refuse order from belligerent countries. During the war he produce large quantity of automobile , truck , ambulance , Liberty airplane motor , munition , whippet tank and Eagle submarine chasers. President Wilson persuade Mr. Ford to become a candidate for United States Senator in 1918 , although the manufacturer have never before displayed any particular interest in party politics. Going before the voter in the primary on both the Democratic and Republican ticket , he receive the Democratic nomination , but be defeat in the election by Truman H. Newberry , Republican , whose majority be reduce from 7,567 to 4,000 in a Senate recount. Previously Michigan have normally return a Republican majority of 100,000 so that the closeness of the 1918 election show Mr. Ford 's personal popularity with the voters. Mr. Ford retire a active head of the Ford Motor Company in 1918 , at the age of 55 , turn over the presidency to his son , Edsel , and announce his intention of devote himself thereafter to the development of his farm tractor , the Fordson , and to the publication of his weekly journal , The Dearborn Independent. Sued Chicago Tribune In 1919 Mr. Ford sue The Chicago Tribune for $ 1,000,000 on the ground of libel , because of an editorial which be head `` Ford Is an Anarchist , '' and which accuse him of have be pro- German during the war. The jury award him a verdict of 6 cent , but only after counsel for the defense have subject him to a pitiless cross-examination which reveal him to be almost without knowledge of subject outside his own field. His activity a publisher of The Dearborn Independent involve him in another highly publicize libel suit. The weekly publish a series of article , which be widely criticize a anti-Semitic. Aaron Sapiro , a Chicago lawyer , bring suit for $ 1,000,000 on the ground that his reputation a an organizer of farmer ' cooperative marketing organization have be damage by article which charge that a Jewish conspiracy be seek to win control of American agriculture. On the witness stand Mr. Ford disclaim animosity toward the Jews. `` It be bring out that , although a column in the paper be label a his , he do not write it nor do he read the publication. The editor write article expound Mr. Ford 's economic and social idea after consult with him. Mr. Ford settle the suit without disclose the term of settlement and discontinue the paper. He appease his critic by make a public apology , in which he explain he have discover the article be do harm by the prejudice they created. Weathered 1921 Crisis Refused Assistance of Bankers And Proved Resourcefulness The 1921 business depression bring the Ford Motor Company it most severe financial crisis , and serve to demonstrate both Mr. Ford 's antipathy to banker , and his resourcefulness. When it become acute the company have obligation of $ 58,000,000 due between Jan. 1 and April 18 , and only $ 20,000,000 with which to meet them. Investment banker be convince that he would have to go to them `` hat in hand , '' and an officer of one large New York bank journey to Detroit to offer Mr. Ford a large loan on the condition that a representative of the banker be appoint treasurer of the Ford Motor Company with full control over it finances. Mr. Ford silently hand him his hat. He load up Ford dealer throughout the country with all the car they could possibly handle and compel them to pay cash , thereby add nearly $ 25,000,000 to the fund in hand. Then , by purchase a railroad of his own , the Detroit , Toledo & Ironton , and by other economy , he cut one-third from the time his raw material and finish product be in transit. Thereby he be able to decrease by one-third the inventory of good he need on hand for uninterrupted production , and to release $ 28,000,000 from capital fund to ready cash. Raised More than Needed In addition he realize nearly $ 8,000,000 from the sale of Liberty bond , nearly $ 4,000,000 from the sale of by-product and $ 3,000,000 in collection from Ford agent in foreign countries. On April 1 , consequently , he have more than $ 87,000,000 in cash , or $ 27,000,000 more than he need to wipe out all the indebtedness. Furthermore , by rigid economy of labor and material hitherto think impossible , he cut the overhead cost on each car from $ 146 to $ 93. The crisis over , Mr. Ford sever all connection with the bank , except a a depositor. In fact , he become a competitor of the bank , frequently loan several million on call in the New York money market. He make a practice of carry tremendous amount on deposit in bank throughout the United States and in other countries. Bankers report that he invariably drive a hard bargain in place these funds. He often exact a special rate of interest when his balance be to be above a certain amount for a certain time. During the calm and increasingly prosperous year of the middle Nineteen Twenties Mr. Ford 's business continue to grow , but more and more of his energy be devote to his outside interests. He attempt in vain to interest the young generation in old-fashioned dance and fiddlers. In 1923 he purchase the Wayside Inn at South Sudbury , Mass. , which have be the subject of Longfellow 's `` Tales of a Wayside Inn , '' and restore it. Mr. Ford startle the country late in 1926 by announce the permanent adoption of the five-day week for his factory , after try it out for some time. He declare that the five-day week would open the way to great prosperity than that which the country then enjoy and which he attribute to the eight-hour day and high wage , because they give people time and money to consume the good they produced. Without the five-day week , he say , the country would not be able to absorb the result of mass production and remain prosperous. Developed Model A Met Chevrolet Competition by Turning Out New Car Late that same year Mr. Ford meet his great industrial crisis. In 1924 the Ford company have manufacture about two-thirds of all the automobile produce in this country , but by 1926 the Chevrolet car , manufacture by the General Motors Corporation , have become a serious competitor. Its production mount from 25,000 in January , 1926 , to 77,000 in November , while Ford sale dropped. Mr. Ford close his plant late in 1926 while he experiment with a six-cylinder model. He finally abandon the Model T the next year , substitute the Model A , which become almost as well known. To produce the new model Mr. Ford have to make over almost his entire system of production , retool his plant and retrain his worker , a feat of industrial renovation which many expert have contend would prove impossible. The new model prove popular with the buy public , and the Ford Motor Company continue to expand. In 1928 Mr. Ford organize the British Ford Company , and subsequently begin operation in other European countries. In Germany the German Ford Company be organize with the German dye trust a one of it principal stockholders. Aided Soviet Industrialization Mr. Ford have long regard Soviet Russia a a potential market of great importance. By agree to aid in the construction of an automobile factory at Nizhni-Novgorod , and by provide technological assistance in the development of the automobile industry in the Soviet Union , Mr. Ford sell $ 30,000,000 worth of product to Russia , and , incidentally , give add impetus to the industrialization of that country , which be to prove of such importance in later years. When the stock market collapse of October , 1929 , precipitate the great depression , Mr. Ford be one of the business and industrial leader who be summon to the White House by President Hoover. Unlike some industrialist who favor deflation of wage , Mr. Ford argue that the maintenance of purchase power be of paramount importance. Although the Ford Motor Company lose as much a $ 68,000,000 in a single depression year , Mr. Ford maintain his wage policy until the autumn of 1932 , when it announce a readjustment from `` the high executive down to the ordinary laborer , '' include a new minimum wage scale of $ 4 a day , $ 1 less than that which he have put into effect eighteen year before. As the depression wan , however , he revert to his high-wage policy and in 1935 establish a minimum of $ 6 a day. Mr. Ford be a central figure in the banking crisis which lead to the closing of the Detroit bank in February , 1933 , which in turn precipitate the chain of event that result in the national bank holiday when President Roosevelt be inaugurate the next month. When the collapse come the Ford Motor Company have about $ 32,500,000 on deposit in various bank of the Guardian Detroit Union group , and Edsel Ford personally and the Ford Motor Company have make loan of about $ 12,000,000 in cash and security to try to stave off the closing. How much the Ford interest lose because of the closing be never publicly reveal , but Edsel Ford subsequently help to organize and capitalize a new national bank , the Manufacturers National Bank of Detroit , which take over most of the asset and obligation of the Guardian National group. Meanwhile the General Motors Company , Mr. Ford 's close business rival , aid by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation , open another new bank , the National Bank of Detroit. Early Foe of New Deal Mr. Ford , who have support Herbert Hoover for re-election in 1932 , be regard a one of the lead foe of the New Deal in the early day of President Roosevelt 's Administration , and he refuse to sign the automobile code of the National Recovery Administration , which stipulate that employee have a right to organize. In 1936 he support Gov. Alf M. Landon , state that the election would `` determine if labor and industry in this country can continue under a system of free enterprise. '' Despite Mr. Roosevelt 's triumphant re-election with the strong support of the Committee for Industrial Organization , then head by John L. Lewis , Mr. Ford remain outspokenly antagonistic to unions. In an interview on Feb. 19 , 1937 , he advise all worker to `` stay out of unions. '' At the same time he declare that no group of striker would ever take over a Ford plant. The United Automobile Workers , a CIO union , begin a vigorous drive to organize the worker in the Ford plants. The opening blow be a sit-down strike in the Ford plant in Kansas City , end only by the promise of official there to treat with the union , a step the Ford company have never take before. Other sporadic strike occur in Ford plant in other section of the country. Mr. Ford fight back with the argument that his policy of high wage and short hour be satisfactory to the bulk of the worker in his plants. He charge that a group of international financier have gain control of the union and be utilize their power to exploit labor and management alike. His Trouble With Union UAW Won 70 % Votes After NLRB Ordered Election On May 26 , 1937 , a group of UAW organizer , include Richard T. Frankensteen and Walter Reuther , be distribute organize literature outside the gate of the Ford plant at River Rouge , when they be set upon and badly beaten. The union charge that the beating be administer by Ford company police. The Ford Motor Company deny this. After lengthy hearing the National Labor Relations Board find the Ford Motor Company guilty of unfair labor practices. The Ford company fight the issue through the court to the United States Supreme Court , which , in effect , uphold the finding by refuse to review it. In April , 1941 , the UAW call a strike in the Ford plant and the NLRB hold an election under the Wagner Act to determine the collective bargaining spokesman for the employes. When the vote be count in June , 1941 , the UAW be find to have win about 70 per cent of them. With characteristic vigor , Mr. Ford , long look upon a perhaps the strong foe of unionism , do a complete about face. He sign a contract with the union which give them virtually everything for which they have ask , include a union shop and a dues check-off system. In the early day of the second World War , Mr. Ford oppose our entry into it and , true to his pacifist conviction , refuse to manufacture airplane motor for Great Britain. He compel the cancellation of a contract make by his son , Edsel , call for the production of 6,000 Rolls- Royce engine for Great Britain , and 3,000 of the same type for the United States. To support his contention that the United States be in no danger Mr. Ford , in May , 1940 , state that if it should become necessary the Ford Motor Company could `` under our own supervision , and without meddle by Government agency , swing into the production of a thousand airplane of standard design a day. '' As the pressure for re-armament become great , Mr. Ford be compel by public opinion to agree to build plane for the United States. The net result be the celebrated Willow Run plant for the construction of four-motored bombers. At it construction it be the large single manufacturing establishment in the world , occupy a building 3,200 foot long and 1,280 foot wide , with 2,547,000 foot of floor space. In addition there be hangar with another 1,200,000 foot of floor space , and an adjacent air field large than La Guardia Field in this city. Produced 8,000 B-24's Plant at Willow Run Turned Out One Bomber an Hour Ground be break for the plant on April 18 , 1941 , and the first of the thirty-ton B-24-E bomber come off it assembly line a little more than a year later , in May , 1942. For a time the plant be under severe criticism on the ground that it be not produce at the rate that have be anticipate , but this be eventually still when the gigantic factory begin turn out bomber at the rate of one an hour , twenty-four hour a day. By the spring of 1945 , when the War Department announce that the production of Liberator bomber would be discontinue , Willow Run have produce more than 8,000 of them. In May , 1945 , a spokesman for the company reveal that it have no plan for the post-war utilization of the gigantic factory , and that it plan to turn it back to the Defense Plant Corporation , the Government agency which have put up the $ 100,000,000 it cost. When Mr. Ford resume the active management of the company , after the unexpected death of his son , Edsel , he begin a series of change in it high officials. In March , 1944 , Charles E. Sorenson , who have be consider for year a it great production expert , announce his retirement from the company. Not long after that Mr. Ford 's personal secretary , Ernest G. Liebold , be dismiss , after have be one of the company 's top executive for many years. The Ford company ask for and obtain the release of Henry Ford 2d , son of Edsel Ford , from the Navy , in which he have serve for two and a half year and have rise to the rank of lieutenant , on the ground that he be need in the executive end of the business. Mr. Ford let it be know that he be groom his grandson and namesake , then 26 year old , for the eventual leadership of the business. From time to time Mr. Ford give interview in which he emphasize his favorite belief : the folly of war , the need for world federation , the decentralization of industry , the advantage of hard work , utilitarian education , abstemiousness and simple pleasures. He be oppose to the use of tobacco and liquor , and he hat idling. In a characteristic interview in September , 1944 , he make known his adherence to his old doctrine of high wage for his employes. Declaring his intention of raise the wage of his worker as soon a the Government would allow him to do so , Mr. Ford say : `` As long a I live I want to pay the high wage in the automobile industry. If the men in our plant will give a full day 's work for a full day 's pay , there be no reason why we ca n't always do it. Every man should make enough money to own a home , a piece of land and a car. '' Mr. Ford be an ardent collector of Americana. In 1928 he establish , and endow with $ 5,000,000 a museum at Dearborn to commemorate the invention of his old friend , Thomas A. Edison. The Menlo Park Laboratory , in which Mr. Edison perfect the electric light , be completely restore in the museum. Mr. Ford also build Greenfield Village , a reproduction of the community in which Mrs. Ford , who be Clara Bryant before their marriage in 1887 , be born. There he bring the original log cabin in which McGuffey , author of the celebrated reader , be bear ; the court house in which Abraham Lincoln first practice law , and the home of Stephen Foster 's parent , as well a momentos of his own youth. One of his lifelong interest be in the training of youth to earn a livelihood , and he establish various vocational school for the purpose. He also make it a policy to employ a fixed proportion of blind person and other handicapped individual in his plant , and take a keen interest in the rehabilitation of wounded war veterans. At it convention in September , 1944 , the American Legion award to him it Distinguished Service Medal for his effort in behalf of disabled veteran of both world war .