July 16 , 1948 OBITUARY Leadership , Personal Courage , Devotion to Troops Won for Pershing Affection of Nation By THE NEW YORK TIMES John Joseph Pershing , Commander in Chief of the American Expeditionary Force in the first World War , enter the military service -- in which he be to rise to the summit of distinction -- almost by accident , for he be plan to be a lawyer when he saw the announcement of an examination for admittance to West Point which change his career. General Pershing come from a humble home. He be bear on Sept. 13 , 1860 , in the cottage of his father , then a section foreman on the old Hannibal & St. Joseph Railroad , near Laclede , Mo. In view of the part he be to play later in life in help to restore Alsace and Lorraine to France it be interest to note that he be of Alsatian extraction. The first Pershing in America be Frederick Pfoerschin , who emigrate to the United States from his home near the Rhine in Alsace in 1724. The family name in time change to Pershin , then to Pershing. The General 's father be John Fletcher Pershing , a sturdy , ambitious man who migrate West from Pennsylvania in his youth , and his mother be Ann Elizabeth Thompson of Kentucky. From them the boy , who later be to command million of men , inherit a strong physique and a spirit of determination. The father , with nine child to support , take up various occupation -- keep a store , run a hotel , farming , develop land and act a a travel salesman -- and finally achieve relative affluence for that time and locality. A collapse in land price , however , sweep away his $ 40,000 fortune and leave him only the farm. Young John Pershing help work the farm , but early become a teacher , first at a Negro school near his home , in which every preceding teacher have fail , and then at a country school to which he ride nine mile on horseback daily. With the money he save from his teach salary he attend Kirksville ( Mo. ) Normal School and be graduate in 1880 with the degree of Bachelor of Arts. Soldierly Qualities Won Honor Pershing still be undecided a to his life work when that notice of the West Point examination appeared. But he do not desire an Army career. `` No , I would n't stay in the Army , '' he tell a friend. `` There wo n't be a gun fire in the world in a hundred years. I 'll study law , I guess. But I want an education and now I see how I can get it. '' He take the examination and win the appointment by a single point in one subject , grammar. At the Military Academy Cadet Pershing be only average in scholarship , but he display such outstanding soldierly quality that he be graduate in 1886 a senior cadet captain , the high honor at West Point. The newly commission second lieutenant go into action immediately in the Southwest in the Sixth Cavalry , under the command of Gen. Nelson Miles , who be then in his closing campaign against Chief Geronimo and his Apaches. Pershing 's daring and quick action win him within a year a commendation from General Miles for `` march his troop with pack train over rough country 140 mile in forty-six hour and bring in every man and animal in perfect condition. '' Lieutenant Pershing presently find himself in command of the Sioux Scouts , a picked organization , and lead them into the Dakotas to put down an outbreak there and participate in the Battle of Wounded Knee. In several year of Indian fight Pershing win further commendation for courage and efficiency. After the Indian campaign be over Lieutenant Pershing be detach and send to the University of Nebraska a military instructor. He study as well a taught there , and in 1893 receive the degree of Bachelor of Laws. Cool Under Fire Courageous Conduct in Cuba in '98 Praised by T. Roosevelt He be make first lieutenant in the Tenth Cavalry in 1892 , serve again against the Indians , and in 1897 go to West Point a instructor in tactics. The Spanish-American War break out the next year and Pershing immediately be transfer from West Point to active command a a captain in the Tenth Cavalry. He fight at El Caney , in the advance on Santiago de Cuba , and his conduct be so courageous that it attract the attention of Theodore Roosevelt and draw from Pershing 's own colonel the testimonial : `` I have be in many fight , through the Civil War , but Captain Pershing be the cool man under fire I ever saw in my life. '' After that war Pershing have an opportunity to show the administrative capacity which he display so notably in the World War. He receive the rank of major in the Federal Volunteer Force and be assign to staff duty. He organize the Insular Bureau , under which the affair of the Philippine Islands and Puerto Rico be still administered. In 1899 he be transfer to the Adjutant General 's Department and order to the Philippines a Adjutant General of the district of Mindanao and Jolo. In the hill of Western Mindanao , thirty mile from the sea , dwell 100,000 Moros -- proud , warlike Mohammedans -- whom the Spanish in 300 year have not be able to subjugate and who start a rebellion against the Americans as soon a the United States free them from Spain. They be split up into dozen of band , rule over by sultan , and could defy all outside interference from supposedly impregnable jungle retreats. To Pershing , with the rank of only a captain in the Regular Army , be assign the job of pacify them. Pershing prepare himself quietly for the ultimate job in his first two year in the island , learn the native dialect and study the Koran. His command include five troop of cavalry , a battalion of infantry , a battery of artillery and a company of engineers. It be evident that to subjugate the Moros the Sultan of Bacolod , the most important of the Moro chief , must be conquered. This sultan hold a strongly fortify position in the hill to the west of Lake Lanao with 600 fanatical tribesmen. Captain Pershing try by diplomacy to induce the Moros to lay down their arm , but they refuse , and on April 5 , 1903 , he lead his men against the fort in a clever surround movement and after defeat several small outpost group of Moros charge the Moro entrenchments. This bring a halt to the insurrection and draw the congratulation of Secretary of War Elihu Root. Captain Pershing be order back to Washington for general staff duty and arrive to find himself lionized. President Theodore Roosevelt pay him the signal honor of mention him in a message to Congress. Soon after his return he meet Miss Helen Warren , daughter of Senator Francis E. Warren of Wyoming. They fell in love almost immediately and be marry on Jan. 26 , 1905 , in St. John 's Church in Washington in the presence of a brilliant array of guest and with President and Mrs. Roosevelt in the front pew. Attache At Tokyo Military Observer in Manchuria in Russo-Japanese War The young captain meanwhile have be assign to the embassy at Tokyo a military attache , and the day after the wedding Captain and Mrs. Pershing start for Japan. The Russo-Japanese War be on and Pershing accompany the army of General Kuroki , a observer , on it victorious march through Manchuria. His report to the War Department on this operation enhance his standing a an officer of marked ability , and the Mikado confer on him his first foreign decoration , the Order of the Sacred Treasury. He return to the United States in 1906. He have suffer some embarrassment in Manchuria , for there he have associate with European observer , colonel and general , of his own age , and he , in his forty , be only a captain. Pershing be ambitious for promotion and President Roosevelt be eager to give it to him. Seniority control army promotions. The President could appoint any man , military or civilian , to the rank of brigadier general or high , but he could not promote a captain to be a major or a colonel. President Roosevelt perform one of his characteristic acts. He appoint Pershing brigadier general , thus jump him over the head of 862 major , lieutenant colonel and colonels. When he send the nomination to the Senate on Sept. 15 , 1906 , it produce a storm in the War Department , and friend of some of the officer who have be pass over charge that Pershing be the beneficiary of `` pull '' because his father-in-law be a Senator. Roosevelt stand by his gun and the appointment be confirmed. Thereupon General Pershing be send back to the Philippines to command the Department of Visayas , on the Island of Luzon. Here the general spent some of the happy day of his life. His first child , Helen , have be bear just before he be make brigadier general. Other child be bear to General and Mrs. Pershing in the Philippines. Went to Europe for His Health Late in 1908 General Pershing 's health break down and he be send with his family to Europe to keep in touch with the Balkan situation. There be rumor that his career be end , but Pershing fully recover and at the end of 1909 he return to the Philippines a commander of the Moro Province of Mindanao. Trouble again be brew among the Mohammedan tribesman , and in 1911 a serious outbreak come on the island of Jolo. Pershing again lead his men in a series of battle which result in the final pacification of the tribe in 1913. Pershing then go about among the recent rebel , show them that there be no animosity on the part of the Americans and that so long a they be peaceable they could count on friendliness and justice. He win the heart of the various chieftain and their follower and be make a `` datto , '' a native ruler , in recognition of their respect and confidence. In his report to his officer on the Bagsak engagement , General Pershing set out his policy for conciliate the rebels. `` In this hour of exultation , '' he write , `` let u not forget the vanquished foe. '' Saying that they fight with `` an unswerving courage and a superb gallantry , '' he direct : `` Let our assurance of good-will be extend to him in his defeat , and let no opportunity be allow to pass to do a kindly act or to extend a word of encouragement to this brave people. '' In January , 1914 , General Pershing take command of the Eighth Brigade , with headquarters at the Presidio in San Francisco. There be trouble along the Mexican border , however , and he soon be call to take command of a large mobile force guard the border under the general supervision of General Frederick Funston. Living condition be hard and General Pershing leave his family in the comfort of the Presidio. On Aug. 27 , 1915 , there come the great tragedy of Pershing 's life. The general be call to the telephone at headquarters. `` Telegram for you , sir , '' say the telephone orderly. `` Yes ? '' respond the General. `` Shall I -- shall I -- read it to you , sir ? '' the orderly ask , haltingly. `` Yes , '' say General Pershing. Again the orderly hesitated. `` Go ahead , '' say Pershing. And then the orderly read him the message telling of the death of his wife and three daughter -- all his family except his son Warren -- in a fire at their quarter in the Presidio. Warren alone have be save by a maid and be report to be in serious condition in the Army hospital. `` Is that all -- be that everything ? '' Pershing ask when the orderly have complete the message. `` Yes , sir , '' say the orderly. Pershing leave his duty only long enough to see to the burial of his family , leave his son Warren with his sister in Lincoln , Neb. , and return , his hair whiten and his face line , to his post. Chased Pancho Villa Leader of 12,000 Troops in Futile Expedition in Mexico One night in March , 1916 , Pancho Villa gallop across the border into Columbus , N. M. , kill eight American soldier and wound nine civilian , and flee back into the fastness of northern Mexico. President Wilson could endure the outrage no longer and order General Pershing to cross the border with a punitive expedition to get Villa. General Pershing act with dispatch and four day later have 6,000 men in Mexico. Eventually he have 12,000 men there on an expedition doom to failure. The Carranza Government not only refuse to cooperate with the Americans against Villa , but throw obstacle in their way. Pershing , restrain by order from Washington from make an aggressive campaign , be oblige to use both firmness and diplomacy. Once a Mexican general transmit to Pershing an order from his Government that Pershing could move only to the northward and threaten an attack if Pershing do not obey. Pershing bark back at him : `` Tell President Carranza that I do not take order except from my own Government. I shall use my own judgment a to when and in what direction I shall move my force in pursuit of bandit or in seek information regard bandits. '' With all the handicap impose , Villa could not be catch and early in 1917 the punitive expedition be withdrawn. Pershing meanwhile have be promote to major general. General Funston die suddenly and Pershing be appoint commander of the border troop in his place. Named To Head A.E.F. Junior on Major General List Advanced Over Five On April 6 , 1917 , the United States declare that a state of war with Germany exist and then begin the great phase of Pershing 's career. Four week after the war declaration General Pershing receive a telegram from his father- in-law , Senator Warren , ask him how well he know French. He respond that he speak it quite fluently. A few day later he receive a letter from the Senator say that Secretary of War Newton D. Baker have call him up to ask him about the general 's French. Meantime a telegram arrive from Maj. Gen. Hugh L. Scott intimate that Pershing might command American troop in France. General Pershing be summon to Washington and soon after his arrival be appoint to command the American Expeditionary Force. This occasion some heartburning in Army circle , for Pershing be junior on the list of major general , with Generals Leonard Wood , Bell , Thomas H. Barry , Hugh L. Scott and Tasker H. Bliss senior to him. In General Pershing 's `` My Experiences in the World War '' he have this to say of his appointment : `` I be grateful to President Wilson and Secretary Baker for select me to command our army and for the whole-hearted and unfailing support they accord me in France. No commander be ever privilege to lead a fine force ; no commander ever derive great inspiration from the performance of his troops. '' Sailed Secretly in May , 1917 The President and Secretary of War give General Pershing wide latitude in their instruction for the course he be to pursue in France. President Wilson stress in write that the idea must be keep in view of an eventual separate and distinct American Army. General Pershing and a small staff , the nucleus of the staff he be to build up , sail secretly from New York on the liner Baltic on May 28 , 1917 , and arrive in Liverpool on June 8. After a cordial reception in England , in which Pershing be receive by King George at Buckingham Palace , this first contingent of what be to be an A. E. F. of nearly 2,500,000 men proceed to France , where they receive an ovation from the French populace. Preparing for the arrival of a huge army so far from it home base be one of the most difficult task ever assign a military leader. For month Pershing struggle with the problem of building supply depot and line of communication , often complicate by difference with the French about problem of supply and with the British about shipping , and with the War Department , at home , which , he believe , be slow to shake itself loose from red tape and think in term of a great modern conflict. One by one the exasperating problem be solve and American troop slowly begin to arrive in France. General Pershing 's two major problem , it appear from his memoir , be combat the strenuous effort of the British and French to have the American troop incorporate in their own army instead of be use to form a separate military force , and obtain from the General Staff in Washington , which , he felt , be handicap by red tape and lack of vision , the immense shipment of men and supply which the war program demanded. His effort to build up a distinct American army bring him into frequent clash with the allied military and political leader , but he stand his ground , argue that an independent American force would better serve the allied cause , as well a insist on the formation of an army for the sake of America 's own pride. So strong be the resentment against Pershing 's firmness , however , that effort be even make by allied leader to have him removed. Throughout the war General Pershing have the full support of both President Wilson and Secretary Baker. A truce come in this controversy in March , 1918 , however , when the Germans overwhelm the British Fifth Army and threaten to cut through between the British and French army , with a strong possibility of the war end in defeat for the Allies. In this emergency General Pershing perform one of the most dramatic act of his entire career. Laying aside for the time be his effort to build up a separate American force , he go to Marshal Foch 's headquarters and put at his disposal the entire American command in France , to be use a Foch saw fit. `` I have come to tell you , '' say General Pershing , `` that the American people would consider it a great honor for our troop to be engage in the present battle ; I ask you for this in their name and my own. `` At this moment there be no other question but of fighting. `` Infantry , artillery , aviation , all that we have be yours ; use them a you wish. More will come , in number equal to requirements. `` I have come especially to tell you that the American people will be proud to take part in the great battle of history. '' The American leader hand Marshal Foch a letter set forth the foregoing , and the letter and the verbal statement be broadcast by the French press and aid powerfully in revive a flagging morale. Winston Churchill say of Pershing 's offer : `` This decision be at the true height of circumstance and it itself go far to repair the injury of Ludendorff 's inroad. '' There be five American division then in France which Pershing consider fit to take their place in the battle. Foch apparently be distrustful of the dependability of the American troop , however , and do not employ them against the German drive , but leave them in quiet sector , where they relieve French divisions. Pershing 's program be delay by his agreement to the shipping in British vessel until June , of American infantry and machine gunner to the exclusion of auxiliary troop necessary to the operation of an independent army , in order to help the Allies through the crisis of early 1918. But this be change only after heat argument , in one of which , at least , the American commander pound the table in emphasis of his objection to be coerced. Meanwhile , support by the advocacy of General Pershing , unity of command among the Allies have be accomplish with Foch a Generalissimo. Enough American division have be season in France by June to permit the employment of half a dozen of them under French high command , with decisive effect in check the final German drive and enable Foch to assume the offensive at last. Foch Agrees to Separate Army Late in July , when American division be help force the Germans back , Foch agree with Pershing that the time have come to assemble the scattered American force then serve with the French and British into an independent army under General Pershing 's own command. Preparations be begin for the first American offensive , to be carry out early in September and to consist of the reduction of the St. Mihiel salient. The army be form , elaborate movement of men and supply be put under way , and the date of the attack be set for Sept. 12. And once again there flare up the issue of the independence of the American forces. On Aug. 30 , the day Pershing take command of the St. Mihiel sector , Foch go to his headquarters and propose a change in plan involve the limiting of the St. Mihiel operation and the withdrawal of several American division and their incorporation in the French Army in the Meuse-Argonne. General Pershing refuse to hear of a split up of his force , and Foch at length demand : `` Do you wish to go to battle ? '' `` Most assuredly , '' Pershing respond , `` but a an American Army and in no other way. If you assign me a sector I will take it at once. '' The discussion continue in this vein , then Pershing declare : `` Marshal Foch , you have no authority a Allied Commander in Chief , to call upon me to yield up my command of the American Army , to have it scatter among the Allied force , where it will not be an American Army at all. '' The marshal say he must insist upon his arrangements. `` You may insist all you please , '' declare General Pershing , `` but I decline absolutely to agree to your plan. While our army will fight wherever you may decide , it will not fight except a an independent American Army. '' Pershing declare himself in write to Foch next day. He tell him frankly of the difficulty that American troop have have under French and British command , of our delay formation of an independent army only in deference to urgent Allied demand for infantry and machine gunner , and declare that he could no longer agree to any plan which involve a dispersal of American units. Vindication at St. Mihiel Crushing of Salient Followed By Meuse-Argonne Victory The matter be finally settle by an agreement with Foch for a limiting of the American operation at St. Mihiel to the actual pinch out of the salient and the beginning of another attack , as soon a possible after St. Mihiel , in the Meuse-Argonne. The St. Mihiel drive be carry out a schedule , and under Pershing 's own direction , and be a striking success , win commendation a a perfect piece of planning and execution. Immediately , General Pershing proceed to the drive into the Argonne , begin on Sept. 26. This be the great battle in which American troop be engage , and General Pershing keep in close touch with it , visit commander close to the line to confer with them and encourage them. It be direct at the enemy 's most sensitive point , his main line of communication , through Carignan , Sedan and Mezieres. By dog slog through the indescribably difficult region of heavily forest hill which lay in front of the main line , desperately defend by the Germans , the American First Army break through and block the German communications. At the same time the French and British be drive the Germans back and with his line crumble everywhere and his army in danger of be trap , the enemy be force to sue for peace. There be many divergent opinion on Pershing 's military ability , and Clemenceau attack him bitterly for the delay in American participation ; but Capt. B. H. Liddell Hart , British military critic who have deal harshly with most of the Allied military leader , have this to say of Pershing : `` It be sufficient to say that there be probably no other man who would or could have build the structure of the American Army on the scale he planned. And without that army the war could hardly have be save and could not have be won. '' Many military men saw in the dash and resourcefulness of the American troop , once the Germans be drive from the trench , vindication of Pershing 's insistence that his men should be train thoroughly in open warfare , and not simply in trench warfare , a the French and British instructor advocated. Sympathetic Under Austerity He be a man of unswerving purpose -- Clemenceau call him `` the stubborn man I ever meet '' -- a stickler for military courtesy and smartness , of reserve demeanor and , in the eye of the men in the rank , cold. There be ample evidence , however , that beneath it all he have deep sympathy for the soldier under him. In write to the Secretary of War of the necessity of have a separate American Army , when he be under severe pressure from the Allies , he say : `` If human being be pawn it would be different , but they be our own men. '' And he close his first cable report to Washington after the armistice with these word : `` I pay supreme tribute to our officer and soldier of the line. When I think of their heroism , their patience under hardship , their unflinching spirit of offensive action , I be fill with emotion which I be unable to express. Their deed be immortal and they have earn the eternal gratitude of our country. '' After the armistice General Pershing take a brief vacation in the south of France , then return to his desk and set about the task of send the army home. It be not until September , 1919 , that he return to the United States. Gets Ovation On Return Named General of the Armies , Becomes Chief of Staff He receive ovation in New York and Washington , and on Sept. 18 he be receive in Washington a `` The guest of the nation '' and reward by the thanks of Congress in joint session. After the war the title of General of the Armies of the United States be confer upon Pershing , the only officer in American military history so designated. He be the fourth man to hold during active service the permanent rank of full general in the Regular Army of the United States. His illustrious predecessor be Grant , Sherman and Sheridan. ( Washington be a Lieutenant-General and first Commander in Chief of the United States Army and a full general of the Continental Armies. ) There be talk of the General be a candidate for President , but he stop it with the terse announcement that he be not in politics. His interest be still with the Army. General Pershing , on his return to America , take over the office of Chief of Staff and devote himself to shape a national defense program. He foster Defense Day and work unceasingly for the citizen ' training camps. He speak often for preparedness. He retire on Sept. 13 , 1924. During his year in Washington after the war General Pershing live quietly and unostentatiously , first in the Corbin mansion in the Chevy Chase district and later in a bachelor apartment in the center of the city. Although he have receive score of decoration from all the Allied country , he seldom wear any of them , and when he walk behind the caisson bear the body of the Unknown Soldier from the Capitol to Arlington he wear but one medal , the Victory medal award every man who serve in any capacity in our armed force in the World War. As chairman of the United States Battle Monuments Commission , General Pershing make many visit to France after the war and supervise the placing of our war dead in appropriate cemeteries. Wrote on War Experiences He also find time to write of the war a he saw it , under the title `` My Experiences in the World War. '' This book , which be syndicate in newspaper all over the country before publication in book form , arouse widespread interest , and some of the frank statement and viewpoint express by Pershing elicit somewhat tart reply from some other veteran of the war , both here and abroad. In the year after the war , General Pershing receive score of honor from university , society and institutions. A grateful America could not do enough for him. General Pershing retain until the end an active interest in army affairs. He continue to occupy an office in the War Department in Washington , make frequent visit to West Point , and to various army post , represent the army in greeting extend to prominent foreign visitor who be in high place in war day , and appear several time before various Congressional committee to further the cause of national defense. He also lend his name and service to many national and civic movement , such a the drive of the Red Cross , unemployment relief , etc. He take a leading part in the celebration of various national holiday , and on several occasion he ask in Armistice Day speeches for adequate preparedness , recall often how unprepared this country be upon it entry into the World War. General Pershing for a time aid in attempt to settle the Tacna-Arica boundary dispute between Chile and Peru , when he take charge of a project plebiscite in that region. The plebiscite met difficulty , however. General Pershing be force to resign , after a year , because of ill health. The general 's personal life be divide between his Army friend here and in France , his brother , James F. Pershing of New York , his sister , Miss May Pershing of Lincoln , Neb. , and his son , Francis Warren Pershing , who be graduate from Yale in 1931 , and become a partner in the Stock Exchange firm of Weicker & Co. two year later. At the end of April , 1937 , General Pershing again sail for Europe , after President Roosevelt appoint him a one of the three official delegate of the United States at the coronation of King George VI. His Life Despaired Of While spend the following winter a usual at Tucson , Ariz. , General Pershing suffer a severe rheumatic attack , which be complicate by a heart condition. Forced to take to his bed on Feb. 16 , 1938 , he pass into a coma on the 24th , and for four day he be conscious only for brief periods. Dr. Roland Davison , his personal physician , and other doctor be in constant attendance. Newspaper reporter be at hand to flash bulletin to a watching world. So slight be chance for his recovery that preparation for his burial in Arlington National Cemetery in Washington be make , his old uniform be carry West by airplane and special railroad car be hold in readiness at Tucson. But on the 28th the General show sign of improvement ; by March 2 the railroad car be release and three day later Dr. Davison predict his recovery. His sister and son have be constantly at his bedside. In the next month the General be well enough to travel by train to New York to attend the wedding on April 22 of his son and Miss Muriel [ miss text ] Richards. Urged Aid For Britain Recommended Sending 'At Least 50 Over Age Destroyers' On Aug. 4 , 1940 , in a national broadcast , General Pershing bring to a head the widespread desire to give Britain , then fight alone , great material aid by recommend that `` at least fifty over-age destroyer '' be turn over to her. Declaring that the next few week and month would be critical , he say : `` It be not hysterical to insist that democracy and liberty be threatened. With democracy and liberty overthrown on the Continent of Europe , only the British be leave to defend democracy and liberty in Europe. By send help to the British , we can still hope with confidence to keep the war on the other side of the Atlantic , where the enemy of liberty , if possible should be defeated. '' On his 80th birthday , President Roosevelt present to him a Distinguished Service Cross , for an act of heroism in the Philippines. A message of greet to `` an old comrade at arm '' be receive from Chief of State Marshal Henri Philippe Petain of France. Because of the general 's long friendship with Marshal Petain , President Roosevelt offer him the Ambassadorship to France , to succeed William C. Bullitt. For reason of health the appointment be decline , and be then give to Rear Admiral William D. Leahy. Since 1941 when he transfer his permanent living quarter to a suite at Walter Reed Hospital , General Pershing have live in semi-seclusion but never have be out of the public eye. Before Pearl Harbor , General Pershing be highly pleased to receive a phone message from his son say , `` I 've enlist in the Regulars. '' He be say to have be [ miss text ] have work his way up to the rank of major than by any promotion he ever received. General Marshall present Warren Pershing 's second lieutenant commission to him at Fort Belvoir ( Va. ) Engineer Corps officer ' train school upon the completion of his training there in August , 1942. His room contain map of the global war and he follow the progress of the conflict from newspaper account supplement by talk with almost every ranking American , British and French military figure who visit Washington. All , include Gen. Charles de Gaulle , who visit him in July , 1944 , manage to find time to pay their respects. General Eisenhower make a special point of visit him upon his return after VE-Day. Although ail for some time , General Pershing celebrate his eighty-fourth birthday in his hospital suite by cut a birthday cake at a party for a few intimate friend and his daughter-in-law , Mrs. Warren Pershing. Wished to Go to Conference The high esteem and affection in which he be hold by veteran be show by the presentation by the Army and Navy Union of it Medal of Honor to General Pershing on his birthday , and by the American Legion in Paris name it headquarters and clubhouse Pershing Hall in December. To the general , Paris be the `` heart of France , '' and he have hail it liberation in August , 1944 , a `` a great step forward along the road to Berlin. '' On April 20 , 1945 , he express the wish he could go to San Francisco `` to help finish the job we start for world peace , '' during a visit from Edward N. Scheiberling , National Commander of the American Legion. President Truman , accompany by Mrs. Truman and their daughter , Mary Margaret , visit the general on Sunday , April 22 , after they have worship in the Walter Reed Hospital chapel. To the end General Pershing be the high ranking officer of the Army , a General of the Armies. The five-star rank of General of the Army , create by Congress in December , 1944 , and give to Gens. George C. Marshall , Chief of Staff ; Douglas MacArthur , then Commander in the Southwest Pacific ; Dwight D. Eisenhower , Supreme Allied Commander in Europe , and Henry R. Arnold , Commanding General of the Army Air Forces , be still a grade below his. Though the observance of his birthday grow less active with the year , this be not because of forgetfulness or lack of interest among the great and the ordinary people whom he have led. The day never pass without the receipt of congratulatory messages. Last year these include , a they have before , one from President Truman , who have be a young artillery officer in World War I. As recently a last November , General Pershing receive a special medal , award to him by Congress for service in the war of his time .