January 31 , 1948 OBITUARY Mohandas K. Gandhi : The Indian Leader at Home and Abroad By THE NEW YORK TIMES The assassin be a Hindu who disagree with Gandhi 's ideology. Gandhi be shoot at point-blank range a he be go to delive his daily prayer meeting message. The assassin be immediately seize by the crowd and later tell a foreign correspondent , `` I be not at all sorry. '' Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru say in a radio address the evening of Gandhi 's death : `` Gandhi have go out of our life and there be darkness everywhere. ... The father of our nation be no more -- no long will we run to him for advice and solace. ... This be a terrible blow to million and milions in this country ... `` Our light have go out , but the light that shone in this country be no ordinary light. For a thousand year that light will be see in this country and the world will see it ... Oh , that this have happen to u ! There be so much more to do. '' Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi , Hindu reformer and nationalist leader , be look upon a a saint by million of his follower , who bestow upon him the admire appellation of `` Mahatma , '' literally `` the great-souled one. '' As be perhaps inevitable in the case of one who be the center of violent controversy for more than half a century , there be others who have very different view about the Indian leader , even contend that he be no good than a scheming demagogue. But , whatever view history may eventually take , there can be no contradiction of the statement that the emaciated little man in shawl and loin cloth make himself the live symbol of India in the mind of most Americans. He be bear on Oct. 2 , 1869 , at Porbandar , on the Kathiawar peninsula of India and come of a Bania family with official traditions. His father have be Prime Minister of the little native state. He be officially betroth three time before he be old enough to realize it. His first two fiancee die ; the third engagement , result in a marriage that last more than sixty year , come when he be only 7. The marriage take place when he be 13. `` I can see no moral argument in support of such a preposterous early marriage a mine , '' he write in his memoirs. At the age of 19 Gandhi go to London , where he study at University College and be call to the bar by the Inner Temple. He have a difficult time in London. Too proud to struggle against the snub not only of white people but also of Brahmins , he retire to cheap lodging , where he cook his own vegetarian meal and live for next to nothing. Worked in South Africa Returning to India Gandhi practice law for a short time in the Bombay High Court , but in 1893 he be call to South Africa on professional business. There he become engross in a long struggle for the liberty of Indians who have migrate to that country , which be his principal occupation for more than twenty years. Both in Natal and the Transvaal race feeling against the Indian settler be strong and discrimination be many. When , in 1896 , after a brief visit to India , Gandhi return to Durban , he be attack and badly beat for his agitations. The South Africans have become incense at a pamphlet he write in India on the condition of the Indians in South Africa. It be then that his conception of passive nonviolent resistance developed. He relinquish his large income a a lawyer and found a colony , the Tolstoy Farm , near Durban. It be along the line of the Russian philosopher 's estate at Yasnaya Polyass. He be often imprisoned and more often subject to indignity , but this neither check his energy nor deter him from render service of marked loyalty to the British Government. In 1914 , soon after a commission have remove some of the bad source of injustice to the Indians living in South Africa , Gandhi return to his native land and throw himself into support of the home rule movement. By 1918 he be busy organize his Satyagraha ( literally `` insistence upon truth '' ) movement , which he define a follow : `` Satyagraha differs from passive resistance a the North Pole from the South. The latter have be conceive a a weapon for the weak and do not exclude the use of physical force or violence for the purpose of gain one 's end , whereas the former have be conceive a a weapon of the strong and exclude the use of violence in any shape or form. '' In the following year the British Government publish the Rowlatt Acts , give the government emergency power for deal with revolutionary crime and conspiracies. Gandhi declare them to be an insult and denounce the bill a `` instrument of oppression. '' His Satyagraha campaign spread with great rapidity throughout India. Non-Cooperation Movement Finally , in June , 1929 , he form his celebrated non-violent , non-cooperation movement. The main point of his campaign be the boycott of Government service , of the new Legislatures and of the court of law ; the surrender of all public office and the withdrawal of child from Government schools. To this be subsequently add the militant boycott of foreign good , the fighting of the liquor and opium trade , and the furtherance of Hindu-Moslem friendship. Gandhi adopt the spin wheel a a sort of symbol of economic independence. He advocate the home manufacture of khaddar , or homespun cloth , to replace the import good from the cotton mill of Lancashire. Hartals , or other local strike , be call and there be many burning of stack of foreign-made cloth. The general boycott be accompany by rioting , looting of shop and unrest throughout India. Partly by his eloquence , partly by his reputation a an ascetic. Gandhi have win enormous prestige in India by this time. The Indian Congress party delegate it full authority to him and empower him to appoint his own successor. But the non-cooperation movement continue to be accompany by outburst of violence , many of them of a racial character. In March , 1922 , Gandhi be arrest and place on trial on a charge of conspire to spread disaffection with a view to overthrow the Government. He plead guilty and take full blame. His Sentence Remitted He be condemn to six year ' imprisonment but be release in January , 1924 , after he have undergone an operation for appendicitis , and the rest of his sentence be unconditionally remitted. In 1925 he announce that he would retire from the world for a year. There follow a long period in which he be the apostle of the spinning wheel , and agitate with much energy for the uplifting of the `` untouchable , '' the Hindu pariah caste. Early in 1930 Gandhi proclaim his intention of refuse to pay all Government tax , and particularly the salt tax. On April 5 he set out with a group of follower to march from Ahmedabad to the sea , where they collect salt water in earthen jar , then obtain salt by evaporation of the water. On May 5 Gandhi be arrest at Surat and spirit away to Poona , charge with have be the leader of plan to seize the Government salt depots. He be still languish in prison when the first Indian Round-Table Conference begin to gather in London. On Jan. 26 , 1931 , Gandhi be release by order of the Viceroy , Lord Irwin , who later become Viscount Halifax. There be much criticism in England of Lord Irwin 's action. However , the follow month Lord Irwin invite Gandhi to a series of conversation at Delhi which result in the Delhi Pact of March , 1931 , by which the Viceroy lift the ban on the Indian Congress party and Gandhi in turn call off the civil disobedience campaign. As the representative of the Congress party , Gandhi go to London to participate in the round- table conference. After much hesitation he undertake the mission , travel steerage , clad in his shawl and loin cloth , and take with him two goats. He be a guest , loin cloth and all , of King George V and Queen Mary in London , lunch with Lady Astor , and wait in vain for Mayor James J. Walker of New York to keep a date with him. Lived in London Slums In London , he live in the slum , familiarize himself with the condition of the poor. He also visit the Lancashire mill district , where he be both cheered and booed. On his way home he stop in Rome and have a conversation with Premier Mussolini , but because of his scanty costume he be not permit an interview with the Pope. He lose no time in institute a new civil disobedience campaign on Jan. 4 , 1932 , and be promptly send back to his old Yerovda Jail. From there he send out the announcement that he would starve himself to death unless the Government reverse it decision to grant separate political representation for seventy year to the Untouchables. His fast end after six day , however , when he be tell that the British Government have accept `` with great satisfaction '' the principal term of the settlement between the high caste Indians and the Untouchables. But in April , 1933 , he announce that he would fast for twenty-one day to call attention to the situation of the Untouchables. Despite almost unanimous medical opinion that he could not stand such a strain , he refrain from food from May 8 to May 29 , and soon regain his health. Released from jail at the time he begin his fast , Gandhi be re-arrested with his wife and thirty follower on July 31 , 1933 , when he begin a new `` individual civil disobedience '' campaign. He be sentence to a year in jail a an ordinary political prisoner without the privilege that have formerly be accord him. A week later he begin a new fast to obtain privilege that would enable him to carry on his fight in behalf of the Untouchables. In April , 1934 , Gandhi instruct his follower to abandon civil disobedience and campaign for the forthcoming election for the Legislative Assembly. Meanwhile the British have be prepare a new Constitution for India , which Gandhi have announce he would give a trial. On April 26 of that year he be attack and narrowly escape a beating by a mob of Indians who resent his attitude on the question of the Untouchables. When the new Constitution be promulgate the following August , Gandhi be bitterly disappoint in it. Although he have be succeed a leader of the Congress party by Jawaharlal Nehru , he remain active behind the scene , help to direct the opposition to the new form of government. He draft certain condition regard the carry out of the provision of the India act , and his tactic hamstring the working of the new act until July , 1937 , when a compromise be reached. In the spring of 1939 , five year after his ostensible retirement from politics , Gandhi openly return to activity because the Congress party have elect a president whom he do not want , Subhas Chandra Bose. He begin the sixth of his famous fast to force certain reform from the Thakore Saheb , autocratic ruler of the tiny principality of Rajkot , in northwestern India. Apprehension sweep India. Eight of the eleven autonomous Indian Governments establish in the Provinces resign and hamstring the Government of India Act , which have be in operation only two years. Markets close in Bombay. Trade be at a standstill. The mount public unrest force the British Viceroy , the Marquess of Linlithgow , to cut short a tour of northern India and return to the capital at New Delhi to protect the interest of the Crown. He inform Mr. Gandhi that the ruler of Rajkot would be force to grant the reforms. Gandhi break his four-day fast with a glass of orange juice , and his million of follower rejoiced. The Congress party promptly commit it new president , Mr. Bose , to the guidance of Gandhi and Mr. Bose resigned. Gandhi 's follower , Dr. Rajendra Prasad , be elect to succeed him. When the second World War break out , the Viceroy declare India to be a participant in it without consult the Congress party leaders. Gandhi , although a strong critic of Nazi Germany , demand the complete independence of India a the price of Indian cooperation. There follow three month of conversation between Gandhi and the Viceroy. In the last war , Gandhi point out , Britain have promise India `` self-governing institution '' after victory. He want the promise kept by free India at once ; Indians could not fight for democracy while it be deny to them. Lord Linlithgow answer for the British Government that any constitutional change must be defer until after the war and then Dominion status would be gradually extend to India. He say Gandhi must first solve the everlasting problem of protect the Moslem and other minority before they be turn over to the Hindus , who outnumber them three to one -- all creed and sect hat one another. Gandhi insist that freedom come first ; the minority would then become a domestic problem of no concern to Britain. There the conversation become deadlocked. Hated Nazis More For almost three year during the early part of the war Gandhi , in complete control of the Congress party , pursue a cautious policy of enlarge his support among the Hindu million , and constantly seek independence from the British. In March , 1940 , the Congress party vote Gandhi full power to direct it future policy and conduct it program. Under his control , the Working Committee , which be the executive body of the party , make a tentative offer of military aid to Britain in June , but withdraw it two month later when Gandhi declare he be convince Britain have no intention of recognize Indian independence. In October , on his seventy-first birthday , he announce that he have no ill-will toward Britain and that there would be no civil disobedience campaign. Two week later he announce that there would be a campaign , but in order not to embarrass the British war effort it would be conduct by a few individual in a symbolic rather than a massive way. He instruct two member of the Congress party to break the Defense of India Act prohibit speech direct to impede the conduct of the war. One of them be his personal servant. The other be the former president of the Congress party , Pandit Nehru. They make speech , urge disregard of the law and court , non-cooperation with munition manufacture , non-contribution of fund and not enlistment. They be jail forthwith , Pandit Nehru be sentence to four years. Thereupon the Working Committee of the party order 1,500 individual to invite arrest in the same way. The jail filled. Gandhi suspend his weekly paper , Harijan , when he be forbid to publish account of the speech and the arrests. He now keep out of jail , which he have never avoid previously , in order to direct the fight. In August , 1943 , Gandhi say that the purpose be `` not to force Britain but to convert her. '' With the entry of Japan into the war in December , 1941 , Gandhi , on Dec. 30 , ask the Working Committee of the party to relieve him from leadership. He explain that sympathy for the Axis- overrun country , rather than for Britain , dictate his second retirement. But he continue to run the Congress party from behind the scenes. With the threat of Japanese invasion grow daily Britain make a great effort in the spring of 1942 to unite the Indian faction behind a common policy of defense. Prime Minister Churchill dispatch Sir Stafford Cripps on a special mission to India to try to compose the difficulty of the party there. He officially offer complete independence and equality for India in the British Commonwealth of Nations as soon a the war be win with the right of ultimate secession. Although this be the large voluntary disbursement of power that Great Britain have ever offer , the war group within India refuse it. The Moslems and other minority group reject it because of their fear of their status under a Hindu majority. The Congress party reject it because it be not immediate. Gandhi , in April , introduce a resolution close the door to further negotiation with the British on the issue. In May , Gandhi call upon the British to quit India. Terms for an Ally Shortly thereafter he lay a resolution before the Working Committee of the Congress party give Britain a last choice : India would be her war ally if immediate freedom be grant ; otherwise `` full power to lead a civil disobedience movement against Britain would be give to Mohandas K. Gandhi. '' The Working Committee adopt it unhesitatingly , and only ratification by the All-India Congress party 's general assembly be require to launch `` open non-violent rebellion. '' Campaigning in behalf of the move , Gandhi say that he would not flinch at call a general strike. He say that there be increase ill will against Britain in India , and grow satisfaction at Japanese victories. He warn that India might welcome a Japanese invasion , even a many of the people of Burma have done. In New Delhi , the British directed Government of India make public a copy of a memorandum seize in a raid on the headquarters of the Congress party , which purport to show that Gandhi have propose conversation with the Japanese four month earlier. The Government charge that he and his follower be appeasers. On Aug. 9 the Congress party assembly , in plenary session , vote to throw his strength behind the `` non-violent rebellion '' and the Government announce it intention `` to use force a the necessity of the situation might require. '' Gandhi and some fifty of his follower be arrest a widespread riot began. As he be take to jail he leave the slogan : `` Either we get freedom or we die. '' He be imprison in the Victorian palace of the Aga Khan in Poona , but the Government 's action be not follow by a widespread unrest a have be predict by some observers. There be demonstration and act of sabotage , but the Government 's policy be successful in keep the heavy war industry running. Gandhi write the Viceroy , disclaim the responsibility of the Congress party for the act of violence that be occur , and threaten to begin a new fast , his ninth , unless he be liberated. The Government , which publish the correspondence , refuse to yield , term the hunger strike `` political blackmail , '' for which there can be no moral justification. Gandhi begin his fast on Feb. 10 , 1943. He announce that it would not be a `` fast unto death , '' but that he would subsist for twenty-one day on a diet of citrus juice mixed with water. There be some disturbance among the Hindu community , but on the fifth day after the fast begin The New York Times correspondent in New Delhi write that `` it be evident that his move would probably misfire. '' Fears be felt for the life of the fasting man for several day , but he astonish the doctor by survive , even though he be too weak to lift a glass of orange juice. American correspondent in India , point out that this be the first time he have fail to win at least a partial victory by a fast , say that his failure seem to have disappoint and discourage him. Disorders mark the first anniversary of Gandhi 's arrest , and agitation for his release be continue both in India and abroad. On Feb. 17 , 1944 , however , Viscount Wavell , who have assume the position a Viceroy , declare that he and his associate would be hold until they show `` some sign '' of cooperation. Mrs. Gandhi , his frail companion through a married life of more than sixty year , die late in February. She have faithfully follow her husband to jail more than once. He be release on parole for a week , and , sit in the shade of a tamarind tree , he watch the cremation of her remains. Then he go back to prison. On May 6 , after twenty-one month a a prisoner , Gandhi be release by the Government because of his fail health. The official doctor consider give him blood transfusion but Gandhi be say to have frown on the idea , maintain that the essential life stream of one human should not be use to extend the life of another. Viscount Wavell be praise for his decision to release the Hindu leader. In a proposal design to break the political deadlock over India 's independence Gandhi in September , 1944 , agree to discuss with Mohammed Ali Jinnah , head of the Moslem League , the Moslem 's long-standing demand that India be partition into separate Hindu and Moslem states. It be this basic plan that be finally agree upon in 1947 when India win her long-sought independence , but Gandhi 's conversation with Mr. Jinnah be fruitless. Gandhi have some time previously make an offer to withdraw his civil disobedience campaign for the duration of the war. By this time the Japanese drive toward India have be turn back and to most observer , the cooperation pledge from the Hindu leader seem a little gratuitous. Nevertheless , Gandhi be hail for his conciliatory attitude. A White Paper issue in London in June , 1945 , make a new attempt to break the deadlock in India , and Gandhi announce that he would ask Congress party leader to accept it. The British offer , look toward Dominion status for India , propose set up of a Viceroy 's Council to be compose `` in equal portion of Moslems and caste Hindus. '' Eight month later Prime Minister Clement Attlee offer to India the right to full independence , and a Cabinet mission be dispatch to work out the procedure. Gandhi appeal to his people to be patient and to give the mission a chance , but warn against `` fake promises. '' When the mission have draft it plan for Indian self-government , Gandhi at first say he regard it a `` seed to convert this land of sorrow into one without sorrow and suffering. '' By June , although the proposal have not be alter to any degree , Gandhi , for reason that remain obscure , develop `` vague misgiving , '' but the Congress party , which he once control , accept the plan , a have the Moslem League. In the ensuing month it become clear that other political leader have take the stage in India , but Gandhi remain the national Government 's core and he tell a New York Times correspondent that he intend to remain in politics for many years. Asked if he still expect to live to the age of 125 , Gandhi , on the eve of his seventy-seventh birthday reply `` Yes , '' in order to serve his people. In early 1947 the British plan be to quit India by June , 1948 , early if the Hindu and Moslem community would compose their differences. Gandhi , in an open break with the Congress party , reverse himself and balk at a Hindu-Moslem partition and the formation of Pakistan a a separate state for the Moslem majority region of India. The Gandhi viewpoint be that whether it cause chaos or not , the British must leave India on the promised date and let India work out it own fate. By this time the British be convince that partition be the only solution that would be accept and finally Gandhi reluctantly go along , declare : `` Partition be bad. But whatever be past be past. We have only to look to the future. '' When on Aug. 15 , 1947 , India achieve her independence , Viscount Mountbatten , Viceroy of India , hail Gandhi a the `` architect of India 's freedom through non-violence. '' Gandhi do not participate in the independence observance hold throughout India. At the moment of victory he sit on a wooden cot in a Calcutta hut , scorn the result of his decade of labor and fast. He announce his intention of living with the Hindu minority in Pakistan , the predominantly Moslem state create by partition. Riots sweep across much of India , with score kill and injure in communal clashes. Gandhi start in Calcutta his first fast in independent India. It would end , he say , only when Calcutta `` return to sanity. '' After he have be assure that there would be no more rioting in Calcutta , Gandhi break his fast. He be credit with have restore peace to India 's large city. Crowds of Moslems and Hindus make their way to his camp and surrender gun , sword and ammunition they have use in the riots. `` If the peace be break again , I will come back and undertake a fast unto death and die if necessary , '' he said. He go to New Delhi , where he continue his effort to end the communal strife , which have break out more violently than ever along the Punjab border and in Delhi itself. Daily he exhort all non-Moslems to accept Moslem neighbor a friend and brothers. However , on Sept. 16 he tell the Hindu Youth Organization that `` if the Dominion of Pakistan persists in wrongdoing there be bind to be war between India and Pakistan. '' On Oct. 2 he celebrate his seventy-ninth birthday ( Hindus be count a year old at birth ) , which have be declare a national holiday by the Government of India. He start a new fast on Jan. 12 , 1948 , declare that he would continue until great unity between Hindu , Sikh and Moslem community be achieved. This fast be end after five day , when Hindus and Moslems in Delhi agree to live in peace .