August 17 , 1948 OBITUARY Babe Ruth , Baseball 's Great Star and Idol of Children , Had a Career Both Dramatic and Bizarre By MURRAY SCHUMACH Probably nowhere in all the imaginative field of fiction could one find a career more dramatic and bizarre than that portray in real life by George Herman Ruth. Known the world over , even in foreign land where baseball be never play , a the Babe , he be the boy who rise from the obscurity of a charitable institution in Baltimore to a position a the leading figure in professional baseball. He be also it great drawing-card , it high salaried performer -- at least of his day -- and the idol of million of youngster throughout the land. A creation of the time , he seem to embody all the quality that a sport-loving nation demand of it outstanding hero. For it have always be debatable whether Ruth owe his fame and the vast fortune it make for him more to his ability to smash home run in great quantity than any other player in the history of the game or to a strange personality that at all time be intensely real and `` regular , '' which be the one fix code by which he lived. He make friend by the thousand and rarely , if ever , lose any of them. Affable , boisterous and good-natured to a fault , he be always as accessible to the newsboy on the corner a to the most dignified personage in worldly affairs. More , he could be very much at each with both. He could scarcely recall a name , even of certain intimate with whom he frequently come in contact , but this at no time interfere with the sincerity of his greeting. Indeed , by a singular display of craft , he overcome this slight deficiency with consummate skill. If you look under 40 it be `` Hello , kid , how be you ? '' And if you appear above that line of demarcation it be `` Hello , doc , how 's everything go ? '' How Ruth Aided Small Boy The story be tell of the case of Johnny Sylvester , a youngster whose life doctor have despair of unless something unusual happen to shock him out of a peculiar malady. The boy 's uncle , recall how fond he always have be of baseball , conceive the idea of send word to Babe Ruth and ask his aid. The next day the Babe , arm with bat , glove and half a dozen sign baseball , make one of his frequent pilgrimage to a hospital. The boy , unexpectedly meet his idol face to face , be so overjoyed that he be cure -- almost miraculously. A year later an elderly man accost the Babe in a hotel lobby and , after receive the customary whole-hearted greeting of `` Hello , doc , '' say : `` Babe , I do n't know whether you remember me , but I 'm Johnny Sylvester 's uncle and I want to tell you the family will never forget what you do for us. Johnny be get along fine. '' `` That 's great , '' reply the Babe. `` Sure , I remember you. Glad to hear Johnny be do so well. Bring him around some time. '' After a few more word they part and no sooner have the man remove himself from earshot than the Babe turn to a baseball writer at his elbow and ask : `` Now , who the devil be Johnny Sylvester ? '' Never Lost Carefree Spirit Nor must this be mistake for affectation , for there be never a doubt that the Babe at all time be tremendously sincere in his desire to appear on friendly term with all the world. And though in late year he acquire a certain polish which he lack utterly in his early career , he never lose his natural self nor his flamboyant , carefree mannerism , which at all time make him a show apart from the ball field. Single-handed , he tear the final game of the 1928 world 's series in St. Louis to shred with his mighty bat by hit three home run over the right-field pavilion. That night , return to New York , he go on a boisterous rampage and no one on the train get any sleep , include his employer , the late Colonel Jacob Ruppert. Such be the blending of quality that make Babe Ruth a figure unprecedented in American life. A born showman off the field and a marvelous performer on it , he have an amazing flair for do the spectacular at the most dramatic moment. Of his early day in Baltimore even Babe himself be , or pretend to be , somewhat vague during his major league baseball career. Thus various version of his childhood be print over the year with neither denial nor confirmation from Ruth a to their accuracy. However , the follow account of his boyhood year appear in a national magazine under Ruth 's own `` by-line : '' `` In the first place I be not an orphan. * * * My mother , whose maiden name be Schanberg , live until I be 13. My father , George Herman Ruth , live until my second year in the majors. Few father ever look more like their son than my pop and I. My mother be mainly Irish , and be call Kate. My father be of German extraction. It be not true that our family name be Erhardt , a have be repeatedly written. Or Ehrhardt , or Gearhardt. `` But I hardly know my parents. I do n't want to make any excuse for or place the blame for my shortcoming a a kid completely on person or places. * * * Yet I probably be a victim of circumstances. I spend most the first seven year of my life living over my father 's saloon at 426 West Camden Street , Baltimore. * * * `` On June 13 , 1902 , when I be 7 year old my father and mother place me in St. Mary 's Industrial School in Baltimore. It have since be call an orphanage and a reform school. It be , in fact , a training school for orphan incorrigibles , delinquent , boy whose home have be break by divorce , runaway pick up on the street of Baltimore and child of poor parent who have no other mean of provide an education for them. `` I be list a an incorrigible , and I guess I was. * * * I chew tobacco when I be 7 , not that I enjoy it especially , but , from my observation around the saloon it seem the normal thing to do. Gaps in School Life `` I be release from St. Mary 's in July , 1902 , but my parent return me there in November of the same year. My people move to a new neighborhood just before Christmas , 1902 , and I be release to them again. This time I stay 'out ' until 1904 , but then they put me back again and I be not release again until 1908. Shortly after my mother die I be return to St. Mary 's once more by my father. He take me back home in 1911 and return me in 1912. I stay in school -- learning to be a tailor and shirtmaker -- until Feb. 27 , 1914. The last item on my 'record ' at St. Mary 's be a single sentence , write in the flowing hand of one of the teachers. It read : `` 'He be go to join the Balt. Baseball Team. ' '' Ruth say he play in the band at St. Mary 's and always point with pride to this accomplishment , frequently remind friend that he also be a musician as well a a ball player. Curiously enough , however , no one ever discover what instrument the Babe play , although he always stoutly deny that it be the bass drum. But baseball captivate his fancy most and now begin a train of circumstance that be to carry this black-haired , raw-boned youngster to fame and a fortune that have be estimate a close to $ 1,000,000. It also happen that Brother Benedict , one of the instructor at St. Mary 's , be a great lover of the national pastime. Using baseball , therefore , a the most plausible mean to a laudable end in keep the Babe out of mischief as much a possible , the good Brother encourage the youngster to play as much a he could. The Babe scarcely need encouragement. Every hour he be allow to spare from his classroom find him on the ball field. He bat left-handed and throw left-handed. He play on his school team , also on a semi- professional team. He also play pretty nearly every position on the field. At the age of 19 he astound even his sponsor , Brother Benedict , who now saw a real mean of livelihood ahead for the young man , though little dream at the time to what height he would soar. He recommend the Babe to his friend , the late Jack Dunn , then owner of the Baltimore Orioles of the International League , and Ruth receive a trial , alternate in the outfield and in the pitcher 's box. That be in 1914. The same summer he be sell to the Boston Red Sox for $ 2,900 , and after a brief period of farm out with Providence be recall to become a regular. Under the direction of Bill Carrigan , then manager of the Red Sox , Ruth rapidly develop into one of the most talented left-handed pitcher ever in the majors. He have tremendous speed and a baffling cross-fire curve , which greatly impress Ed Barrow , later to become associated with Colonel Ruppert a general manager of the Yankees , Barrow because the leader of the Red Sox in 1918 and give much time to Ruth 's development. But even then he also display unmistakable talent for bat a ball with tremendous power and with unusual frequency , and Barrow , one of baseball 's great men of vision , decide to convert Ruth permanently into an outfielder on the theory that a great hitter could be build into a great attraction than a great pitcher. It be quite a momentous decision , for in the 1918 world 's series against the Cubs Ruth have turn in two masterful performance on the mound for the Red Sox , win both his games. He have also turn in one victory for the Red Sox against Brooklyn in the world 's series of 1916. But Barrow have also see Ruth , in 1918 , hit eleven home run , an astonishing number for that era , particularly for a pitcher , and his mind be make up. The next year -- 1919 -- Ruth , pitch only occasionally , now and then help out at first base , but perform mostly in the outfield , crack twenty-nine home run and the baseball world begin to buzz a it have n't since the advent of Ty Cobb and the immortal Christy Mathewson. This total surpass by four the then accept major league record for home run in a season , set by Buck Freeman with the Washington Club in 1899. But it be the following year -- 1920 -- that be to mark the turning point , not only in Babe Ruth 's career but in the entire course of organize baseball. Indeed , baseball men be almost in accord in the belief that Babe Ruth , more than any individual , and practically single-handed , rescue the game from what threaten to be one of it dark periods. Not only rescue it , but divert it into new channel that in the next decade be to reap an unprecedented golden harvest. The first sensation come early that winter when Ruth be sell by the late Harry Frazee , then owner of the Red Sox , to the Yankees , own jointly by the two Colonels , Jacob Ruppert and Tillinghast L'Hommedieu Huston , for a reported price of $ 125,000. It may even have be more , for in make the purchase the Yankee owner also assume numerous financial obligation then harass the Boston owner , and the matter be very involved. But whatever the price , it be a record sum , and New York prepare to welcome it late hero prospect. The Babe do not disappoint. The Yankees be then play their home game at the Polo Grounds , home of the Giants , and before the close of the 1920 season they be already give their more affluent rival and landlord a stiff run for the city 's baseball patronage. Ruth surpass all expectation by crash out the unheard-of total of fifty-four home run and crowd which hitherto have lavish their attention on the Giants now jam the historic Polo Grounds to see the marvelous Bambino hit a homer. Crisis in History of Game But scarcely have the echo from the thunderous roar that greet the Ruthian batting feat subside than another explosion be touch off that rattle the entire structure of baseball down to it sub-cellar. The scandal of the world 's series of 1919 break into print and through the winter of 1920-21 the `` throwing '' of that series by certain White Sox player to the Reds be on every tongue. The baseball owner of both major league be in a panic , fearful that the public 's confidence in what they have so proudly call America 's national pastime have be shake beyond repair. True , they have induce the late Kenesaw Mountain Landis , a Federal judge , to assume the position of High Commissioner with unlimited power to safeguard against a repetition of such a calamity , but they fear it be not enough. With considerable misgiving they saw the 1921 season get under way and then , a the popular song of the day run , `` Along Came Ruth. '' Inside of a fortnight the fandom of the nation have forget all about the Black Sox , a they have come to be call , a it attention become center in an even great demonstration of superlative batting skill by the amazing Babe Ruth. Home run begin to scale off his bat in drove , crowd jam ball park in every city in which he appear and when he close the season with a total of fifty-nine circuit clout , surpass by five his own record of the year before , the baseball world lay at his feet. In addition to that , the Yankees that year capture the first pennant ever win by New York in the American League , and Ruth be now fairly launch upon the first chapter of the golden harvest. With the help of his tower war club , the Yankees win again in 1922 and repeat in 1923 , in addition to win the world 's championship that year. Also in 1923 come into be the `` House That Ruth Built , '' mean the great Yankee Stadium with be seat capacity of more than 70,000 , which Colonel Ruppert decide to erect the year previous in order to make himself clear and independent of the Giants , whose tenant he have be at the Polo Grounds. The right-field bleacher become `` Ruthville. '' Homers soar into them in great abundance and the exploitation of Babe Ruth , the great slugger of all time , be at be height. Spent Earnings Freely But now there crept in a dark episode , decidedly less glamorous , though spectacular enough , and which must be chronicle in order to appreciate more fully the second chapter of the golden harvest. Money be now pour upon the Babe and be be pour out a speedily. In 1921 he have draw $ 20,000 and the following season he sign a five-year contract at $ 52,000 a season. In addition to this he be collect royalty on all sort of ventures. But money meant nothing to the Babe , except a a convenient mean for lavish entertainment. He gamble recklessly , lose and laugh uproariously. The Ruthian waistline begin to assume alarm proportions. He still take his baseball seriously enough on the field , but training have become a horrible bore. Of such phenomenal strength , there seem to be no limit to his vitality or stamina. It be no trick at all for him to spend an evening roister with convivial companion right through sun- up and until game time the next afternoon and then pound a home run. Along in the 1924 season Colonel Ruppert begin to fear he have make a mistake in have sign the Babe to that long-term contract at $ 52,000 per season which run from 1922 to 1926 inclusive. The Yankees lose the pennant that year and there come ominous rumbling that Miller Huggins , the mite manager who have just pilot the Yankees through three successful pennant year , be not in harmony with the Babe at all. There even have be trouble back in 1921 when Ruth openly flout Commissioner Landis by play on a barnstorming tour that fall after the limit date set by the commissioner. The following spring Landis , in order to demonstrate his authority , suspend Ruth for thirty day from the opening of the season. But it be not until 1925 that the real crash come and high living prove a exact in collect it toll a the high commissioner. Coming north at the end of the training season Ruth collapse at the railroad station at Asheville , N. C. , from a complication of ailments. He be help aboard the train , carry off on a stretcher on the team 's arrival in New York and spent week in a hospital. He do not appear again in a Yankee line-up until Jun 1. Nor have all the lesson be yet fully learned. Later in the same campaign Huggins , exasperate beyond all measure at the Babe 's wayward way of deport himself , slap a $ 5,000 fine on him for `` misconduct off the ball field. '' It be the high fine ever impose on a ball player , and Ruth at first take it a a joke. But Huggins stick by his gun , receive the backing of Colonel Ruppert , who be now the sole owner of the club , and the fine come from the Babe 's pay check. Now the lesson be learn and another startling change come over the Babe. He become , almost overnight , one of Miller Huggins ' staunch supporters. He train faithfully in 1926 , hammer forty-seven homer a against a meager twenty-five in 1925 , and start the Yankees on another pennant-winning era. Sixty homer , a new record sail off his bat in 1927 , and Ruth be a great figure in baseball than ever. Another pennant follow that year and still another in 1928 , on top of which the Yankees sweep through two world series triumph in those two year without the loss of a single game. Became Good Business Man In the Spring of 1929 , several month after his first wife , from whom he have be estrange for a number of year , die in a fire in Boston , the Babe marry Mrs. Claire Hodgson , formerly an actress , and to her also be give a deal of credit for the complete reformation of the Babe , who in the closing year of his baseball activity train a faithfully to fulfill what he consider his obligation to his public a it be humanly possible. Simultaneously with this Ruth suddenly become a shrewd business man with an eye to the future. Giving heed to the advice of Colonel Ruppert and Ed Barrow , the Babe invest his earnings carefully. In 1927 he become the high salaried player of his time with a three-year contract at $ 70,000 a year. In 1930 he sign a two-year contract at $ 80,000 per season , but in 1932 accede to economic pressure of the time , accept a $ 75,000 stipend for one season. That prove an excellent investment , for the Yankees win another pennant that year and defeat the Cubs in four straight game , Ruth cause a sensation by indicate to the spectator in Chicago where he mean to hit the ball when he make two home run in the third game of the series for the championship. The next year saw a further decline in the salary of the star to $ 52,000 , and in 1934 he sign for $ 35,000. At the close of his baseball career it be estimate that in his twenty-two year in the major league he have earn in salary $ 896,000 , plus $ 41,445 a his share of world series receipts. In addition , he be repute to have make $ 1,000,000 from endorsement , barnstorming tour , movie and radio appearances. As a consequence , when he retire the Babe be able to live in comfort , maintain a large apartment on New York 's West Side. For , despite his early extravagance , he later invest so well he be able to realize a monthly income of $ 2,500 by the time he have reach 45. In addition to the great crowd he have draw steadily to major league park , he also bring vast sum into the Yankee coffer from spring exhibition tours. In 1929 and 1930 the Yanks book two tour through Texas and the Middle West on their way north from the training camp in Florida and play to record-smashing crowd that storm hotel lobby and block traffic in all direction to get a glimpse of baseball 's most famous character. And through all this new homage shower upon him , he steadfastly remain the same Babe , more serious-minded , but a cordial and affable a ever. The youngster he worship possibly as much a they worship him. In Waco , Tex. , he break up an exhibition game by invite some of the kid to come out on the field and roll around on the grass. They pour out of the stand by the thousand , overrun the field , swamp the local police and end the game. Ruth come to the parting of the way with the Yankees after the 1934 season. He have always aspire to be a manager , and that Winter he ask Colonel Ruppert , with his accustomed bluntness , to make him leader of the New York team. Ruppert be satisfy with the result obtain by Joe McCarthy in win the 1962 world series after come from the Cubs in 1931 and refused. However , he say that he would not stand in the way of Ruth if the latter could find a place a manager. The opening come in the spring of 1935 , when Judge Emil Fuchs , then president of the Boston National League Club , offer Ruth a contract a a player at $ 25,000 a year , with a percentage from exhibition game and a percentage of the gain in the earnings of the club , together with a promise of become manager the follow season. Ruppert give Ruth his release and he join the National League team at it training camp in St. Petersburg , Fla. , that spring. Ruth never be a success with the Braves. He be his old self a a batsman and player only in spot and the team sink into the National League cellar. On May 25 , 1935 , in Pittsburgh he show the last flash of his former greatness when he bat three home run in consecutive time at bat at Forbes Field , but a week later , on June 2 , after a dispute with Fuchs he ask for and receive his release. He have several offer from minor league team after that , but refuse them all. It be not until June 17 , 1938 , that his chance come to re-enter the big leagues. Then he be name coach of the Dodgers. Burleigh Grimes , the manager of the team , recommend the move , say `` you ca n't keep a man like that out of baseball. '' Although the team be a loser , Ruth enter into the work of upbuilding enthusiastically and be hail with the usual acclaim around the circuit and in town where he play in exhibition games. Although Ruth 's continued popularity help the Dodgers to draw additional fan through their turnstile , a service for which the club pay him a $ 15,000 salary , he be not re-engaged a coach at the close of the 1938 season. It be then that Leo Durocher be appoint manager to succeed Grimes. Ruth , take his dismissal in good spirit , explain that a new manger necessarily would want to make his own choice for the coaching job , and he wish the Dodgers good luck. The Bambino once again become the retired business man , and a he return to the role of `` baseball 's forgotten man , '' he increase his activity on the links. His name soon become associate with some of golf 's leading player , while his score consistently run in the low 70's. At World 's Fair Baseball School However , he never overlook lend a hand to his first love wherever baseball offer him some opportunity for show himself. During 1939 he appear at the World 's Fair baseball school in the role of instructor , take part in the old-timer ' game in the baseball centennial celebration at Cooperstown , play a prominent role in the Lou Gehrig appreciation day ceremony and in the spring of 1940 appear for a time with a baseball training school at Palatka , Fla. During 1941 , Ruth , principally through the medium of his golfing prowess , stay in the public eye. During the summer he engage in a series of match with his old diamond rival , Cobb , the proceeds go to the British War Relief Fund and the United Service Organizations. Cobb , victor in the first match in Boston , 3 and 2 , lose the second match at Fresh Meadow , New York , 1 up on the nineteenth hole , but come back to defeat the Babe in the decide tilt in Detroit , 3 and 2. Later in the year Ruth sign a contract to appear in the Samuel Goldwyn motion picture base on the life of his famous team-mate , Lou Gehrig , with the Babe appear a himself. The Babe hit the headline and frighten his friend before 1942 scarcely have begun. On the morning of Jan. 3 he be remove to a hospital in an ambulance , the reason be `` an upset nervous condition , ? partly bring on by an automobile accident in which he be involved. But three week later Ruth be off on a hunting trip in up-State New York and by February be in Hollywood , teach Gary Cooper ( who be to portray Gehrig ) how to bat left-handed and sign autograph for screen stars. On April 9 Ruth go to the Hollywood Hospital suffer from pneumonia and describe by his doctor a `` a border line case , '' but two day later the Babe 's countless friend and well-wisher be cheer by the same physician 's statement : `` I believe he be over the hump. '' Ruth be out of the hospital by April 22 and back on the movie lot to complete his work in the Gehrig film. During that and succeed war year Ruth answer any and all demand for his appearance at war bond rally and charity enterprises. He play in golf tournament , go bowling and sell bonds. On Aug. 23 , 1942 , he pair with the late Walter Johnson , another of baseball 's immortal , at the Yankee Stadium to aid in a benefit show for two war services. With Johnson pitching , the Babe come through , a he always have , by hit a `` home run '' into the right field seat and `` round the base '' via a short cut from first to third base. That be his final homer. Wrong on War Prophecy Late in 1943 Ruth prove a bad prophet when he predict that major league baseball would become a war casualty in 1944 , `` if not sooner. '' His prophesying be as wholehearted a his ball playing have be , for he say : `` It 's a cinch they wo n't open the ball park next year. '' Although never realize an ambition to manage a major league club , Ruth become manager for a day in mid-July of 1943 , when he pilot a team of all-stars , include such player a Ted Williams and Dom DiMaggio , to a triumph over the Boston Braves a part of a charity field-day program in Boston. A dozen day later he fill the same role in a similar game at Yankee Stadium. Ruth 's activity in aid war cause increase in 1944 and it be in March of that year that he be the subject of one of the odd dispatch of the conflict. It come from Cape Gloucester , New Britain , where United States Marines be fight the Japanese and recount that when the little men charge the Marine liens their battle cry be : `` To hell with Babe Ruth ! ? Babe 's rumble comment to that be : `` I hope every Jap that mention my name get shoot -- and to hell with the Japs anyway ! '' The Babe do n't know , or care , that nine year before the Japanese sound that battle cry a Japanese publisher have be assassinate by a Japanese fanatic and that Ruth be partly blame for it. The assassin have say the publisher 's crime be in sponsor the Japanese tour of a group of American ball player , head by Babe Ruth. In June of 1944 Ruth go into the hospital once more , this time to have a cartilage remove from his knee. Reports immediately follow that he might try to play ball again a a pinch- hitter. Early in 1946 Ruth take a trip to Mexico a a guest of the fabulous Pasquel brother , `` raider '' of American organize baseball. This result in a rumor that he would become commissioner of the Mexican National League , the Pasquel loop , but a usual nothing come of it. On his return to New York Ruth disclose that he have seek the manager 's berth with the Newark club , own by the Yankees , but that `` all I get be a good push around '' by Larry MacPhail. The Babe also praise the Pasquels and at the same time reveal that he have turn down an offer of $ 20,000 from the Federal League while get $ 600 a season from Baltimore. `` I turn it down because we be tell by organize baseball that if we jump we would be bar for life. But nobody be bar for life and I just get job out of $ 20,000 without a thank-you from anybody. '' There be scarcely room for real bitterness in the expansive and warm Ruthian temperament , but the big fellow undoubtedly do feel at time a resentment against the owner in major league baseball because no place in it ever be find for him. And whatever slight flame of resentment may have light in him be frequently fan by many writer who openly chide the baseball mogul for sidestep the great Bambino. Through the unhappy medium of a protracted illness and a serious neck operation that keep him hospitalize from late November 1946 , to mid-February , 1947 , Ruth come back into the public eye. Recurrent report that his condition be critical result in a deluge of message from sympathetic well-wishers. There be general rejoicing among his legion of follower when he be sufficiently recover to leave the hospital. That this feeling be share in official baseball circle be promptly indicate when Baseball Commissioner A. [ MISSING TEXT ] ( Happy ) Chandler pay unprecedented tribute to the Sultan of Swat by designate April 27 , 194 [ MISSING TEXT ] a `` Babe Ruth Day. '' All organize baseball join on this date in honor the man who contribute so much to the game. Ruth himself be present at the Yankee Stadium , where a crowd of 58,339 turn out for ceremony that be broadcast over the world and pip into the other major league ballparks. Extremely conscious of his debt to the `` kid of America , '' to whose loyal support he attribute his success , Ruth identify himself with welfare program after his discharge from the hospital. He be engage by the Ford Motor Company a a consultant in connection with it participation in the American Legion junior baseball program and he be name by Mayor William O'Dwyer of New York a permanent honorary chairman of the Police Athletic League. In May , 1947 , he establish and make the first contribution to the Babe Ruth Foundation. Inc. , an organization whose resource be to be devote to the interest of underprivileged youth. Although the ravage of his illness leave little of his once robust physique , the Babe , now gaunt bent and his once resonant voice reduce to a rasp whisper , continue to astound his physician by tackle his new job with all his oldtime vigor. Throughout the summer he make innumerable public appearance all over the country. On Sunday , Sept. 28 , the final day of the 1947 championship season , he return to the Yankee Stadium to receive another thunderous ovation. On this day , under the direction of MacPhail , a galaxy of more than forty star of former Yankee and other American League world championship team , assemble to engage in an Oldtimers Day. They include such immortal a Ty Cobb , Tris Speaker , Cy Young , George Sisler , Waite Hoyt , Bob Meusel and Chief Bender and with the Babe look on from a box the grizzled vet play a two-inning game. The entire day 's receipt be turn over to the foundation. Ruth continue his role a consultant , make appearance all over the country. He go to Hollywood to help with the filming of his life story. While there , the Babe be inform that the Yankees be plan to celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Yankee Stadium. He readily agree to participate in the ceremonies. He accept the managership of the 1923 Yankees , who be to play an abbreviated exhibition game against later-year Yankees , to be pilot by Barrow. June 13 , 1948 , be the date set for `` Silver Anniversary Day. '' It turn out to be a memorable day , one that Ruth , despite his physical condition , would not have miss for anything. Despite a wretched day -- rain , fog , etc. -- the Babe don his old uniform with the No.3 on the back. When he be introduce and walk slowly to home plate , a thunderous ovation from 49,641 men , woman and child greet him. Many in the gathering wept a Ruth , in a raspy voice , tell how happy he be to have hit the first homer ever achieve in the Stadium ; how proud he be to have be associate with such fine player and how glad he be to be back with them , even if only for a day. Bob Shawkey , Sad Sam Jones , Whitey Witt , Bob Meusel , Waite Hoyt , Carl Mays , Bullet Joe Bush , Wally Pipp , Mike McNally , Wally Schang and others from the 1923 club that annex the first world championship by a Yankee aggregation ; Bill Dickey , Lefty Gomez , George Selkirk , Red Rolfe and others who come later -- all be on hand to pay homage to the Babe. It be the last time that No. 3 be win by a Yankee player. For , the Babe turn his uniform over to the Hall of Fame , retire for all time. It be send to the baseball shrine at Cooperstown , N. Y. , where it be place among the Ruth collection there. Ruth 's team score a 2-0 , two-inning victory that day and the man to whom a big-league manager 's job be never give manage a winner in the `` House That Ruth Built . ''