August 17 , 1949 OBITUARY Miss Mitchell , 49 , Dead of Injuries Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES ATLANTA , Aug. 16 -- Margaret Mitchell , author of `` Gone With the Wind , '' die today at Grady Hospital of injury receive when she be strike down by a speed automobile on Peachtree Street last Thursday. Not once since the accident have the 49-year-old Miss Mitchell fully regain consciousness , accord to hospital attaches. At infrequent interval , she have murmur vague , incoherent response to speak questions. Shortly after Miss Mitchell die , the driver of the auto which strike her surrender voluntarily to police and Atlanta Police Chief Herbert Jenkins say an `` immediate murder indictment '' would be sought. Hugh D. Gravitt , 29 , the driver , have be out on bond of $ 5,450 , after have be arrest at the scene of the accident and charge with drunken driving , speeding and drive on the wrong side of the street. Gravitt , an Atlanta taxi driver , be off duty and drive a private car when Miss Mitchell be strike a she and her husband , John R. Marsh , be cross Peachtree at Thirteenth Street on the way to a neighborhood movie. Mr. Marsh be the `` J.R.M. '' to whom `` Gone With the Wind '' be dedicated. Skull and Pelvis Fractured Physicians say X-rays reveal Miss Mitchell 's skull be fracture from the top of her head to the top of the spine and that her pelvis be fracture in two places. Miss Mitchell suffer a sudden sinking spell shortly after 11 A. M. today. Three physician be in attendance when death come at 11:59. Gov. Herman Talmadge order the flag over the State Capitol lower to half-staff until after the funeral. The Governor also announce the state would act to tighten regulation in the licensing of taxi drivers. The driver of the car which kill Miss Mitchell have twenty-three previous traffic violation on police records. A private funeral service will be hold at 10 A. M. Thursday at Spring Hill , Atlanta funeral home , with Dean Raimundo de Ovies of St. Philip 's Cathedral , Atlanta , officiating. Burial will be in Oakland Cemetery here. Besides her husband Miss Mitchell leave a brother , Stephens Mitchell , and two nephew , Eugene and Joseph Mitchell of Atlanta. A Housewife in Atlanta Margaret Mitchell be an Atlanta housewife , a former newspaper woman , when she show a suitcase full of manuscript to a talent scout for the Macmillan Company in 1935. The publication , the next June , of her 1,037-page novel of the South in reconstruction day , `` Gone With the Wind , '' make her an international personage. The fame which come with her book bring her an estimated $ 1,000,000 in book royalty , movie payment and other allied return in less than four year , but disrupt her way of living. She say one day , in a fit of exasperation a she leave for a mountain hideaway from the throng which besiege her by telephone , telegraph and in person , that she have determine never to write another word as long a she lived. The novel , her first , be such a phenomenal success , it character so grip the imagination of the book 's reader , that it might almost be label a Frankenstein which overwhelm it maker. She be almost lose in the confusion which greet the premiere of the movie of her book in Atlanta on Dec. 15 , 1939. Miss Mitchell in private life be Mrs. John R. Marsh , wife of the retired advertising manager of the Georgia Power Company. She be bear in Atlanta soon after the turn of the century , the daughter of a lawyer. The family be descend from the Huguenot settler of South Carolina. Father Headed Bar Group Her father , the late Eugene M. Mitchell , be an attorney and former president of the Atlanta Bar Association , former president of the Atlanta Historical Society and a recognize authority on Atlanta and Georgia history. Her mother be the late Maybelle Stephens Mitchell. She have one brother , Stephens Mitchell , also an attorney , editor of the Atlanta Historical Society Bulletin , former president of the Atlanta Bar Association and of the Atlanta Lawyers Club. Her family have be live in or near Atlanta since before the town originated. She attend the Atlanta public school , be graduate from Washington Seminary , an Atlanta preparatory school , and attend Smith College at Northampton , Mass. , for about a year , leave because of the death of her mother. She make her society debut in Atlanta. Miss Mitchell become a member of the staff of The Atlanta Journal Sunday Magazine in 1922 and work there until 1926 , write under the name of Peggy Mitchell. She be force to abandon this position , however , because of an injured ankle. It be then that she begin write her famous novel , `` Gone With the Wind. '' She have be marry the year before. Miss Mitchell be familiar with story of the Old South , of the burning of Atlanta by Sherman on his march to the sea , of the dreary day of reconstruction. She once say that she be 10 year old before she learn that Robert E. Lee do not win the Civil War. The story her father told , those she hear from Negro servant , from relative and from friend finally begin to form into a novel in her mind. With her marriage and her injured ankle make her life sedentary , she begin to write. When she be a reporter on The Journal , she say , she always have trouble frame the opening paragraph to her story , so she always write the last part first. `` You can imagine how my city editor love me , '' she explained. So , when she start her book , she write the last chapter and then start work back from there. In her Atlanta apartment the manuscript pile up for nine years. Some of it be typewrite , some of it be scribble on the back of laundry lists. It be in desk , bureau drawer and on closet shelves. Friends have read part of it , but she have never show it to a publisher. In the fall of 1935 H. S. Latham , a vice president of the Macmillan Company , make a trip through the South look for new authors. He have luncheon in Atlanta with Miss Mitchell and Mrs. Medora Perkerson , who also have work on The Journal. They be suggest writer he should see. Finally , he recall later , Mrs. Perkerson say to him , `` Peggy have write a book. '' Miss Mitchell be bashful about it , wave the suggestion aside , say the book be n't finished. They go drive to look at the dogwood. She Changed Her Mind That night , after he have return to his hotel , Miss Mitchell go to see him. She have change her mind after go home , have gather her manuscript together and have take it down to him. He have to buy a new suitcase to hold it. A few day later he wire Miss Mitchell that his company have accept the book for publication , subject to some revision. For six month she labor at the job of rewrite , edit , pull the thread of the story together. `` Gone With the Wind '' go on the bookstands June 30 , 1936. She have hop for a sale of 5,000 copies. On one day that summer it sell 50,000. Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler become national character , and then international. In two year the book be translate and print in sixteen foreign languages. The sale pass 500,000 , then a million , then a million and a half , and on up. David O. Selznick pay her $ 50,000 for the movie right and spent several million make the picture. The question of who would play Scarlett and Rhett and the other character be discuss all over the world. Early in 1949 it be announce that 8,000,000 copy of the book have be sell in thirty language in forty country , and that 50,000 copy be still be sell yearly in the United States. The motion-picture version , with Vivien Leigh and Clark Gable , become America 's most popular movie and be show throughout the country to big audience in 1947 for the fourth time. Won 1937 Pulitzer Prize The book win the Pulitzer Prize in 1937. Miss Mitchell receive an honorary degree from Smith College , medal and decoration , and be besiege for her autograph and the story of her life. Two year after the book be publish , when she grant her first formal interview to New York reporter , she be ask if she be write anything else , or intend to. She say she have be so busy answer the phone , the doorbell and her fan mail that she have not have time. A Danish bookseller give a trip to Atlanta to the winner of a raffle. She be impersonate all over the country and in Europe. Rumors about her and her mode of life be a thick , and a unpredictable , a bee in a clover patch. When , in 1943 , Gov. Ellis Arnall of Georgia want to appoint her to the State Board of Education , Miss Mitchell decline the appointment in a letter in which she write , `` My time be not my own. It have not be my own since 'Gone With the Wind ' be published. The very fact that since 1936 I have never have the time to sit down to my typewriter and write -- or try to write -- another book will give you some indication of what I mean. '' She add that `` be the author of 'Gone With the Wind ' be a full-time job , and most day it be an overtime job fill engagement and meet visitors. In addition , I be give all the time I can to war activity and future commitment in this field which will take me out of the city. '' Asked about her ambition at the height of the fame of `` Gone With the Wind '' she say that she hop to put on weight , become `` fat and amiable , '' grow old gracefully. The criticism which greet her book be not all in praise , although much of it be lavish. Whatever posterity may decide a to it merit , Miss Mitchell write a book which be the most phenomenal best seller ever write by an unknown author of a first novel .