October 20 , 1950 OBITUARY Edna St. V. Millay Found Dead At 58 Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES AUSTERLITZ , N.Y. , Oct. 19 -- Edna St. Vincent Millay , the famous poet , be find dead at the foot of the stair in her isolated home near here at 3:30 P. M. today. Her physician say she die of a heart attack after a coronary occlusion. She be 58 year old. She be dress in a nightgown and slipper when her body be find by James Pinnie , a caretaker , who have arrive to fix a fire for the evening. The Columbia County coroner estimate that she have be dead for eight hours. Her near neighbor live a mile away. Miss Millay have live alone in the Berkshire hill near the Massachusetts border , ten mile southwest of Chatham , N. Y. , since her husband die on Aug. 20 , 1949. He be Eugen Jan Boissevain , a retired New York importer. Spokesman for Three Decades Edna St. Vincent Millay be a terse and move spokesman during the Twenties , the Thirties and the Forties. She be an idol of the young generation during the glorious early day of Greenwich Village when she write , what critic term a frivolous but widely know poem which end : My candle burn at both end , It will not last the night ; But ah , my foe , and oh , my friend , It give a lovely light ! All critic agree , however , that Greenwich Village and Vassar , plus a gypsy childhood on the rocky coast of Maine , produce one of the great American poet of her time. In 1940 she publish in THE NEW YORK TIMES Magazine a plea against isolationism which say , `` There be no island any more , '' and during the second World War she write of the Nazi massacre of the Czechoslovak city of Lidice : The whole world hold in it arm today The murdered village of Lidice , Like the murder body of a little child , Innocent , happy , surprise at play. Before this , when Miss Millay win the Pulitzer Prize for poetry in 1922 , her work have become more profound and less personal a she grow out of the `` flaming youth '' era in the Village. The nation and the world have become her concern. Was Raised in Maine Miss Millay be bear in Rockland , Me. , on Feb. 22 , 1892 , in an old house `` between the mountain and the sea '' where basket of apple and dry herb on the porch mingle their scent with those of the neighboring pine woods. She be the eldest of three sister , bring up by their mother , the former Cora Buzelle. Of the young sister , Norma become an actress and Kathleen a writer , whose first novel , publish in 1927 , be succeed by fairy story , short story , play and verse. Floyd Dell , novelist and unofficial historian of the Village in the early Twenties , have write how the mother work to bring up her daughter in `` gay and courageous poverty. '' Edna , the tomboy of the family , be usually call `` Vincent '' by her mother and sisters. Her talent be recognize and encourage and poetry be read and reread in the household. At 14 she win the St. Nicholas Gold Badge for poetry , the first of many honors. In the poem that give it name to her volume , `` The Harp-Weaver , '' some have discover the inspiration of her poor youth and her mother 's devotion. Edna enter Vassar late. She be then 21 year old , but when she be 18 she have finish the first part of her first long poem , `` Renascence , '' and at 20 have end it. It be publish in a prize contest , which incidentally , it do not win. Sonnets and lyric follow while she still be in college. She be graduate in 1917 and come to live in the Village , remain for year , something of a tradition in her college. Miss Millay , say Floyd Dell , be in those day `` a frivolous young woman , with a brand-new pair of dance slipper and a mouth like a valentine , '' young , red-haired and unquestionably pretty. But the Village be the wartime Village , and Miss Millay take the radical stand. John Reed , Communist and war correspondent , be among her friends. Inez Milholland , feminist leader , to whom the sonnet `` The Pioneer '' be a tribute , be one of her admirers. In a play , `` Aria da Capo , '' write in 1921 , she express her hatred of war , and it have be record that she haunt court room with her pacifist friend , recite to them her poetry to comfort them while jury decide on their cases. With Provincetown Players At first poetry in Greenwich Village do not pay , and Miss Millay turn to the theatre , briefly. She act without pay with the Provincetown Players in their convert stable on Macdougal Street and get a part in a Theatre Guild production. For some time she do hack writing for magazine under a pseudonym. It be her second volume of verse , `` A Few Figs From Thistles , '' that turn national attention to the nine-foot-wide house on Bedford Street where she lived. There follow `` Second April '' in 1921 and `` The Lamp and the Bell '' and a morality play , `` Two Slatterns and a King , '' in the same year , and in 1922 , with the Pulitzer Prize , her position a a poet be established. `` The Harp-Weaver '' be publish in 1923 , and then the Metropolitan Opera House commission Miss Millay to write a book for the score of an opera compose by Deems Taylor. For her plot she go to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle of Eadgar , King of Wessex , a story not unlike that of Tristan and Isolde , and the result be `` The King 's Henchman , '' call by one writer the most effectively and artistically wrought American opera ever to reach the stage. It be produce at the Metropolitan Opera a the most important production of the 1927 season , with Lawrence Tibbett , Edward Johnson and Florence Easton , and later be take on an extensive tour. Within twenty day of the publication of the poem in book form four edition be exhaust , and it be calculate that Miss Millay 's royalty from her publisher run to $ 100 a day. In the summer of 1927 the time draw near for the execution of Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti , Boston Italians whose trial and conviction of murder become one of the most celebrated labor cause of the United States. Only recently recover from a nervous breakdown , Miss Millay fling herself into the fight for their lives. Contributed Poem to Fund A poem which have wide circulation at the time , `` Justice Denied in Massachusetts , '' be her contribution to the fund raise for the defense campaign. Miss Millay also make a personal appeal to Governor Fuller. In August she be arrest a one of the `` death watch '' demonstrator before the Boston State House. With her be John Howard Lawson , the playwright ; William Patterson of the American Negro Congress , Ella Reeve , `` Mother '' Bloor and others. `` I go to Boston fully expect to be arrest -- arrest by a polizia create by a government that my ancestor rebel to establish , '' she say , when back in New York. `` Some of u have be think and talk too long without do anything. Poems be perfect ; picketing , sometimes , be better. '' Miss Millay be marry to Mr. Boissevain in 1923. They spend most of their married life at Steepletop , their Columbia County home. They travel to Florida , the Riviera and Spain and , in 1933 , buy an eighty-five acre island in Casco Bay , Me .