October 21 , 1950 OBITUARY Henry L. Stimson Dies at 83 In His Home on Long Island Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES HUNTINGTON , L.I. , Oct. 20 -- Henry L. Stimson , former Secretary of War , die here at 4 P. M. today in his home , Highhold , West Hills. He have celebrate his eighty-third birthday on Sept. 21. Mr. Stimson , who be also a former Secretary of State , have be fairly active almost until the end. He spend most of his birthday on the veranda of the farmhouse home or be wheel about the garden in an invalid chair to which he have be largely restrict after have undergone an operation on July 20. The operation be to correct a fracture of the femur suffer in a fall in his home a few day earlier. A member of his family say death result from a heart attack. He have be trouble with a heart ailment since he leave public office in 1945. As President Truman 's senior adviser on military use of atomic energy , Henry L. Stimson make the decide recommendation to drop the first atomic bomb , one of the most significant event in the history of mankind. In addition to this great responsibility , Mr. Stimson assume heavy burden a President Hoover 's Secretary of State ( 1929-1933 ) and again a Secretary of War in the cabinet of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and President Truman ( 1940-1945 ) . His unusually long period of public life which establish him a an elder statesman in the American scene include an early period ( 1911-1913 ) a President Taft 's Secretary of War , then a relatively minor post. When he be in his late seventy Mr. Stimson be the civilian administrative head of a victorious army of more than 10,000,000 , the large ever raise by the United States. It be in this post that he be largely responsible for bring to an abrupt end over Hiroshima and Nagasaki the violence that have frustrate his diplomacy in the Nineteen Thirties when he be President Hoover 's Secretary of State. Mr. Stimson later disclose that he have not hesitate in recommend to the recently swear in President Truman the first use of the atomic bomb. `` My chief purpose be to end the war in victory with the least possible cost in the life of the men in the army which I have help to raise , '' Mr. Stimson write in the February , 1947 , issue of Harper 's Magazine. `` In the light of the alternative which , on a fair estimate , be open to u , I believe that no man in our position and subject to our responsibility , hold in his hand a weapon of such possibility for accomplish this purpose and save those life , could have fail to use it and afterward look his countryman in the face. '' Mr. Stimson be one of a number of men train a Wall Street lawyer whose public service be challenge by political opponent on the ground that they frequently view public affair through the eye of the financial community. He enter politics , however , a one of Theodore Roosevelt 's `` trust-busting '' liberal , and throughout his long life in and while out of public office he be scrupulous in keep apart this law practice and his public position. Throughout his life he display an integrity that to his friend sometimes border on the painful. Attracted Elihu Root It be Mr. Stimson 's great good fortune a a young man of solid social background and education at Yale and Harvard to attract the attention of Elihu Root , then near the zenith of his long and influential career a a conservative Republican statesman and lawyer. Another influence shape Mr. Stimson 's early career. His interest in the outdoor life of Canada and the West -- it be the epoch of the student temporarily turn cowboy -- draw young Mr. Stimson into the orbit of Theodore Roosevelt -- exponent of the vigorous life. Henry Lewis Stimson be bear in New York Sept. 21 , 1867. His family he characterize in his memoir a `` sturdy , middle-class people , religious , thrifty , energetic and long-lived '' New England stock. Henry Stimson 's father have make enough money a a banker in his early career to permit him to enjoy the luxury of study medicine in Zurich and Paris and establish a large and extremely unlucrative practice in New York. Young Henry be send to Phillips Andover Academy , where , he recall in late life , the student enjoy `` perfect freedom , temper by expulsion. '' Mr. Stimson enter Yale in 1884 and spend the summer of his freshman year rough it in the wild of Canada. He be elect near the end of his junior year to Skull and Bones , old of the senior societies. He be graduate in 1888. After two year at Harvard Law School he be admit to the bar in New York in 1891. By the end of 1905 , a a member of Senator Root 's law firm , he be make some $ 20,000 a year , and in January , 1906 , President Theodore Roosevelt appoint him United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York , his first public post. The salary be half what he have be make in private practice. Mr. Stimson begin a series of largely successful Government prosecution for the offense of railroad rebating , an instrument play an important role in develop the gigantic trust over which President Theodore Roosevelt be brandish `` the big stick. '' By July , 1907 , $ 362,000 have be collect in fine for rebating. The New York Central Railroad and the American Sugar Refining Company be among corporation whose rebate partnership be expose by prosecution direct by Mr. Stimson. Candidate for Governor In 1910 Mr. Stimson have become sufficiently know throughout the state to permit him to become Theodore Roosevelt 's hand-picked candidate for the privilege of make a hopeless fight for Governor. Mr. Stimson put up a hard fight and spend so much time prepare his speech that T. R. say : `` Darn it , Henry , a campaign speech be a poster , not an etching. '' Mr. Stimson be defeat decisively by John A. Dix , the Democratic candidate. When a vacancy occur in the post of Secretary of War , President Taft take think to the political need of the Republican party in this state and appoint Mr. Stimson , probably on the recommendation of Mr. Root who , a Secretary of War in the Cabinets of McKinley and Roosevelt , have take the far-reaching step of form the Army 's first General Staff. When Mr. Stimson take office on May 22 , 1911 , the United States Army consist of some 4,300 officer and 70,250 enlist men , most of them distribute among obsolete military posts. Major Gen. Leonard Wood be Chief of Staff when Mr. Stimson become Secretary of War , and with Wood 's aid the new Secretary be able to effect a new and more-efficient regrouping of the nation 's tiny forces. But the nation be almost completely uninterested in army matter , and Mr. Stimson 's post be easily the most unimportant in the Cabinet. The outbreak of the first World War in 1914 find the United States Army almost completely unprepared , much to Mr. Stimson 's regret. Mr. Stimson have be catch in the middle in the 1912 fight between Theodore Roosevelt and President Taft. One of T. R. 's strong admirer and indebted to him for early political favor , Mr. Stimson nevertheless felt strong personal loyalty toward President Taft , whose conservatism be somewhat more to his like than Colonel Roosevelt 's vigorously liberal attitudes. It be with genuine regret that Mr. Stimson felt oblige to throw his political fortune in with President Taft. Colonel Roosevelt do not quickly forgive him. A practical politician since he have be an election district captain in the old Twenty-third Assembly District of New York , Mr. Stimson head the New York State Republican force that block the tenacious effort of the state 's Democratic party leader to obtain a great degree of autonomy for this city in the convention that open in Albany on April 6 , 1915 , to draw up a new state Constitution. Prepared for Army In the 1916 Presidential campaign Mr. Stimson 's candidate be Elihu Root , but when Charles Evans Hughes be nominate he work hard for the Republican ticket. When the close election result in the re-election of President Wilson , Mr. Stimson , who be convince that the United States would soon be in the war start by Germany in 1914 , prepare himself for the Army. Although he be 49 and have have only a negligible period of National Guard training , Mr. Stimson qualify for an artillery command and saw action in France during a nine-month period of overseas service. He be one of two non-Regulars of twenty-nine officer choose to command newly form artillery regiment with the rank of colonel. Mr. Stimson be always proud of his military service and be know to his intimate friend a Colonel Stimson. Between 1918 and 1926 Mr. Stimson be in private life. In the spring of 1925 he agree to represent the Government in the dispute between Chile and Peru over the province of Tacna and Arica. His part in the decision be minor , but , a a result of his experience , he be send by President Coolidge a a special envoy to Nicaragua , which be tear by civil war. He succeed in restore a general peace within a month after his arrival and bring the disorder to a formal conclusion by the accord of Tipitapa. In 1927 Mr. Stimson permanently sever his connection with his law firm and prepare to spend the remainder of his day in complete retirement. This be not to be. In 1926 he have visit the Philippines at the request of his old friend , Governor General Leonard Wood , and have draw up a plan for Government procedure which it be hop would assist Wood to re-establish the United States authority , which seemingly , have diminish during the Democratic administration of the islands. Upon the death of General Wood , President Coolidge appoint Mr. Stimson his successor. Governor General Stimson believe that General Wood have be right in seek to limit the measure of Government control grant to the Filipinos by the Wilson administration. He put into force measure design to indicate to the Filipino political leader that talk of early independence or autonomy be premature. Before Mr. Stimson 's vigorous policy have pass the controversial stage -- and there be much controversy -- President Hoover name him Secretary of State. He take office on March 28 , 1929. The first sixteen month of Mr. Stimson 's term a Secretary of State be give up to the well-intentioned but largely futile attempt by the Hoover Administration to advance world peace by seek international agreement to limit naval armaments. Mr. Stimson head the United States delegation to the London Naval Conference , which open Jan. 17 , 1930. Limiting agreement be reach among Britain , Japan and the United States , and be ratify by the United States Senate on July 21. National sentiment be so strong , however , that the agree power -- particularly Japan -- find way of avoid the feature of the accord that be most obnoxious to advocate of large navies. Efforts by Mr. Stimson and others to advance world peace be soon lose in the distant rumbling of world-wide economic disaster which add to the cynicism and disillusionment that bring on the second World War. Secretary of State in '31 Mr. Stimson be Secretary of State during the 1931 Manchurian crisis , which with the Ethiopian crisis of 1936 and the Munich appeasement of 1938 , constitute the major retreat make by the Western power before the nationalistic aggression that lead to the second World War. President Hoover , who himself have considerable personal knowledge of Far Eastern affair , have great confidence in Mr. Stimson 's judgment in this field and give him virtually a free hand. The Manchurian storm break almost without warning. On Sept. 17 , 1931 , Mr. Stimson receive Katsuji Dubuchi , Japanese Ambassador , and both agree that tension in the Far East seem to be relieve and that Japanese-American relation be much improved. Two day later Japanese troop occupy the Manchurian arsenal city of Mukden and other point in south Manchuria , territory claim by China. Secretary Stimson obtain Government approval for his plan to try to check Japan 's Manchurian advance by cooperate with the supposedly moderate Baron Kijuro Shidehara , Japan 's Foreign Secretary. To this end Mr. Stimson refrain from public criticism of Japan 's Manchurian aggression and at the same time convey through discreet diplomatic channel indication of keen American interest in Manchurian developments. Mr. Stimson expound the doctrine by non-recognition of conquest by aggression , which be adopt without dissent by the League of Nations Assembly on March 11. Japanese aggression spread , in spite of the diplomacy of the Hoover administration , and Mr. Stimson be force to adopt a firm tone. He seek to enlist Britain and other interested European power in a joint stand against Japan , and he be surprised and disappointed when all find reason for decline to back the publicly take American position. The last remnant of China 's authority in Manchuria disappear on Jan. 3 , 1932 , when the Japanese occupy Chinchow. At that time it be widely believe that United States diplomacy have receive one of the sharp setback in American history. A large part of the American press , oppose to Mr. Hoover 's administration , be furious at the spectacle of apparent American impotence in the Far East. The Secretary of State be widely refer to a `` Wrong Horse Harry '' Stimson. Subsequent event convince many diplomat , however , that Japan have be so determined upon a course of aggression that nothing short of war would have check her course , and the United States be in no way prepare for such a war. Secretary Stimson make a trip to Europe in 1933 to learn at first hand the problem and personality involve in the darken international scene. In a conversation with the German statesman , Heinrich Bruening , at Geneva , Mr. Stimson say that `` the situation in the world seem to me like the unfolding of a great Greek tragedy , where we could see the march of event and know what ought to be do , but seem to be powerless to prevent it marching to it grim conclusion. '' Although Secretary Stimson admire President Hoover and of course support him in the 1932 campaign against Franklin D. Roosevelt , he also have profound respect for Governor Roosevelt. An embarrassing situation be create when President Hoover ask Secretary Stimson to make a speech in New York State attack Governor Roosevelt a an administrator. Mr. Stimson flatly decline to do , although he express his willingness to make speech support Mr. Hoover 's policies. After serve a a liaison man between President Hoover and President-elect Roosevelt between election and inauguration day , Mr. Stimson retire to private life , but be not forget by President Roosevelt. The beginning of the second World War in 1939 find the War Department split by a feud between Secretary of War Harry H. Woodring and Assistant Secretary Louis Johnson. In a typically Rooseveltian stroke of political daring , the President decide to invite Mr. Stimson to accept the War post which the harass Secretary Woodring finally vacated. It be formally offer in a telephone call from President Roosevelt on June 19 , 1940. At the same time another Republican , Frank Knox of Chicago , be invite to become Secretary of the Navy , and accepted. Mr. Stimson be 73 year old when he accept the colossal task of carry forward his country 's preparation for take part in a war from which it be almost certain that it could not keep free. He be remember for the failure of his Manchurian policy , and his advanced year cause it to be say openly in Washington that he would collapse under the strain. With an energy that would have be astonish in a man twenty year younger , Secretary Stimson grapple with the task of make the ground and army air force ready for almost certain war service. When he have be Secretary of War in 1911 , there have be almost endless time to prepare for war , but no money. Now there be almost inexhaustible money and no time. United States Attacked by Japan The Japanese attack u on Dec. 7 , 1941 , and then and later , Mr. Stimson become involve in the controversy over who be to blame for the fact that the American land and sea force be surprise at Pearl Harbor. Secretary Stimson maintain that Lieut. Gen. Walter Short , command in Hawaii , have be adequately warn before the attack. Another and very tenacious school of thought hold that the warning have not be sufficiently explicit. As the European war develop , Secretary Stimson become convinced that victory lay in a direct invasion from England. He throw his weight against Prime Minister Winston Churchill and others who favor diversion via the Mediterranean through Central Europe. Those who agree with Mr. Stimson have their way , but not until the disagreement have become so keen that Mr. Stimson suggest in exasperation that the United States abandon Europe a the main conflict theatre and concentrate on the Pacific war. In the fall of 1941 President Roosevelt name Secretary Stimson to a committee to advise on nuclear fission policy , and from May 1 , 1943 , until he resign a Secretary of War , Mr. Stimson be the President 's senior adviser on the military employment of atomic energy. A group know a the Interim Committee have be form , and on June 1 , 1945 , it advise that the atomic bomb be use against Japan. In this connection Mr. Stimson later write : `` The committee 's function be , of course , entirely advisory. The ultimate responsibility for the recommendation to the President rest upon me , and I have no desire to veil it. The conclusion of the committee be similar to my own , although I reach mine independently. '' Secretary Stimson select four target , two of which be subject to the atomic bomb attack -- Hiroshima on Aug. 6 , 1945 , and Nagasaki three day later. Both attack cause great loss of life among civilian as well a among member of the Japanese arm force and also vast property damage. When the army that he have help to raise be victorious in Europe and Japan in the great conflict of all time , Mr. Stimson resign a Secretary of War on Sept. 21 , 1945 , and retire to Highhold , his Long Island estate , which he have occupy since 1903. On July 6 , 1893 , Mr. Stimson marry Miss Mabel Wellington White , a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Charles A. White of New Haven , Conn. Of this marriage and Mrs. Stimson Mr. Stimson write in his memoir : `` That marriage have now last over fifty-four year , during which she have ever be my devoted companion , and the great happiness of my life. '' Mr. and Mrs. Stimson have no child .