Cancer cell be take from her body without permission. They lead to a medical revolution. By ADEEL HASSAN She never travel farther than Baltimore from her family home in southern Virginia , but her cell have travel around the earth and far above it , too. She be bury in an unmarked grave , but the trillion of those cell — generate from a tiny patch take from her body — be label in university lab and biotechnology company across the world , where they continue to spawn and to play the critical role in a 67-year parade of medical advances. Henrietta Lacks be the great-great-granddaughter of a slave and be herself a tobacco farmer whose family remain poor , with some member not have health insurance despite her cell lead to a medical revolution. Her endlessly renewable cell be harvest from her cervix just month before she die and without compensation or consent , before be buy , sell and ship many time over. There be thousand of patent involve her cells. Millions of dollar in profit have be made. Lacks leave behind five young child and an unparalleled medical legacy when she die on Oct. 4 , 1951 , at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore from an aggressive cervical cancer at 31. While she be sick , a Hopkins doctor appear on a TV science program. “Now let me show you a bottle in which we have grow massive quantity of cancer cell , ” say the doctor , George Gey , a he hold up her cells. “It be quite possible that from such fundamental study such a these that we will be able to learn a way by which cancer can be completely wiped out.” Gender Letter A weekly newsletter on woman , gender and society. There be no mention of Lacks on TV and there be not a single obituary for her. After she die , a lab technician be in an autopsy room , take more of the precious cell from her body. In Lacks’s medical record , a doctor write of small white tumor cover some organ : “It look a if the inside of her body be stud with pearls.” Though she be forget at the time , part of her remained alive , at the forefront of science. While a cure for cancer remain elusive , the cell line name for her , HeLa ( pronounced hee-lah ) , have be at the core of treatment for hemophilia , herpes , influenza , leukemia , and Parkinson’s disease as well a the polio vaccine , the cancer drug tamoxifen , chemotherapy , gene mapping , and in vitro fertilization. Lacks with her husband , David , circa 1945. Lacks Family Born Loretta Pleasant in 1920 and later call Henrietta , she be the ninth of 10 children. When she be 4 , her mother die and her father send her to Clover , Va. , where his family still work the tobacco fields. Henrietta be take in by her grandfather , Tommy Lacks , the son of a white plantation owner and a former slave. The original plantation have be divide between black and white Lackses by a judge after one of Tommy’s brother sue to take some of the land leave to black heirs. Tommy be already take care of another grandchild. The boy , David , know a Day , would share a bedroom with Henrietta in their grandfather’s cabin , a former slave quarters. With Day and her other cousin , Henrietta would rise before dawn to tend to animal and a garden before spending much of the day crouch among the tobacco. The constant demand mean that most of the child didn’t finish their education ; she make it as far a the sixth grade. At 14 , she and Day have their first child , a son name Lawrence. A daughter , Lucile Elsie , join them four year later. Henrietta and Day marry on April 10 , 1941 , when she be 20 and he be 25. The newlywed continue to toil , struggle to survive on their small farm. By the time Japan bomb Pearl Harbor eight month later , a few of their cousin have already leave to work for Bethlehem Steel in Baltimore. Day would soon follow and once he have save enough for a house and three train ticket , Henrietta came. She arrive in Maryland at the age of 21 in the midst of the Great Migration , when more than six million African-Americans move from the rural South to city in the Northeast , Midwest and West beginning in 1915 and last into the 1970s. After nine year , she find herself at Johns Hopkins Hospital in January 1951 , where she have give birth to her fifth child only a few month earlier. She tell the receptionist at the gynecology clinic : “I get a knot on my womb.” A hard mass be find in her cervix and , a usual , a small piece of the cancerous tissue be cut off and take to Gey’s pathology lab for a diagnosis. Unlike most cancer cell , which die within a few day , a cluster of Lacks’s cell not only survive , but thrive , double within 24 hour and never stopping. Gey later tell others that the cell be take from a woman name “Helen Lane , ” relegate Lacks to obscurity. Ten month after come in , she died. But the rapid reproduction of HeLa cell continue , inexplicably become the only human cell to grow outside the body. Scientists use them to gain insight into viruses. Cosmetics company , pharmaceutical firm and the military do test on them. And Scientific American publish an article inform reader how to grow HeLa cell at home. HeLa be the most prolific and widely use human cell line in biology. The Lacks family do not know that her cell be alive , and all the while no one know that her mighty cell be accidentally contaminate other cell lines. HeLa travel through the air , float on dust particle , or on hand or pipette , muscle into secure location and onto airplane , ruin year of research around the globe , while cause million of dollar in damage. After Gey die of pancreatic cancer in 1970 , his colleague publish a medical journal article with Lacks’s name in 1971 , 20 year after her death. Three week later , President Nixon announce a “war on cancer.” The Lacks family find out about HeLa one night in 1973 when one of Lacks’s daughter-in-law have dinner with a friend , whose husband happen to be a cancer researcher who recognize the Lacks name. He tell her that he be work with cell from a woman name Henrietta Lacks and ask if she have die of cervical cancer. As recount in Rebecca Skloot’s “The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks , ” she rush home and tell Lacks’s son Lawrence , “Part of your mother , it’s alive ! ” In 2001 , 50 year after Lacks die , her daughter Deborah visit Johns Hopkins Hospital and close her eye a a cancer researcher open the door of his floor-to-ceiling freezer. Deborah then open her eye slowly , and star at vial of red liquid. “Oh , God , ” she gasp , “I can’t believe all this be my mother.” When he hand her one , she say , “She’s cold , ” and blew on the tube to warm it. “You’re famous , ” she whisper to the cells. Clover , Va. , and Baltimore be separate by about 250 miles. The distance that mankind and science travel , because Lacks make that short journey , be immeasurable. No dead woman have do more for humanity. Says one researcher : “HeLa will live forever , perhaps.” Adeel Hassan be a writer and editor for Race/Related , a newsletter and reporting project at The Times .