July 27 , 1952 OBITUARY Saga Of Eva Peron : 12 Years To Power By THE NEW YORK TIMES Ambitious , ruthless , untiring , clever and strikingly beautiful , Maria Eva Duarte de Peron have in large measure many of the quality need to lift her in a dozen short year from obscurity to fame , wealth and power on the unpredictable current of Argentine political life. The child of a poor village landowner who have be separate from his first wife , she rise meteorically through a brief radio and motion picture career to become the first lady of her land and one of the most influential woman in the Western hemisphere. Senora Peron 's ascent and her important role in governmental affair and propaganda be all the more remarkable for the contrast that they present to the conservative social tradition of Latin America , where woman previously be seldom see , and never hear , in public life. No less than her husband , Senora Peron be a controversial figure. To her supporter , among whom be the many recipient of her highly publicized charity , she approach the stature of a dazzling goddess. She be `` la dama de la esperanza , '' the lady of hope. For her opponent , political and social , however , there be not word strong enough to express their dislike and envy of this blonde upstart , who seem to have virtually take over the country. The controversial aspect of the role of Senora Peron be by no mean limit to Argentina. She become a truly international figure , a world-wide topic of conversation and invariably a subject of conjecture. Countless anecdotes -- factual as well a apocryphal -- point this up. The inevitably humorless way in which she lend herself to the promulgation of absolute peronismo be never well illustrate than on the day she have to undergo minor surgery. 'Viva Peron ! ' One of the Buenos Aires newspaper own outright by the Government run a front-page box , allegedly describe the moment that she be be wheel into the operating room. `` Before they put me to sleep , '' she be quote a have say , `` if I do not awake -- Viva Peron ! '' She be bear May 7 , 1919 , in Los Toldos , a village of Buenos Aires province , young of five child of Juan Duarte and Juana Ibarguren. Her father die while she be still a child , and her mother move to the near-by town of Junin and open a boarding house. After two year of high school , still in her mid-teens , the slim blonde girl go to Buenos Aires on her own to seek an acting career. Through characteristic persistence , she be able to land a permanent job with Radio Belgrano , a major station , after several fruitless excursion into both radio and motion pictures. Finding favor with her employer and several government official , she rise from a start salary of $ 35 a month to about $ 1,000 a month in 1943 , and seven time that figure the next year. In 1944 her monthly income be reportedly $ 15,000 , half of which be pay for her motion-picture performances. It be in 1943 that she meet at a studio party Col. Juan D. Peron , a 49-year-old widower who be Under-Secretary of the War Ministry and a rise figure on the political scene. Both evidently be impressed , for a close association result , and they be marry secretly in October , 1945. Aided Radio Employees Union Even before her marriage , Evita , a she prefer to be know , begin to broaden her interest to suit those of her future husband. While he be become the champion of the `` decamisados , '' originally the shirtless , and later the shirtsleeved one , a Minister of Labor , she help organize a radio employee 's union and undertake her first campaign for the underprivileged. When Colonel Peron be force to resign from the Government in October , 1945 , Senorita Duarte be dismiss from her radio post. Within a week , however , he have return to power , and four month later he be elect President and take Senora Peron , then 26 , to the executive mansion a his wife. From then on her activity , wealth and influence expand rapidly. She set up office in the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare , there hold daily audience and distribute food , medicine and money to petitioners. In 1947 she incorporate the Maria Eva Duarte de Peron Welfare Foundation , which carry on much of this work. Spreading with her welfare work be her personal propaganda machinery. Large picture of the handsome `` presidenta '' appear throughout Argentina. Many of her gift be accompany by highly color speech emphasize her warm heart , generosity and affection for the people. These sentiment be echo by a large part of the Argentine press , which be come under Peronista control financially as well a politically. Growth of Political Influence Although Senora Peron insist repeatedly that she be only interested in social work , political observer begin to credit her with influence in Government affair that be second only to her husband 's -- if indeed that. In 1947 Senora Peron make a tour of Europe that be consider highly significant politically. She be fete with great enthusiasm in Madrid and decorate by Generalissimo Francisco Franco. In Rome she have a half-hour audience with Pope Pius XII , and be the subject of several leftist demonstrations. She be receive by President Vincent Auriol in Paris , but cancel plan to visit England. One of Senora Peron 's several legislative triumph be win in September , 1947 , when a bill give woman the right to vote in Argentina be approved. This bring another round of eulogy from the press. The first lady 's power to control unfavorable press commentary be considerable. Time magazine be ban in Argentina for four month after it publish an article on Senora Peron that be not consider flattering. In 1948 her press campaign become avowedly personal with the publication of a weekly sign column , `` Eva Peron Says. '' Her political influence be credit a be instrumental in force the resignation of the entire minority bloc in the Argentine Parliament in August , 1948. She take an active part in the campaign to `` reform '' the Argentine Constitution four month later. For nearly a month early in 1949 Army official exert pressure on the President to curb his wife 's activity , but the movement be unsuccessful , and two month later she play an important role in the resignation of Dr. Juan Bramugha a Foreign Minister. In the fall of 1950 report be circulate in Buenos Aires that Senora Peron have ambition for elective office. The rumor hint that she would seek the Vice Presidency in the 1952 election on the ticket with her husband. Early in 1951 the Perons start a high-pressure campaign to have themselves draft a a husband and wife team to run the country. By late August they have `` agree '' to `` accept '' the nomination for President and Vice President of the Peronista party. After take four day to make up her mind , Evita tell a demonstration audience of 250,000 in Plaza Moreno that she and her husband would `` do what the people want. '' Then on the last day of the month , she change her mind and decline the nomination. In a choked voice on the same broadcast that on which she have announce her decision , Senora Peron say she have hop history would say : `` There be a woman alongside General Peron who take to him the hope and need of the people to satisfy them , and her name be Evita. '' Senora Peron 's book : `` The Purpose of My Life , '' publish in 1951 , have the wide distribution of any book print in Spanish in Argentina , and the Chamber of Deputies later make it compulsory reading in the school .