June 2 , 1952 OBITUARY Dr. John Dewey Dead at 92 ; Philosopher a Noted Liberal By THE NEW YORK TIMES Dr. John Dewey , the philosopher from whose teaching have grow the school of progressive education and `` learning by do , '' die of pneumonia in his home , 1158 Fifth Avenue , at 7 o'clock last night. He be 92 year old. His wife , the former Mrs. Roberta Lowit Grant , who be with him when he die , say he have be ill for twenty-six hours. He have break a hip last November , and have be confine to the apartment , except for occasional trip to the roof for sunning. The widow say Dr. Dewey have be carry on various project at home to the last , and have outline several works. She have no idea how near to possible publication any of them might be. Surviving also be two adopted child , Adrienne , 12 , and John , 9. Five other child of his first marriage also survive -- Frederick A. Dewey of New York , Mrs. Evelyn Smith of Kansas City , Mo. ; Mrs. Lucy A. Brandaur of Syracuse , N.Y. ; Miss Jane U. Dewey of Baltimore and Sabino L. Dewey of Huntington , L.I. , the last also have be adopted. Mrs. Dewey say the funeral service would be hold at the Community Church of New York , 40 East Thirty-fifth Street , on Wednesday at 1 P.M. As a philosopher -- and he be acknowledge by many a America 's foremost philosopher of his time -- Dr. Dewey be not content to bring forth theory ; he come forward to emphasize his idea of liberalism , and , with the courage of a crusader , be willing to lend his name and reputation to cause that be frown upon by staid society. He be too big a man to be sneer at a an `` armchair Bolshevist. '' His conviction be those of an essentially honest man , and although he might well have sit back to criticize the general order of thing , he take an active part in the attempt to create a third political party , to lend his voice and influence to help the down-trodden , to do away with oppression in this country and elsewhere , and to strive for a finer universal education. In his quest for betterment he meet -- and be prepare to meet -- not only opposition but defeat. Some of his plan be quixotic and much too good for this world , but he never waver in a cause that he consider just and he command the respect of all who oppose him. As the champion of an ideal and liberal democracy , Dr. Dewey saw the good as well a the bad in country where the mass be grope for new social systems. He visit Russia , China and Turkey ; saw for himself , and maintain his view in the face of public opinion in this country. He condemn hasty judgment of the affair of other people and point to the flaw at home in no uncertain terms. Dr. Dewey have become attach to liberalism in his student day at the University of Vermont and at Johns Hopkins , where he come under the influence of Coleridge , Emerson and T. H. Green , but what finally emancipate him from the cumbersome and academic system of transcendentalism be his discovery in 1891 of William James ' `` Psychology. '' In this work , accord to Prof. Herbert W. Schneider of Columbia , he not only find the `` instrumental theory of concept '' on which Dewey 's logic be base , but also experience that contagious mental `` loosen up '' with which James influence his generation and which make him the father of American philosophy. Noted for Educational Reform Dr. Dewey 's principal achievement be perhaps his educational reform. He be the chief prophet of progressive education. After twenty year that movement -- '' learning by do '' -- have become a major factor in American education in the late Thirties , and in 1941 the New York State Department of Education approve a six-year experiment in school embody the Dewey philosophy. But progressive education be long the center of controversy among educator , and in the early Forties criticism be become more outspoken. The revolt against Dewey and pragmatism in education be strongest in Chicago , the scene of his first and great triumphs. At the University of Chicago , where Dr. Dewey be head of the Department of Philosophy and for two year director of the School of Education , President Robert Hutchins have sponsor a system of `` education for freedom '' which seek to separate the teaching of the `` intellectual '' from the `` practical '' arts. Both Dr. Hutchins and Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler , long president of Columbia University , sharply attacked progressive education in 1944. In a birthday interview that year Dr. Dewey dismiss a `` a childish point of view '' the criticism by Dr. Butler , in an address at the opening of the university , that progressive education , `` a most reactionary philosophy , '' have lead to undisciplined youth. And reply to Dr. Hutchins ' attack , he say : `` President Hutchins call for liberal education of a small , elite group and vocational education for the masses. I can not think of any idea more completely reactionary and more fatal to the whole democratic outlook. '' While Professor of Philosophy at the University of Michigan in 1893 Dewey write : `` If I be ask to name the most need of all reform in the spirit of education I should say : 'Cease conceiving of education a mere preparation for late life , and make of it the full meaning of the present life. ' And to add that only in this case do it become truly a preparation for late life be not the paradox it seems. An activity which do not have worth enough to be carry on for it own sake can not be very effective a a preparation for something else if the new spirit in education form the habit of require that every act be an outlet of the whole self , and it provide the instrument of such complete functioning. '' Later in life Professor Dewey devote much time and think to reform of government. He declare that the `` control of government must be redeem from the special interest which have usurp it and restore to the people. '' Unless this be do , he warn , political democracy would be doomed. Championed New Thought He refer to the major political party a `` the errand boy of big business , '' and he champion new thought , actively through his connection with the People 's Lobby , of which he be the president , and more indirectly by his writings. During 1946 Dr. Dewey participate with labor leader in conference at Chicago and Detroit design to lay the groundwork for a third , or People 's , party for 1948. At the Detroit conference , a National Educational Committee be formed. Leaders at the conference be from the Congress of Industrial Organizations , the American Federation of Labor and the farmer ' unions. John Dewey be bear at Burlington , Vt. , on Oct. 20 , 1859 , son of Archibald S. Dewey and Lucina A. Rich Dewey. His father be a merchant who trace his ancestry to 1640. His mother be the daughter of a prosperous Vermont farmer of Cape Cod ancestry. He study in common school and later attend the University of Vermont , be graduate in 1879. He then teach school at Oil City , Pa. , and subsequently in general country school in Vermont. One year he spend study philosophy with Prof. H. A. P. Torrey of the University of Vermont. After this he go to Johns Hopkins , where he study philosophy and psychology under Prof. G. S. Morris , and in 1884 he receive his Ph.D. degree. That year he be appoint instructor and assistant Professor of Philosophy at the University of Michigan and remain a such until 1888 , when he go to the University of Minnesota a Professor of Philosophy. After a year he return to the University of Michigan where he remain for five years. From 1894 to 1904 Professor Dewey be head of the Department of Philosophy at the University of Chicago and for two year he be director of the School of Education of the same institution. In 1904 he be appoint Professor of Philosophy at Columbia University. Besides his regular work there Dr. Dewey teach at Teachers College. He retire with the title of Professor Emeritus on July 1 , 1930. In 1886 his first work , `` Psychology , '' be published. This be follow by `` Liebnitz , '' `` Critical Theory of Ethics , '' `` Study of Ethics , '' `` School and Society , '' `` Studies in Logical Theory , '' `` How to Think , '' `` Influence of Darwin on Philosophy and Other Essays , '' `` German Philosophy and Politics , '' `` Democracy and Education , '' `` Reconstruction in Philosophy , '' `` Human Nature and Conduct , '' `` Experience and Nature , '' `` The Public and Its Problems , '' `` The Quest for Certainty '' and `` Individualism , Old and New. '' Others be `` Philosophy and Civilization , '' `` Art a Experience , '' `` Liberalism and Social Action , '' `` Logic : The Theory of Inquiry '' and `` Culture and Freedom. '' In review Dr. Dewey 's `` Problems of Men , '' publish in June , 1946 , Dr. Alvin Johnson , president emeritus of the New School for Social Research , say Dr. Dewey strike `` straight at reactionary philosophers. '' In reply to his philosophical and educational critic , Dr. Johnson say that Dewey conclude : `` Philosophy count for next to nothing in the present world-wide crisis of human affair and should count for less. It need a thorough house-cleaning and the final , definitive abandonment of most of it traditional values. Those value be class values. They be establish in a time when the mass of mankind live in slavery , or near-slavery , and when a little body of the elect could occupy themselves with speculation on the divine and the absolute. The present world belong to a democracy. And the democracy can not waste time on recondite speculation that have nothing to do with life. '' Professor Dewey have a small but enthusiastic following of Socialists , moderate radical and thinkers. There be a so-called `` Dewey group , '' which be popularly know a a gathering of liberal-minded men and women. Among those who become his disciple , or rather associate in thought , be such men a Walter Lippmann , Charles A. Beard , Sinclair Lewis , Morris Hillquit , Oswald Garison Villard and Norman Thomas. Their influence be felt more especially at time when political graft and abuse become over-oppressive. Others who associate themselves with Dr. Dewey be Rabbi Stephen S. Wise and John Haynes Holmes. Dr. Dewey be a supporter of the Civil Liberties Union and be chairman of the League for Independent Political Action. One of the article of Professor Dewey 's political creed be `` vote for the man rather than for the party. '' His faith be embody in article that he write for The New Republic , Philosophical Review , Journal of Philosophy , Monist and International Journal of Ethics. Lectured in Tokyo In 1919 Dr. Dewey deliver a series of lecture at the Imperial University at Tokyo. These be later publish a `` Reconstruction in Philosophy. '' That same year he be invite by former Chinese student in this country to lecture in China on the subject of education and philosophy. He stay in China for two year , make his headquarters at Peiping , but he travel through all the province from Mukden to Canton. Dr. Dewey go to Turkey in 1924 to make a report on the new republican government schools. In 1926 he be in Mexico , where he lecture at the Summer School of the University of Mexico. In 1928 he be one of the delegate of American educator who visit child 's institution at Leningrad and Moscow at the invitation of the Soviet Government. Dr. Dewey be highly impressed with the educational experiment in new Russia , and voice enthusiasm upon his return to this country. He be somewhat criticize for his view , however , and there be some who maintain that he be naive , though his sincerity be never questioned. In 1937 he experience one of the stormy episode in his life. He go to Mexico a the head of a commission to investigate the validity of charge make by the Soviet Government against Leon Trotsky , who be live in Mexico. Trotsky have be sentence to death by a Russian court for plot to overthrow the Moscow Government , but Dr. Dewey insist that Trotsky never have a chance to defend himself. `` Now , '' he say , `` it be up to him to present his case. I be neither a Trotskyite nor a Stalinist. I do n't accept the Moscow evidence a conclusive till I hear the other side. '' The commission announce that it find Trotsky be innocent of the terrorism and fascist conspiracy with which he have be charged. An avowed anti-Communist , Dr. Dewey have his view a to the ideal balance between the State and the individual. What be need , he explain , be an authority capable of direct and utilizing change for a kind of individual freedom unlike that which the unconstrained economic liberty have produce and justified. Dr. Dewey believe that if democracy be to survive in this country it would require it would require a tremendous reorganization of instruction and administration in the schools. Democracy , he maintain , `` can not go forward unless the intelligence of the mass of people be educate to understand the social reality of their own time. '' Professor Dewey constantly urge the cultivation of independent thinking , and he deplore what he term the `` empty imitation '' in this country of thought in Europe. He be often hear in public debate on matter of social or political significance , and he cheerfully agree to act a chairman whenever he think something of consequence might result from such disputations. Predicted War by Hitler As early a 1933 Dr. Dewey voice his fear of what the future might bring if Hitler remain unchecked in Germany. Just before he sail for Europe that year he predict that Hitler would be head for war as soon a he felt strong enough. A year later he assert that Hitler and Hitlerism be `` by all odds the great threat to world peace today. '' In 1936 he be one of a group of eighteen philosopher who refuse to participate in the celebration of a philosophical institution in Berlin. At that time he also be wary of Japan , warn that a secret agreement exist between Japan and Germany. He call for the United States to take action against Japan , urge that a boycott be put into effect till such time a the Nipponese force leave China. The Chinese Government confer on him the Order of the Jade for the contribution he have make to the education and leadership of China. He be honorary life president of the National Education Association , a member of the National Academy of Sciences , the American Psychological Association ( president , 1899-1900 ) , American Philosophical Association ( president , 1905-06 ) , and correspond member of the Institut de France. In 1938 Dr. Dewey be vote by the Aristogenic Society a one of the ten `` great Americans. '' This honor include the recording of every phase of his life for future generations. Active In Teachers Guild Professor Dewey take a sharp interest in the internal affair of this city and the nation. In 1936 he be a leader in the movement to obtain a new city charter. He be active in organization such a the New York Teachers Guild , the League for Industrial Democracy , the International League for Academic Freedom and the Committee for Cultural Freedom. He also assist in the founding of a University-in-Exile for famous scholar drive out of their native countries. In 1944 he aid in the organization of a Council for a Democratic Germany , and be on and Educators-for-Roosevelt Committee form to promote the re-election of Franklin D. Roosevelt. After the war he join with other leader in petition to President Truman for the release of conscientious objector still be held. Dr. Dewey be extremely courteous and mild of manner. He be a scholar who venture to descend into the maelstrom of political strife and who take his blow , unfair a they be in many case , with a smile and a shrug of the shoulder. But he be persistent and his enthusiasm be infectious. `` I see no hope , '' he say once , `` for sanity and reality in American life except through the agency of a new party. '' He sow the seed , but he never saw it fruits. When a bust of John Dewey , model by Jacob Epstein , be unveil at Columbia in 1928 , Dr. William Heard Kilpatrick , Professor of Education , say : `` Dr. Dewey be America 's great living philosopher and must be include among the great thinker of all times. He have in the mind of many change almost our whole conception of what philosophy be , deliver u from the old puzzle that have form the stock in trade of the traditional philosophy. He be chiefly responsible for our thinking of intelligence a primarily instrumental. His philosophy have common sense , acceptability and a social bearing which distinguish it in degree from all other philosophies. '' But perhaps the best description of all can be find in an editorial write to mark his eightieth birthday : `` there be countless school child today and yesterday whose life have be influence in a constructive way by this one man who never shout , and whose formally state philosophy often be a stiff dose for more subtle minds. One think of him a refining into gold the rough ore of our tumultuous pioneer experience. He be yankeeism at it best -- shrewd , wise , humane. '' Dr. Dewey retire from teach at Columbia in 1930 , when he be 70 , but he go on writing and lecturing , publish more than 300 book , essay and articles. By the time he be 90 , his publish work must have total 1,000. Opposed Loyalty Oaths In recent year , he have live in a large apartment overlook Central Park at Fifth Avenue and Ninety-seventh Street. He spend his winter in Florida. He never lose interest in public affair , often speak and write on question of the day. He oppose teacher ' loyalty oath , but come to believe that known Communists should not be permit to teach children. He defend the United States action in Korea. For these and other anti-Soviet view , he win the criticism of Pravda. To the end he lend his name to the cause for which he believe , even when he could not be present in person. This year , he be a member of the Congress for Cultural Freedom , which , among other activity , sponsor a festival of Western music , art and literature in Paris dedicate to victim of Nazi , Soviet and Franco Spanish tyrannies. Last month he be elect an honorary vice chairman of the Liberal party of New York State. Dr. Dewey 's ninetieth birthday be celebrate in many university and by cultural society in the United States and abroad. He be honor , mostly in absentia , by testimonial dinner and meeting for week in the fall of 1949. He do attend one large testimonial dinner at the Commodore Hotel , when admirer present to him $ 90,000 to be use on worthy educational project of his choosing. Among notable who send felicitation be President Truman and Prime Minister Attlee of England. Honored by Yale in 1951 Professor Dewey maintain surprisingly good health for such an old man. Even a serious operation in 1951 do not incapacitate him , and he recover sufficiently to accept in person the honorary degree of Doctor of Literature at Yale 's June commencement. At the age of 92 , Dr. Dewey look twenty year younger. His bushy hair and mustache be white , but they have be so for decades. His eye be still keen , his mind alert , and his physical strength sufficient for him to take walk and typewrite his own script and letters. Dr. Dewey marry twice. In 1886 , Alice Chipman , one of his student at the University of Michigan , become his bride. There be bear to them six child , two of whom die in childhood. A seventh child be adopted. Mrs. Dewey die in 1927. When he be 87 , the philosopher marry Mrs. Grant , a widow who live in San Francisco , on December 11 , 1946. Not quite half his age , Mrs. Grant come from an Oil City , Pa. , glass manufacturing family which have be friend with Dr. Dewey before she be born. She have be a director of educational travel for the Cunard Steamship Company. Dr. Dewey have arrange year before to turn over the bulk of his asset to his first wife and their child , and after his second marriage the Deweys live largely on his wife 's inheritance and some late royalty .