November 9 , 1952 OBITUARY Chaim Weizmann Of Israel Is Dead Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES TEL AVIV , Israel , Sunday , Nov. 9 -- President Chaim Weizmann of Israel die at 6:30 this morning in his home in Rehovot , near here , after a long illness. He would have be 78 year old on Nov. 27. Respiratory inflammation be declare to be a principal cause of his death. Dr. Weizmann , a world-famed chemist , be an early Zionist and the natural choice to be Israel 's first President when the new nation come into be May 14 , 1948. Led Adventurous Life Chaim Weizmann 's life be sufficiently full of adventure , romance , accomplishment and fulfillment to have be live by a dozen men. He be a world-famous scientist , a statesman , leader of a forceful political movement , an intellectual and , above all , a great humanitarian. In the three-quarters of a century through which he live , he experience every emotion : reward , for priceless scientific achievement ; despair , when the great prize seem lose , and triumph , when the prize -- his lifelong dream of a Jewish home in Palestine -- be achieved. Few great men have have more humble beginnings. He be bear on Nov. 27 , 1874 , in the village of Motele , near Pinsk , Russia. He live to become the first president of the modern state of Israel and to see pour into it border the hundred of thousand of homeless , abandon European Jews. Many strong men and woman , people of great courage , skill and ability , have contribute to the growth of Israel. His life epitomize the task of all of them in transform Palestinian desert into section of roll forest , lush olive and orange grove , irrigation and water- power project , and center of science and industry in the undeveloped Middle East. Theodor Herzl be the founder of the modern Zionist movement ; Dr. Weizmann give it practical direction. He act a a moderator among the bitterly quarreling Zionist factions. Perhaps his principal contribution to the movement come a a result of his work a a scientist in the first World War. His reward be the Balfour Declaration. It become the key to ultimate Zionist victory. As head of the British Admiralty Laboratories from 1917 to 1919 , Dr. Weizmann develop a process for the manufacture of synthetic acetone at a time when the British need it desperately. He isolate certain organism find in cereal and horse chestnut and within a month have create synthetic acetone for British explosives. He be also credit with have suggest to David Lloyd George the strategy of the campaign against Turkey which result ultimately in Allenby 's victorious march on Jerusalem. For all these service the British Prime Minister ask him what he want in return. Dr. Weizmann refuse any monetary reward or a title , and say , `` There be only one thing I want -- a national home for my people. '' The Balfour Declaration , issue in November , 1917 , followed. It be Britain 's promise to facilitate the Jews in make a homeland in Palestine and be hail a the Magna Carta of the Zionist movement. It be support by a joint resolution of the Congress of the United States and lead Jews everywhere to believe the redemption of Palestine be assured. The declaration be a central factor in Jewish aspiration even in the dark day when war , then change in British policy , include support of the Arab position , seem to doom the whole idea of a Jewish homeland. Son of Timber Merchant Dr. Weizmann be the third child of Reb Oizer and Rachel Czermerinsky Weizmann. His father be a timber merchant , of modest mean , who manage with his wife the remarkable task of send nine of their fifteen child to universities. He go first to cheder ( Jewish religious school ) until he be 11 and then to the Gymnasium in Pinsk , where he make a brilliant record in science and mathematics. Years later when he be reputedly ask by Lord Balfour , the British Foreign Secretary , if there be many Zionists like him , Dr. Weizmann , whose celebrated remark be legendary , reply , `` The road of Pinsk be pave with them. '' He leave Russia in 1894 and spend the next four year in Germany at the Technische Hochschule of Darmstadt and Berlin-Charlottenburg. When a favorite professor join the staff of the University of Freiburg in Switzerland , Dr. Weizmann go there to study. He receive a doctorate in science in 1900. Within a year , he take a position a lecturer in organic chemistry at the University of Geneva , where he teach and continue his research until 1904. He become affiliated , meanwhile , with the Zionist movement. It be in Geneva that he meet Vera Chatzman , a medical student , whom he marry in 1906. They have two son , Benjamin and Michael , who be kill in 1944 while fly on patrol with the British Royal Air Force. Dr. Weizmann leave Geneva to accept a post of the University of Manchester in England and in 1910 he become a naturalized British subject. He receive a D. Sc. from the British university in 1909 and an LL. D. in 1919. The only major Zionist conference which Dr. Weizmann fail to attend be the first , in 1897 , after Herzl publish `` Der Judenstaat. '' Criticized Herzl 's `` Vision '' At the age of 27 Dr. Weizmann have dare to criticize Herzl a `` too visionary , '' and in 1900 , at the Fourth Zionist Convention , he emerge a the leader of the Democratic Zionist faction. This group oppose both the political Zionists , who want political guarantee for the establishment of a Jewish home in Palestine , and the practical Zionists , who want to settle Jewish colony in the Holy Land without regard to political guarantees. Dr. Weizmann help reconcile their differences. His first speech to the biennial Zionist Congress in 1903 propose the establishment of a Hebrew University. The proposal be accept at the Eleventh World Zionist Congress in 1913. Five year later he have the honor of lay the cornerstone of the Hebrew University on Mount Scopus in Palestine. On his first visit to Palestine in 1907 he be instrumental in found the Palestine Land Development Company. This be typical of this ability to convert idea into practical realities. For fifteen year , while teach chemistry at the University of Manchester , he head the `` Manchester Group '' of British Zionists. In 1906 he meet Balfour , who be on an electoral campaign , and convince him that Palestine rather than Uganda , British East Africa , which have be offer by the British , be the proper homeland for the Jews. After his distinguished service in behalf of the British in the first World War , the main task he assign himself be to remind the British of their promise to aid in the establishment of the Jewish national home. His effort lead to his appointment a chairman of the first Zionist Commission , establish in March , 1918 , and recognize by the British a an official advisory body on all Jewish questions. He appear before the Paris Peace Conference in support of his cause. Dr. Weizmann visit the Arab Prince Feisal in his camp near Amman around this time and convince him that the propose Jewish national home hold no exist threat to the Arabs and that Jewish-Arab cooperation be desirable. He win Arab support to help carry out the Balfour Declaration , and reach an agreement with Feisal for large-scale Jewish immigration into Palestine and the protection of Arab rights. Sought Jewish State in 1919 The Zionist delegation be give a hearing before the Supreme Council of the Peace Conference on Feb. 27 , 1919 , at which Robert Lansing , the United States Secretary of State , ask if the term `` a Jewish national home '' mean an autonomous government. Dr. Weizmann reply that they do not ask for the immediate creation of a Jewish administration but he quite clearly express his hope that he would some day see a Jewish majority in Palestine and the ultimate creation of a Jewish state. The Zionists find shortly afterward that their principal difficulty be only beginning. The League of Nations have to be organize and a mandate system work out. It be not until August , 1924 , that the status of Palestine a a mandated territory be legalized. From 1920 to 1931 , and in 1935 , Dr. Weizmann , a president of the World Zionist Organization , find it necessary to compromise with the British and the Arabs and to appease his various Zionist opponents. Civil war in Palestine between the Jews and Arabs add to his difficulties. The Arabs insist that Palestine have be exclusively theirs for thirteen century ; the Jews maintain the right of prior occupation and historical connection relate to their conquest of Palestine in 1200 B.C. Blood flow freely in frequent clashes. In the second World War , the British reject his proposal to train a Jewish Army. They do train a Jewish battalion but that do not come into existence until 1944. No Jewish mission be invite to the United Nations Conference in 1945 and it be not until 1946 , when the Anglo-American Commission of Inquiry on Palestine be create , that Dr. Weizmann again have an opportunity to make an official plea for a Jewish home and unrestricted immigration. In October , 1947 , he head a delegation from the Jewish Agency which present it case before the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine. He accept at that time the principle of partition of Palestine into Jewish and Arab state provide that the Jews be free to form a `` free national unit. '' On Nov. 30 , 1947 , the U. N. General Assembly approve partition , and Jews dance in the street of Tel Aviv. Partition be threaten temporarily when the American delegation to the U. N. switch it position and press for a trusteeship. This proposal be turn down , and on May 14 , 1948 , simultaneously with the withdrawal of the British from Palestine , the Provisional Government of the new State of Israel be created. Elected President by Council On May 16 the thirty-seven council member of the provisional government elect him president. The honor be accept on the next day by Dr. Weizmann at his suite here at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel , crown his life 's work. `` I dedicate myself to the service of the land and people in whose cause I have be privilege to labor these many year , '' he pledge in his message of acceptance. Dr. Weizmann 's first official act of state be to visit President Truman on May 25 at the White House , where he appeal for fund to build the new country and an end of the arm embargo which keep the Jews from get munition from the United States. An export- import loan of $ 100,000,000 be authorize several month later , but no action be take on the arm embargo. He be the honorary chairman of the board of director of Hebrew University and director of the Daniel Sieff Research Laboratory. His home be in Rehovot near the $ 4,000,000 Weizmann Institute of Science , which be create for him a a tribute from American Jews. Dr. Weizmann pay his first visit to the United States a President of Israel in April , 1949. At a dinner in behalf of the Weizmann Institute , where he be the guest of honor , he blueprint the foreign policy of his nation a friendship with all nation whose policy be , similarly , friendship to Israel regardless of `` whether or not they diverge among themselves. '' Israel Admitted to U. N. It be in May , soon after his return to Israel , that Dr. Weizmann realize another significant goal in his life when the United Nations admit Israel a a member nation. This come after he have talk with President Truman during his visit here to participate in celebration commemorate the first anniversary of the founding of the new State of Israel on May 4. It be also in 1949 , in June , that Dr. Weizmann finally surrender his British citizenship to become a citizen of Israel. And it be two month later that he participate in ceremony when the body of Theodore Herzl be bring `` home '' to Israel from Vienna to be bury on Mount Herzl. At the time of his seventy-fifth birthday on Nov. 27 , 1949 , he stand by while the nation which grant him the title of be it `` father '' give him an eighteen-gun salute. He foretell it future by say on a visit to Geneva that `` just a some people live by the sword , we will live by science. '' On his seventy-seventh birthday , he be content , a on many other day , to gaze with fail eye from his home in Rehovot , across the orange grove , to the white building of the Weizmann Institute. Construction of the institute start in 1944 and each year large sum of money be contribute here toward additional buildings. Although in poor health , Dr. Weizmann continue active a President of Israel and president of the Executive Council of the Weizmann Institute. In July , 1950 , he urge support of United Nations measure to end the war in Korea. Later the same year he be confront with the fall of his Cabinet and the formation of a new one. Early in 1951 he be again confront with the collapse of the coalition Cabinet under Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion , but despite continued illness he carry on the duty of his office. He preside over the first meeting of Israel 's new thirteen-man coalition Cabinet on Nov. 3 , 1951 , and continue to work at his home in Rehovoth , until remove to a hospital four week later. Dr. Weizmann be re-elected President in November , but a move to name him life President be drop after several political party fail to go along with the proposal. His illness drastically curtail his activity in his second term a President , but he be able to serve a host to Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt on her tour of Israel in February , 1952. From his sickbed at Rehovoth , he issue a message on the fourth anniversary of the Republic the next April 29. Addressed `` to all citizen of Israel and to all member of the House of Israel , '' it say : `` On this solemn day I would say this to all my brother : the future of Israel rest on three foundation -- brotherly love , constructive effort and peace near and far. '' His chief work in chemistry be in three field of research : the synthesis of polycyclic substance , the production of acetone and butyl alcohol and their derivative , and the development of protein foodstuff for use a meat substitutes. Always a Moderate Throughout the year of turmoil and violence he have remain a moderate , and in 1931 , when he relinquish his post a head of the world Zionists , he refuse to give ground on this issue. He express his philosophy in a three-hour `` farewell address. '' His word then might just as well have sum up his view in 1949. He say : `` With a strong national home in Palestine , build up peacefully and harmoniously , we may expect , in cooperation with the Arabs , also to open up for Jewish endeavor the vast area which for their development need intelligence , initiative , organization and finances. `` The constant formulation of excessive demand endanger the safety of the mandate. We have be search for other way and means. In this quest I have not always be successful , but in lay down my office , formally and definitely , today , I feel that I have bring the movement a little nearer to it goal. That goal we shall reach . ''