September 9 , 1953 OBITUARY Vinson Excelled In Federal Posts By THE NEW YORK TIMES Fred M. Vinson enjoy a noteworthy career in each of the three branch of the Federal Government -- legislative , executive and judicial. In twelve year in the House of Representatives he win wide renown a a tax and fiscal expert. Then , in World War II , he serve in top administrative post , a Economic Stabilizer , Federal Loan Administrator , Assistant President , and Secretary of the Treasury. Finally , in 1946 , he be appoint by President Truman a Chief Justice of the United States. In all three field he distinguish himself by the exercise of his most characteristic quality , his exceptional ability a a negotiator , a trouble-shooter , a reconciler of conflict view , a man who could reduce war faction to at least outward harmony and so get thing done. Probably his fine achievement be the application of this soothing technique to the bitter personal feud and doctrinal dispute that have rent the Supreme Court for a long time before his appointment. Within a year after he become Chief Justice , member of the august tribunal who previously have refuse to speak be bow to each other from the waist. What be more important , the court have regain the public confidence and respect which it have lose because of the dissension in it midst. But it be this highly commended trait that cause trouble for the Chief Justice and his good friend President Truman in 1948. Then the President , without ponder all the implication and potential repercussion , decide it would be a fine idea to send his Great Negotiator to Moscow to negotiate personally with Premier Stalin for the lifting of the Soviet blockade of Berlin and peaceful relation generally. But General of the Army George C. Marshall , then Secretary of State , have previously take the lead in break off direct negotiation with the Russians , and in refer the Berlin matter to the Security Council. Amid a flood of protest from all side that the President 's proposal be embarrass our ally , break the united front of the Western nation , and provide the Communists with a new weapon for their `` peace '' propaganda , Secretary Marshall rush back from a Paris meeting of the Security Council and succeed in talk the President out of the idea. Mr. Truman say later he have not intend any appeasement but merely to try to convince Marshal Stalin of our sincerity. Friendship With Truman The Chief Justice 's friendship with the President be one of the most important fact of both their lives. This friendship begin when both be in Congress , Mr. Truman in the Senate and Mr. Vinson in the House. It develop into an especially close relationship after the death of the late President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1945. When the President go to Key West in the winter the Chief Justice would accompany him or visit him. The Vinson family would go to the White House for Thanksgiving dinner with the Trumans. Both the President and the Chief Justice have telephone by their bed , and regularly hold long talk at night , in which the President receive Mr. Vinson 's advice and counsel on many problems. Throughout the Truman Administration Mr. Vinson be regard a one of the real inner circle at the White House , one of the `` top ten. '' Mr. Vinson 's name be frequently mention a a possible Democratic candidate for President in 1948 and 1952 if Mr. Truman do not choose to run. The Chief Justice be generally regard in Washington a the President 's choice to succeed him in 1952 if Mr. Truman himself do not run , but Mr. Vinson let it be know he have no Presidential ambition , and early in 1952 it be report he have indicate to the President he prefer not to be a candidate. At one time , when Secretary of State Dean Acheson be under fire and report of his resignation be current , Mr. Vinson be mention in Washington a his possible successor. Mr. Vinson regard himself a `` a little left of center '' in politics. He be consider a moderate New Dealer , and support most of President Roosevelt 's policy , but maintain a stubborn independence and oppose any project which he think pass beyond the line of true liberalism into `` totalitarian '' liberalism. Political Washington mark him down a both `` anti-Socialist and anti-reactionary. '' In the Supreme Court he become one of the middle-of-the-road `` liberal-conservative '' group that seek to reconcile national security with individual right and maintain a balance to preserve and strengthen both amid the problem of the `` cold war '' era. Had Pleasing Personality Physically , Mr. Vinson be a tall , large , vigorous man with gray hair , blue eye , deep line in his face , dark circle under his eye and shaggy eyebrows. A friend of his once say : `` He look like an extremely dignified sheep with a hangover , but he be not at all like a sheep and he never have a hangover. '' He be genial , affable and kindly , hearty and sincere , amiable and unaffected , a convivial companion who occasionally take a drink but not often , a dignified man of grave demeanor , calm judgment , a great amount of patience , and an easy manner. It be this pleasing personality , combine with a mellow sense of humor , a folksy way of talk , a homespun philosophy and a common-sense approach to hard problem , together with a hardworking , ambitious nature , a canny and logical mind , and great political know-how that win him such wide friendship in all branch of governmental Washington. His selection a Chief Justice after the death of Harian Fiske Stone be largely due to his demonstrated capacity a a mediator in troubled situations. At the time the Supreme Court be split into two war group , and beset with personal as well a legal animosities. One be head by Associate Justice Hugo Black , a former Senator from Alabama , the other by Associate Justice Robert G. Jackson of New York , a former Attorney General of the United States. Both be appointee of President Roosevelt. The feuding between the two group , which have be go on in private before Justice Stone 's death , with occasional hint find their way into print , flare into the open immediately after Justice Vinson 's appointment. President Truman and others in high place in Washington have be familiar with the situation before , and there be reason to believe that Mr. Vinson be name to the court primarily to bring peace and restore some of the court 's prestige with the bar and public. Mr. Vinson have manifest his talent on a national basis for the first time while serve a chairman of a subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee consider new source of governmental revenue. Tax proposal submit by the Treasury Department stir a small-scale revolt in Congress and inspire vigorous opposition from business. By virtue of skillful negotiation and a constant search for common ground , Mr. Vinson be able to whip into shape a bill that be satisfactory to President Roosevelt and at the same time able to command the support of majority in both house of Congress. Chosen to Fight Inflation He give a further demonstration after President Roosevelt induce him to leave the Court of Appeals bench , to which he have be appoint a a reward for Congressional service , to become direct or in 1943 of the Office of Economic Stabilization. One of the main task of the agency be to prevent the nation from start on an inflationary spiral that would impair it ability to wage the two-front global war in which it be then engaged. Stability be be threaten by union demand for wage increase on the one hand and industry demand for price increase on the other. James F. Byrnes , a former Senator and Associate Justice of the Supreme Court , have hold the post before Mr. Vinson. The two have much in common and be to follow each other in several other war-agency post before they become member of President Truman's Cabinet , Mr. Byrnes a Secretary of State and Mr. Vinson a Secretary of the Treasury. As Economic Stabilizer Mr. Vinson be a controversial figure. He come under attack by the head of the oil industry when he refuse to sanction a price increase of 35 cent a barrel , and under even heavy fire from the railway brotherhood when he reject wage increase that another governmental agency have recommended. Philip Murray , president of the Congress of Industrial Organizations , and William Green , President of the American Federation of Labor , who differ on other thing , join in brine unsuccessful pressure to bear on Mr. Vinson for wage increases. However his adamant stand affect his relationship with labor and industry leader , it endear him to Congress and his appointment a administrator of the Federal Loan Agency be hail by Democrats and Republicans alike. The vacancy have be cause by President Roosevelt 's ouster of Jesse Jones a Secretary of Commerce and Federal Loan Administrator to make a place in the Cabinet for Henry A. Wallace , whom the Democrats have refuse to renominate for Vice President. Distrustful of Mr. Wallace 's radicalism , the Congress have separate the function of Secretary of Commerce and Loan Administrator before the Senate confirm the Wallace appointment. Mr. Vinson 's tenure a Loan Administrator be very brief. He have no more than restore morale and get the agency work smoothly again after the repercussion of the Jones- Wallace contest than he be draft to replace Mr. Byrnes a director of War Mobilization and Reconversion where his main task be to chart a course that would enable the country to make the transition from war to peace without undue disruption of the economic system. His major contribution a Director of War Mobilization and Reconversion be the issuance of several report point out the road the country must follow which win widespread acclaim. The purpose of the report be to dissipate uncertainty about Government policy in the transition period and enable business and labor to plan intelligently their future relations. It be the general view at the time that he succeed magnificently in the assignment. Victory in Europe come while he be in this office , but he be not allow to remain to put the program he have develop into practice. Instead , President Truman , who have succeed to the White House on President Roosevelt 's death , call upon him to head the Treasury Department. Henry Morgenthau Jr. never have enjoy cordial relation with Congress , and , with tax legislation again a subject of major discussion , the new President decide the Treasury Department need a it head a man in the good grace of Congress and conversant with tax sentiment and problems. He remain a head of the Treasury until call upon by President Truman to become Chief Justice and act a peacemaker in the court feud. As Secretary , he bring about the first reduction in tax rate in fourteen year , recommend a bill , which Congress accept , remove almost 12,000,000 person from the tax roll through increase exemptions. One of Mr. Vinson 's first opinion a Chief Justice , early in 1947 , accompany the Supreme Court 's decision uphold the conviction of John L. Lewis and the United Mine Workers for contempt of court in the 1946 coal strike. Later that year , after the new Chief Justice have demonstrate his success in bring at least outward peace to the court , he receive from President Truman the Medal of Merit for `` exceptionally meritorious performance of outstanding service to the United States '' in World War II. In 1948 Mr. Vinson write the unanimous opinion that declare that convenants to bar Negroes and other racial group from own real estate be legally unenforceable. Administered Oath to Truman Chief Justice Vinson administer the oath of office to President Truman on Jan. 20 , 1949 , when the later be inaugurate a the thirty-second President of the United States. Mr. Vinson declare in a speech that summer , take note of foreign development , that the United States `` must keep our powder dry. '' Later in the year he tell the American Bar Association that the large number of dissent in the Supreme Court be to be welcome , not deplored. They conclusively prove that the United States be a democracy , he explain , add that regular unanimity among judge be possible only in Fascist and Communist systems. In 1950 Justice Vinson write two opinion in which the court hold that segregation of Negroes in the Universities of Texas and Oklahoma violate the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution. He also take part in a majority decision that segregation on railroad din car violate the Interstate Commerce Act. Justice Vinson write the majority opinion in 1950 that uphold the constitutionality of the non-Communist oath require of union official by the Taft-Hartley Labor-Management Relations Act. In 1951 he write the majority opinion that validate the constitutionality of the Smith Act under which the eleven top leader of the Communist party of the United States have be convict in New York of criminal conspiracy to teach and advocate overthrow of the Government by force and violence. Opinion on Communist Bail Later the same year a Vinson majority opinion hold that $ 50,000 bail each for twelve Communists arrest in California for Smith Act violation have not be fix by proper method and direct the return of the case to the low court for a hearing on the reduction of bail. He write that the United States in fight communism must not accept Communist method , and add that Communists , like everyone else , be entitle to reasonable bail unless the Government could prove evidence justify exceptional bail. Early in 1952 Justice Vinson take part in a majority opinion that uphold the constitutionality of the Feinberg law prohibit the employment of school teacher in New York who advocate overthrow of the Government by force and violence or belong to subversive organizations. Later he join with the majority in opinion uphold the conviction of six member of counsel for contempt of court in the trial of the eleven Communist leader in New York , and in uphold the constitutionality of law make membership in the Communist party at any time ground for deportation of an alien. In June , 1952 , he be one of the minority in the six-to-three decision hold unconstitutional President Truman 's seizure of the steel industry to avert a strike. Last June 1 Justice Vinson , speak for a six-to-three majority , set aside a stay of execution which Justice William O. Douglas have grant Julius and Ethel Rosenberg , convict atomic spy , who be put to death that night in the electric chair at Sing Sing. Five fee eleven inch in height and weigh 190 pound , Chief Justice Vinson be a striking figure. As a boy , he have be a good than average baseball player but in his late year he eschew all form of athletics. Nor do he care for the elaborate social function that be so much a part of official life in Washington and rarely attend them. His favorite relaxation be read , exchange gossip with his neighbor and play bridge or poker with a few close cronies. Like many another Southern family after the Civil War , his parent be in reduced circumstance when he be bear on Jan. 22 , 1890. His father be the jailer at Louisa , Lawrence County seat in Kentucky , at the time , and he be bear in the front part of the county jail. Fine Record a Student His father die not long after his birth. As a schoolboy , the son spend his after-school hour run errand or clerk in various Louisa stores. His mother , determine that he should have an education take in boarder to support the family. In 19i08 he be graduate from the Kentucky Normal School near the head of his class , but instead of teaching , he decide to enter the law , so he enrol at Centre College , where he receive the high grade in the history of the school and walk off with a number of scholarship prizes. At the age of twenty-one , he hang out his shingle a a lawyer in the town of Louisa , population 2,500 , and begin the practice of law and politics about the same time. His first political office be a City Attorney for Louisa , but he leave that post to join the Army at the outbreak of the first World War in 1917. He be in an officer ' training camp when the war ended. Upon his return from military service , he be elect Commonwealth Attorney for his district of Kentucky. His national career begin in 1924 , when he be choose at a special election to fill a vacancy in the Ninth Congressional District cause by the election f the incumbent a Governor. He be also choose shortly afterward a Democratic State Chairman for Kentucky and , in that capacity , manage the campaign that result in send Alben W. Barkley to the Senate. At the end of his first term in Congress , he marry Miss Roberta Dixon of Ashland , Ky. They have two child , Frederick Jr. and James Robert. Except for one interruption , the Congressional service of Mr. Vinson that begin in 1924 be continuous until his appointment by President Roosevelt a an Associated Justice of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in 1938. The break come in 1928 when he refuse to heed the advice of political adviser that he dissociate his own campaign for re-election from the Democratic Presidential campaign of Alfred E. Smith. Instead , he devote most of his campaign speech to attack on bigotry. In 1930 he be re-elected. As a member of Congress he be generally regard a conservative in the Southern tradition , but he be influence by change political trend more than most Southerners. When President Roosevelt take office , Mr. Vinson support most of the New Deal legislative program , include the Wagner Labor Relations Act and the Guffey Coal Act , and be credit by labor spokesman with a 100 per cent labor record. But he be no `` rubber stamp. '' Despite pressure from the White House , he refuse to vote for President Roosevelt 's first economy bill , and he vote in favor of the passage of the bonus for veteran of the first World War over President Roosevelt 's veto .