December 16 , 1953 OBITUARY Mrs. Rawlings , 57 , Novelist , Is Dead By THE NEW YORK TIMES ST. AUGUSTINE , Fla. , Dec. 15 ( UP ) -- Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings , whose story of a Florida backwoods boy win the Pulitzer Prize in 1939 , die of a cerebral hemorrhage last night in Flagler Hospital. She be take ill yesterday morning. The death of the 57-year-old novelist cut short her work on a new project -- the life of Ellen Glasgow , the Virginia novelist. Mrs. Rawlings have plan to devote five year of research and write to it. Surviving be her second husband , Martin Baskin , to whom , she be mar in 1941. The funeral service will be hold here at 11 A.M. tomorrow at the Craig Funeral Home. Mrs. Rawlings will be bury near her Cross Creek farm near Gainesville. Failure for Ten Years For more than ten year , Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings try hard to become a fiction writer -- with complete failure. She make up her mind to give up. `` Then I think , well , just one more , '' she tell a New York Times reporter year later. That short story `` sell like a shot , and I have have no trouble since , '' Mrs. Rawlings said. `` No trouble '' be a modest understatement for a success that include a Pulitzer Prize novel and two others in the final consideration for the award , two honorary college degree and a fortune in book club royalty and movie rights. `` The Yearling , '' Mrs. Rawlings ' great triumph , be hail in 1938 a a `` classic '' of American popular fiction. While consider her writing a lack the depth and `` tough-mindedness '' of great literature , critic nevertheless praise her skill in reproduce the color , character , speech , local custom and way of life of the backwoods of Florida. Marjorie Kinnan be bear on Aug. 8 , 1896 , in Washington , where her father , Arthur Frank Kinnan , be a patent attorney for the Government. The girl acquire her knowledge of farm life early by spend her holiday on the family farm in Maryland. Elected to Phi Beta Kappa She be graduate from Wisconsin University in 1918 with a Phi Beta Kappa key and be one of the best English student of Prof. William Ellery Leonard , the poet. She have be write for school publication since the age of 14. After college , she work during World War I a a publicity agent for the Young Women 's Christian Association headquarters in Washington. In 1919 , she be marry to Charles Rawlings , also a writer. They be divorce fourteen year later. For ten year , Mrs. Rawlings be a reporter for The Louisville ( Ky. ) Courier-Journal and The Rochester ( N.Y. ) Journal , and write syndicate verse for United Features. All during these journalistic year , she also be toil at short story , but sell not a one. In 1928 , Mrs. Rawlings retire on a seventy-two acre orange farm she have buy in the remote swamp of north-central Florida , near the hamlet of Hawthorn , which she have discover on a visit to her in-laws. There she persevere until `` Jacob 's Ladder '' win a novelette contest in Scribner 's magazine in 1931. After that first success , another short story , `` Gal Young Un , '' win an O. Henry Memorial Prize in 1933 , and she send her first novel , `` South Moon Under '' to Scribner's. All these work be `` regional '' to her Florida home. 'South Moon Under ' in 1933 The late Max Perkins , Scribner 's great editor and talent scout , direct the rewriting of `` South Moon Under '' and it become a Book of the Month Club selection in 1933. `` Golden Apples '' almost win the Pulitzer Prize in 1935. `` The Yearling '' do win it in 1939. This sentimental story , tell how a 12-year-old boy grow up to the harsh fact of life by accept the necessity for his pet deer to be kill , have sell hundred of thousand of copy in many edition , and be make into a popular Technicolor film. Mrs. Rawlings write a non-fiction book about her farm , `` Cross Creek , '' another Book of the Month choice , in 1942 , and a Florida cookbook the same year. She leave the swamp briefly for upper New York State , produce `` The Sojourner , '' a novel , last year. But it be the Florida of hammock tree and palmetto and alligator hunter that make Mrs. Rawlings famous. `` When one hear the term Florida Cracker , one think at once of her work , '' The Times commented. She do not produce a great deal in twenty-two year , consider the demand for her every line. `` Writing be agony for me , '' she once tell an interviewer. `` I work at it eight hour every day , hop to get six page , but I be satisfied with three . ''