March 6 , 1953 OBITUARY Stalin Rose From Czarist Oppression to Transform Russia Into Mighty Socialist State By THE NEW YORK TIMES Joseph Stalin become the most important figure in the political direction of one-third of the people of the world. He be one of a group of hard revolutionary that establish the first important Marxist state and , a it dictator , he carry forward it socialization and industrialization with vigor and ruthlessness. During the second World War , Stalin personally lead his country 's vast arm force to victory. When Germany be defeat , he push his country 's frontier to their great extent and foster the creation of a buffer belt of Marxist-oriented satellite state from Korea across Eurasia to the Baltic Sea. Probably no other man ever exercise so much influence over so wide a region. In the late Nineteen Forties , when an alarmed world , predominantly non-Communist , saw no end to the rapid advance of the Soviet Union and her satellite , there be a hasty and frighten grouping of force to form a battle line against the Marxist advance. Stalin stand on the Elbe in Europe and on the Yalu in Asia. Opposed to him stand the United States , keystone in the arch of non-Marxist states. Stalin take and keep the power in his country through a mixture of character , guile and good luck. He outlast his country 's intellectual , if indeed , he do not contrive to have them shoot , and he wear down the theoretician and dreamers. He could exercise great charm when he want to. President Harry Truman once say in an unguarded moment : `` I like old Joe. Joe be a decent fellow , but he be a prisoner of the Politburo. '' But the Stalin that the world know best be hard , mysterious , aloof and rude. He have a large element of the Oriental in him ; he be once call `` Ghengis Khan with a telephone '' and he spend much of his life nurture the conspiracy that bring him to power and keep him there. Opinion of Leon Trotsky Leon Trotsky , Stalin 's brilliant and defeat adversary , regard him a an intellectual nonentity who personify `` the spirit of mediocrity '' that impregnate the Soviet bureaucracy. Lenin , who value Stalin highly a a party stalwart , characterize him a `` crude '' and `` rough '' and a a `` cook who will prepare only peppery dishes. '' But those who survive the purge hail Stalin a a supreme genius. Although he remain an enigma to the outside world to the very end of his day , Stalin 's role a Russia 's leader in the war bring him the admiration and high praise of Allied leader , include President Roosevelt and Winston Churchill. And , indeed , only a man of iron will and determination like Stalin 's could have hold together his shattered country during that period of the war when German army have overrun huge portion of Russian territory and swept to the gate of Moscow , Leningrad and the Caucasus. Like Churchill in England , Stalin never falter , not even at moment when everything seem lost. When most of the Government machinery and the diplomatic corp be move to Kuibyshev in December , 1941 , in expectation of the imminent capture of Moscow , Stalin remain in the Kremlin to direct the operation that finally hurl the Nazi horde from the frontyard of the capital. His battle order and exhortation to the Russian army and people to persevere in the fight contribute immensely to final victory. Repeatedly , Churchill refer to him in Parliament a Russia 's `` great warrior. '' War Role Paramount With the turn of the tide against the Germans , Stalin proclaim himself marshal of the Soviet Union and later generalisimo. Surrounded by a galaxy of brilliant general , whose name will go down in history a among the great of Russia 's military leader , Stalin be portray in the Soviet and foreign press a the supreme commander responsible for over-all strategy. To what extent this be true will have to be determine by the future historian , but that his role in the conduct of the war be paramount be undeniable. The energy and will power he display both before and during the war confirm the justification for his name , for Stalin in Russian mean `` man of steel , '' a nom de guerre he adopt early in his revolutionary career. Long before he dream of become the supreme autocrat of Russia he have display the steel in his character a a political prisoner under the Czarist regime. A fellow prisoner of that period give an illustration of Stalin 's grit. This be in 1909 , in the prison at Baku. In punishment of rioting by the prisoner , the authority order that they be march in single file between two line of soldier who proceed to shower blow upon them with rifle butts. With head high , a book under his arm , Stalin walk the gantlet without a whimper , his face and head bleeding , his eye flash defiance. It be the kind of grit he demand from others , the kind that help save Russia from Nazi conquest and domination. His experience under the Czarist regime and his Asiatic character teach him how to treat political opponents. In his relation with the Allied power during the war and in his diplomacy before and after the war Stalin win the reputation of a grim realist. Joseph Vissarionovich Djugashvili , later to become famous under his revolutionary name of Joseph Stalin , be bear in the Georgian village of Gori Dec. 21 , 1879. His father be an impoverished and drunken shoemaker who make him sullen and resentful by regular beatings. His mother , Ekaterina , a peasant 's daughter , be a woman of singular sweetness , patience and strength of character who exercise great influence on her son. She call him Soso ( Little Joe ) and live to see him dictator of the world 's large empire. Attended a Seminary When he be 6 or 7 , young Stalin contract smallpox , which leave him pock-marked for life. Through the effort of his mother , who work a a part-time laundress , Stalin enter a church school at 9. He be remember there a a bright , self-assertive boy who love argument and who fly into a fury with those who do not agree with him. He remain in this school from 1888 to 1893. By heroic exertion , Stalin 's mother obtain for him a scholarship in the Theological Seminary of Tiflis , where he study from October , 1894 , to May , 1899. The seminary be a gloomy institution -- a cross between a barrack and a monastery -- where the student attend endless lecture on theology and spend their few spare moment plot to obtain forbidden book from the outside. Stalin be among the bad offenders. An entry against him in the seminary 's book of discipline have be preserve : `` At 11 A.M. I take away from Joseph Djugashvili Letourneau 's 'Literary Evolution of the Nations. ' Djugashvili be discover read the say book on the chapel stairs. This be the thirteenth time this student have be discover reading book borrow from the Cheap Library. `` The official reason for Stalin 's expulsion be that for `` unknown reason '' he fail to attend examinations. He declare he be expel for `` propagate Marxism. '' To support himself he obtain a temporary job a night attendant in the Tiflis Observatory , but he be more concerned with his observation at meeting of Tiflis railway worker during the day than of the star at night. His revolutionary apprenticeship be serve a an organizer of the Tiflis transportation workers. He help stage street demonstration and distribute revolutionary leaflets. In April , 1899 , he receive his first baptism of fire at a demonstration he help organize in the heart of the city. The demonstration be drown in blood by Cossacks , and he go into hiding for a year to escape the police. At this time he assume the nickname of `` Koba , '' after a hero in Georgian mythology. On Nov. 11 , 1901 , he be elect a member of the Tiflis Committee of the Russian Social Democratic Labor party , in his native Georgia. A few week later he be deputize to go to Batum , a thriving industrial and commercial center , to direct revolutionary activity. In March of that year he lead a strike of oil worker in that city. In April , 1902 , he be arrest and lodge in the Batum prison , from which he be transfer to Kutais. While in prison he learn of the meeting in London , in 1903 , of the second congress of the Russian Social Democratic party , at which the party split into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks -- extremist and moderate -- an event that subsequently determine the entire course of the Russian Revolution. Stalin ally himself with Nikolai Lenin , leader of the Bolsheviks. Trotsky be against Lenin , although in 1917 , after the revolution , he join Lenin and become his principal lieutenant in the October Revolution and in the establishment of the Soviet regime. On July 9 , 1903 , while in prison in Kutais , Stalin be sentence to three year of exile to Siberia , and in November of that year he be transfer to the bleak , remote village of Novaya Uda. There he receive his first letter from Lenin in response to one pose certain question concern Bolshevist policy and tactics. The letter confirm him in his adherence to Lenin , whom he glorify a `` Mountain Eagle. '' Determined to escape , Stalin make his way safely to Irkutsk at the end of the year. From there he proceed to Baku , in the Caucasus , where he experience his second baptism of fire a leader of a strike of oil workers. It be part of a wave of strike that sweep Russia with her defeat by Japan , a wave that be the harbinger of the Revolution of 1905. Shortly after the outbreak of the general strike which be the key element in the revolution of 1905 , Stalin meet Lenin for the first time at a party conference in Tammerfors , Finland. From the Tammerfors conference Stalin return to his activity in the Caucasus , where on June 26 , 1907 , on Erivan Square in Tiflis , he direct the celebrate `` expropriation '' which net the Bolshevik party 340,000 rubles. There have be other such `` expropriation , '' but this be the big and most dramatic. Formally , Lenin and his associate have frown upon these act , but they , nevertheless , accept the proceeds to help finance the party 's work. In the Erivan Square affair a band of revolutionist direct by `` Koba '' fell upon a convoy of two carriage carry Government fund from the railway station to the state bank , and after bomb the Cossack guard escape with the money , which be send to Lenin. Following the `` expropriation , '' Stalin be arrest and lodge in Bailov fortress , in Baku , where the incident of his run the gantlet of rifle butt take place. Soon thereafter he be exile for the second time to Solvychegodsk , in Siberia , from which he escape on June 24 , 1909. He return to Baku to resume his revolutionary activity , but remain at liberty only eight month , when he be again arrest and send back to Solvychegodsk. From that place he conduct secret correspondence with Lenin and his staff at Bolshevik headquarters in Cracow. Eager to attend a party conference in Prague , Stalin again escape and make his way to St. Petersburg , where he be arrest and exile to Vologda. Once more he escape and reach St. Petersburg on the day of the notorious massacre of worker in the Lena goldfield in Siberia. In St. Petersburg he help find Pravda , the official organ of the Bolshevik party , but on the day of it first issue he be arrest and exile to Narym , in the Urals. On Sept. 1 , 1912 , he escape and return to St. Petersburg to resume the editorship of Pravda. This time he be betray by the agent provocateur Malinovsky , who have him arrest together with Jacob Sverdlov , the future first President of the Soviet Union , at a concert give for the benefit of Pravda. Stalin and Sverdlov be exile to Turuchansk , in Siberia , from which they be take to the outlying settlement of Kureika , 800 mile north of the Trans-Siberian Railway. After twenty year of revolutionary activity and repeat imprisonment and exilings. Stalin find himself at a dead end. Letters arrive from Lenin , but they seem very remote and futile. Then come the news of the first World War in 1914 , the war that Lenin predict would bring the downfall of the Russian autocracy and world revolution. Stalin be transfer to Atchinsk , on the Trans-Siberian Railway , and it be there he first receive word of the revolution of March 12 , 1917. Almost the very first act of the Provisional Revolutionary Government , in which Alexander Kerensky be at first Minister of Justice and later Premier , be to order the release of all political prisoners. Among the many thousand who profit by this decree sign by Kerensky be Joseph Stalin. He make his way speedily to Petrograd. On his arrival in Petrograd in March , 1917 , Stalin go directly to the office of Pravda , where he be meet by V. M. Molotov and Leo Kamenev. Lenin and most of his staff be in Zurich , Switzerland. It be not until April 16 , 1917 , that Lenin arrive in Petrograd after his famous journey through Germany in a sealed car provide by the German General Staff. The journey lead across Germany to Stockholm and through Finland. A month later Trotsky arrive from America. Upon his arrival in Petrograd in May , 1917 , from the United States , where he have live for several month , Trotsky lose no time in associate himself with Lenin in his demand for the overthrow of the Provisional Government , conclusion of an immediate peace , a sweeping Socialist program and advocacy of world revolution. From the very beginning of this development Trotsky completely overshadow Stalin and all others among Lenin 's lieutenants. He become Lenin 's `` big stick. '' In the first Council of Commissars , form upon the formation of the Soviet Government , Stalin be give the modest , obscure post of Commissar of Nationalities. Nevertheless , that post in the hand of Stalin become symbolic and significant , for it be under Stalin a supreme dictator that the Soviet Union , conceive a a multiple state of nationality , achieve it great expansion , territorially and politically. In the October Revolution Stalin take a relatively modest part. Although his admirer picture him a take the initiative with Lenin in planning and execute that historic upheaval against the opposition of Trotsky and others in Lenin 's immediate encourage , the minute of the Central Committee of the party for Oct. 23 , two day before the coup d'etat , show clearly that Lenin and Trotsky take the lead in demand approval of the uprising , while others be either oppose or hesitant. Stalin support Lenin. On that occasion , the minute attest , Lenin , angry and defiant over the refusal of his collaborator to approve the plan for the uprising , rise and , point to Trotsky , shout , `` Very well , then , he and I will go to the Kronstadt sailor , '' meaning that he would summon the sailor of the Baltic Fleet to rise in rebellion against the Kerensky regime. The Baltic Fleet play a leading role in the uprising. Later these same sailor , who have be glory by Trotsky a `` the pride and beauty of the Russian Revolution , '' be shoot down en masse by Trotsky in their revolt against the Soviet regime in March , 1921. During the civil war after the Bolshevik revolution Stalin and Trotsky be at loggerheads. This be particularly true during the fighting on the Tsaritsin and Perm fronts. Repeatedly Trotsky call him to order and on various occasion Lenin have to intervene to make peace between them. The enmity and hatred between Trotsky and Stalin date from that period. Already during Lenin 's illness , which last about two year , Stalin begin prepare for his future leadership of the party and of the Government. This he ultimately achieve by utilize his new position a general secretary of the party in build a party machine loyal to him. Member of Triumvirate After Lenin 's death , authority be vest by the party in the hand of a triumvirate , consist of Stalin , Zinoviev and Kamenev. There be three principal faction in the party , the left , represent by Zinoviev ; the right , head by Rykov and Bukharin , and the center , of which Stalin be regard a the spokesman. Trotsky , who be ill a good part of the time , so much so that he have be unable to attend Lenin 's funeral , have plan of his own. He felt that ultimately , a Lenin 's chief collaborator , he would inherit Lenin 's mantle. In the bitter factional polemic that ensue , Stalin play the left against the right and vice versa , and eventually defeat both , as well a Trotsky. In 1936 , during the period of purge , Stalin proclaim a new Constitution for Russia , with promise of universal secret suffrage , freedom of the press , speech and assembly. It be interpret to maintain the dictatorship and to stabilize the revolution. Not since the day of Peter the Great , who seek to westernize Russia by force , have the country witness so violent a transformation. In fact , nothing in the history of revolution could compare with the gigantic social and economic upheaval bring about under Stalin. Profound a be the [ MISSING TEXT ] In 1929 Stalin begin predict a second world war and avow that his purpose be to keep Russia clear of the conflict. Despite this policy , with the advent of Hitler to power he join in collective security measures. He abruptly abandon his advocacy of collective security in 1939 , when he about-face and sign a mutual nonaggression pact with Nazi Germany. It lead to World War II , into which Russia later be draw by Hitler 's attack on her. This onslaught forge a Soviet alliance with the West , an alliance that ultimately enlarge the Soviet sphere. 70th Birthday Celebrated Stalin 's fiftieth and sixtieth birthday be celebrate , but the press prepare the Soviet public on his sixty-ninth anniversary for the grim reality that year have leave their impress even on `` the teacher and inspirer of the world proletariat. '' Pictures be publish show that Stalin 's hair have whitened. Then on his seventieth birthday in 1949 his anniversary be celebrate in grand fashion. It be the first occasion in which Stalin have permit public participation in his private life , and hence little be know about his personal affairs. He marry twice. His first wife be Ekaterina Svanidze , who die after a long illness in 1907. They have a son , Jacob , whose fate have be unknown since he become a German prisoner during World War II. In 1919 the Premier marry Nadya Alliluyeva , the 17-year-old daughter of his old revolutionary crony , Sergei Alliluyev. She die in 1932 under mysterious circumstances. They have a daughter and a son. The latter , Vassily , be now a lieutenant-general in the Soviet Air Force. All that become know of the daughter be her name , Svetlana , and her intellectual interest .