March 29 , 1953 OBITUARY Jim Thorpe Is Dead On West Coast at 64 Special to The New York Times LOS ANGELES , March 28 -- Jim Thorpe , the Indian whose exploit in football , baseball and track and field win him acclaim a one of the great athlete of all time , die today in his trailer home in suburban Lomita. His age be 64. Thorpe be eat dinner with his wife when he suffer a heart attack. Mrs. Thorpe 's scream attract a neighbor , Colby Bradshaw , who administer artificial respiration for nearly half an hour. A county fire rescue squad take over and be momentarily successful. Thorpe revive , recognize person around him and speak to them. He be conscious for only a brief time before he suffer a relapse and died. Hero of the 1912 Olympic Games at Stockholm and a tower football figure , Jim Thorpe be probably the great natural athlete the world have see in modern times. King Gustaf V of Sweden say to the black-haired Sac and Fox Indian a he stand before the royal box , `` Sir , you be the great athlete in the world. '' That be after Thorpe almost single-handedly gain the Olympic honor for the United States , set a point-total record never before approached and dominate the game a no other figure. Thorpe come back from Stockholm with $ 50,000 worth of trophies. They include a Viking ship present to him by the Czar of Russia , and gift from King Gustaf. A month later the new American sport idol be topple from his high pedestal when the Amateur Athletic Union file charge of professionalism against him , accuse him of receive pay for play summer baseball with the Rocky Mount Club in the Eastern Carolina League. The amount of money be negligible , help to tide him over at school , but the American Olympic Committee offer it apology and send back the gift and medal lavish upon the young man to whom President Theodore Roosevelt have cable long message of congratulation. The medal be forward to the runner-up in the pentathlon and decathlon event at Stockholm. Thorpe have win four of the five event in the Pentathlon and finish third in the other , a record unequaled to this day , and in the decathlon he score 8,412 out of a possible 10,000 point , also unequaled. Thorpe 's decathlon feat in the Olympics have since be surpass by Bob Mathias , who win the event for the second straight time last year. However , another Olympic great -- Finland 's Paavo Nurmi -- declare that `` Jim Thorpe could still beat them all. '' Even if Thorpe never could beat Mathias in his prime , most expert still place the Indian ahead a an all around athlete. In 1950 Thorpe 's athletic prowess win for him selection a the great athlete of the twentieth century and the great football player in an Associated Press poll of sport writer and broadcasters. Before leap into world-wide fame a the star of the Olympics Thorpe have become a national sport figure through his deed on the gridiron a a member of the famous Carlisle Indians football team coach by Glenn S. ( Pop ) Warner. In 1911 and 1912 he be choose a halfback on Walter Camp 's All-America teams. Thorpe play professional football for almost fifteen year and in his prime at Carlisle and a a pro he never have to leave the field because of an injury , such be his courage and stamina. In his last year at the Indian school he win letter in five major sport , and he be proficient in others. His activity include running , jumping , football , lacrosse , boxing , rough-and-tumble , basketball , hockey , archery , rifle shooting , canoe , handball , swimming and skating. His Record a Track Athlete He could run the 100-yard dash in 10 second flat , the 220 in 21.8 , the 440 in 50.8 , the 880 in 1:57 , the mile in 4:35 , the 120-yard high hurdle in 15 second and the 220-yard low hurdle in 24 seconds. He broad-jumped 23 foot 6 inch and high-jumped 6 foot 5 inches. He pole-vaulted 11 foot , put the shot 47 foot 9 inch , throw the javelin 163 foot , the hammer 140 foot and the discus 136 feet. Thorpe be bear on a farm at Prague , Okla. , the son of Hiram Thorpe , a ranchman. Dutch , Welsh and Irish blood be understood to flow in his vein , but he be predominantly Indian. As might have be expect he learn to ride , swim and shoot almost as soon a he could walk , and he be punch cattle at the age of 10. His favorite diversion be follow his hunt dog in the forest , which help to develop his magnificent body. His mother give him the Indian tribal name of Wa-Tho-Huck , or Bright Path. Official record , however , list him a James Francis Thorpe. Young Jim be send to the Haskell Indian School at Lawrence , Kan. , and then to the Carlisle School at Carlisle , Pa. He show no particular interest in college athletics until Warner persuade him to come out for football. That be in the fall of 1907 and he play a a substitute. The next year he become a regular and attracted attention a a ball-carrier and kicker. He weigh around 178 pounds. Career at Carlisle In the spring of 1908 Jim make the track team. Jumping and hurdle be his specialties. By the time he finish his five-year term at Carlisle in the spring of 1909 he have develop into a track star. Thorpe return to his home and play baseball in North Carolina. In the fall of 1911 he come back to Carlisle. Warner think he would have a good chance of make the Olympic team if he return and persuade him to do so. That year he win All-America honor in football , a he do in 1912 also , perform sensationally against Harvard , Penn , Princeton , Army , Syracuse and Penn State. Against Harvard in 1911 Thorpe run 70 yard in nine play for a touchdown and kick three field goal from back of the 40-yard line. President Eisenhower can attest to Thorpe 's hit power. When the general be a cadet at the United States Military Academy , the Army team play Carlisle , the Indians winning , 27-6. Thorpe stop General Eisenhower time after time , and in the process the general injure his knee and never play again. One-Man Track Team In his track day Carlisle be book to meet the Lafayette team at Easton. A welcome committee be puzzle when only two Indians get off the train. `` Where 's your team ? '' they asked. `` This be the team , '' reply Thorpe. `` Only two of you ? '' `` Only one , '' Jim say with a smile. `` This fellow 's the manager. '' In the spring of 1912 he start train for the Olympics. He have confine his effort to the jump , the hurdle and the shot-put but now he undertake the pole vault , the javelin , discus , the hammer and the fifty-six-pound weight. In the Olympic trial hold at Celtic Park in New York , his all-round ability stand out in all these event and so he rivet a claim to a place on the team that go to Sweden. After his suspension a an amateur athlete , follow his return from Stockholm , Thorpe leave Carlisle in 1913 and sign with the New York Giants. He be optioned out to the Milwaukee club of the American Association and remain there until 1916 , when he come back to the Giants for two seasons. After that he go to the Boston Braves and then it be back to the minors. Enters `` Pro '' Football Although he never could be consider a star in the major league have trouble hit a curve ball , Thorpe be good enough to last for seven seasons. In his last year , 1919 , he bat a highly creditable .327 in sixty game , play first base and the outfield for the Boston Braves. Meanwhile , he go into the game he love best -- football -- a a professional. In 1915 he organize the famous Canton ( Ohio ) Bulldogs , which beat most of the good teams. Later he play with the Cleveland Tigers , the LaRue ( Ohio ) Indians and the Rock Island Independents. Jim get heavy and find it more difficult to keep in shape and he be appear in New York at the Polo Grounds in a drop-kicking contest with Charley Brickley a an extra attraction to the game. He play with other team in Hammond , Ind. , and Portsmouth , Ohio , and finally his competitive day ended. After his retirement , Thorpe fell upon hard days. He go to California in 1930 a master of ceremony for C. C. Pyle 's cross-country marathon , know a the bunion derby. He settle down in Hawthorne , Calif. , and get work a an extra in motion picture , appear in Western serial and in short football feature , but thing get bad for him. Thorpe be back in the news in 1943 , when the Oklahoma Legislature adopt a resolution that the A.A.U. be petition to reinstate the Sac and Fox Olympic record , but no action be taken. In February , 1952 , a group in Congress make another unsuccessful attempt to have the medal restored. After an operation for cancer of the lip in the preceding November , he have be discover to be nearly penniless and group throughout the country raise thousand of dollar for him. Although past the age for acceptance by the Army or Navy in World War II , he join the merchant marine in 1945 and serve on an ammunition ship before the conflict ended. In the summer of 1949 , Warner Brothers start work on a motion picture entitle `` Jim Thorpe -- All American , '' with Burt Lancaster in the athlete 's role. The picture reach Broadway in the summer of 1951. Thorpe marry three times. His first wife be the former Iva Miller , whom he wed in 1913 and be the mother of his three daughter , Gale , Charlotte and Frances , and his first son , the late James Francis Jr. He marry Freeda Kirkpatrick in 1926 and they have four son , Phillip , William , Richard and John. On June 2 , 1945 , Thorpe wed Patricia Gladys Askew of Louisville , Ky .