November 28 , 1953 OBITUARY Eugene O'Neill Dies of Pneumonia ; Playwright , 65 , Won Nobel Prize Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES Boston , Nov. 27 -- Eugene O'Neill , note American playwright whose prolific talent have bring to him both Nobel and Pulitzer Prizes , die today of bronchial pneumonia. His age be 65. The announcement of the death be make by Dr. Harry L. Kozol of Boston. Mr. O'Neill have be ill for several year with Parkinson 's disease , a form of palsy that make write virtually impossible. The writer have be in and out of various hospital in eastern Massachusetts in recent year , but have seek to keep the visit unpublicized. Mr. O'Neill die in a Boston apartment where he have be live recently. His third wife , Carlotta Monterey , and Dr. Kozol be at the bedside. He also leave a daughter , Oona O'Neill , who reside with her husband , Charles Chaplain , the actor , in Lucerne , Switzerland , and London. The funeral will be private. Eugene Gladstone O'Neill be generally regard a the foremost American playwright , his achievement in the theatre overwhelm those of his able contemporaries. Whatever judgment posterity may make , the history of the stage will have to find an important niche for him , for he come upon the scene at an opportune moment and remain active long after the American theatre have come of age. In the word of Brooks Atkinson of The New York Times , Mr. O'Neill break a number of old mold , shake up the drama as well a audience and help to transform the theatre into an art seriously relate to life. The genius of Mr. O'Neill lay in raw boldness , in the elemental strength of his attack upon outworn concept of destiny. The playwright receive the Pulitzer Prize on three occasion and be the second citizen of this country to win the Nobel Prize for Literature. The author of some thirty-eight play , most of them grim drama in which murder , disease , suicide and insanity be recur theme , Mr. O'Neill be in recent year too wrack by illness to write and live a secluded life in a little house by the sea with his third wife , a former actress. But the decline of his fortune saw no loss of public interest in his works. His play continue to be produce to acclaim here and abroad and the fall of 1951 saw a real O'Neill `` revival '' on Broadway. The American National Theatre and Academy schedule his `` Desire Under the Elms '' to launch it new season and the Craftsmen , a small dramatic group , produce the same play at the Barbizon-Plaza Theatre. In addition , the New York City Theatre Company play `` Anna Christie '' a the second offering of it winter season. A revival of `` Ah , Wilderness ! , '' the playwright 's nostalgic comedy of first love , find it way to the television screen when the Celanese Theatre offer it , with Thomas Mitchell in the role originate by the late George M. Cohan. Had International Audience Actually , no modern playwright except the late George Bernard Shaw have be more widely produce than Mr. O'Neill. He be as well know in Stockholm , Buenos Aires , Vienna , Mexico City , Calcutta and Budapest a in New York. There be a much color and excitement in his early life a there be in his plays. Indeed , much of his success be attributable to the fact that he have live in and see the very world from which he draw his dramatic material. As a young man he spend his day a a common sailor and his night in dive that line the water 's edge. Out of these experience come such play a `` The Hairy Ape , '' `` Anna Christie '' and `` Beyond the Horizon , '' all of which have have a lasting life in the theatre. Mr. O'Neill be bear on Oct. 16 , 1888 , in a third-floor room of the Barrett House , a family hotel that use to stand at Forty-third Street and Broadway. His father be the James O'Neill who star for so many year in `` The Count of Monte Cristo. '' His mother be the former Ellen Quinlan , who be bear in New Haven but be rear in the Middle West. The first seven year of Eugene 's life be spend trouping up and down the country with his actor-father and housewife-mother. The boy 's day a a theatrical camp follower end at his eighth birthday , when he be enrol in a Roman Catholic board school on the Hudson. In 1902 , when he be 13 , he enter Betts Academy in Stamford , Conn. , consider at the time one of the lead boy ' school in New England. He be graduate in 1906 and go to Princeton. After ten month at the university , he be expel for heave a brick through a window of the local stationmaster 's house. It mark the end of his formal education. The youth get a job a a secretary in a New York supply company business but quit after a few month to go to Honduras with a young mining engineer name Stevens. The two spent several month explore the country 's endless jungle and try their hand at prospect for gold. The venture end after Mr. O'Neill become ill with fever and be ship home by a kindly consul. Worked for His Father For a time the young man work a an assistant stage manager for his father , who be tour in a play call `` The White Sister. '' But he soon succumb to the lure of far-off place and ship a an ordinary seaman on a Norwegian freighter bound for Buenos Aires. This begin his acquaintance with the forecastle that be to stand him in good dramatic stead later on. In Buenos Aires he take such job a come his way. Tiring of that , he ship again , this time for Portuguese East Africa. From there he sail right back to Buenos Aires , then work his way to New York on an American ship. In New York he live at a waterfront dive know a `` Jimmy the Priest 's , '' and incidentally acquire the locale for `` Anna Christie. '' For a time he join his father 's troupe a an actor of bit parts. Later he turn up at his father 's summer place in New London , Conn. In August , 1912 , he go to work a a reporter on The New London Telegraph. His newspaper career last for four month , because , a he readily admit , he be more interested in write verse , swimming and sunbathe than in gather news. Just before Christmas in 1912 he develop a mild case of tuberculosis and be send to the Gaylord Farm Sanitarium at Wallingford , Conn. He spend five month there and be to say later that it be while at the sanitarium that his mind get a chance to `` establish itself , to digest and to evaluate the impression of many past year in which one experience have crowd on another with never a second 's reflection. '' At Gaylord , too , he begin to read Strindberg. `` It be read his play , '' Mr. O'Neill later recall , `` that , above all else , first give me the vision of what modern drama could be , and first inspire me with the urge to write for the theatre myself. '' After his discharge from the sanitarium he board with a private family in New London for fifteen months. During this period he write eleven one-act play and two long ones. He tear up all but six of the one-acters. His father pay to have five of the six short play print in a volume call `` Thirst , '' publish in 1914 and now a collector 's item. Studied at Harvard The elder O'Neill also pay a year 's tuition for his son at Prof. George Baker 's famous playwriting course at Harvard. The year over , Mr. O'Neill return to New York and settle down in a Greenwich Village room house. The young man proceed to soak up more `` local color '' at various Village dive , among them a saloon know a `` The Working Girls ' Home , '' where John Masefield , the British poet , be for a time a bartender. Mr. O'Neill live in the Village until 1916 , when he move to Provincetown , Mass. , and fell in with a group conduct a summer theatrical stock company know a the Wharf Theatre. He haul out a sizable collection of unproduced and unpublished play and one of them , a one-acter call `` Bound East for Cardiff , '' be put into rehearsal. It mark Mr. O'Neill 's debut a a dramatist. The Wharf Theatre do not go out of business at summer 's end but set up shop in New York and call itself the Provincetown Players , a name that be to become famous. The company produce more of Mr. O'Neill 's play and the budding playwright begin to be talk about in theatrical circle far afield. At about the same time , as well , three of his one-act play , `` The Long Voyage Home , '' `` Ile '' and `` The Moon of the Carribbees , '' be publish in the magazine Smart Set. In 1918 Mr. O'Neill go to Cape Cod to live , occupy a former Coast Guard station on a lonely spit of land three mile from Provincetown. He start work on long play and , in 1920 , have his first big year when he win the first of his three Pulitzer Prizes for `` Beyond the Horizon. '' The play mark Mr. O'Neill 's first appearance on Broadway. The other prize winner be `` Anna Christie '' in 1922 and `` Strange Interlude '' in 1928. Ranked a Money Maker `` Beyond the Horizon '' establish Mr. O'Neill not only a a ranking playwright but a a money maker. The play run for 111 performance and gross $ 117,071. Mr. O'Neill need the royalty badly ; he have to use the $ 1,000 Pulitzer Prize money to pay off some debts. The Theatre Guild begin produce his play with `` Marco Millions '' in 1927 and stag all his play thereafter. At least three of the play , `` Mourning becomes Electra , '' `` Strange Interlude '' and `` The Iceman Cometh , '' mark a new departure -- they run from four to five hour in length , require odd curtain and intermission times. Mr. O'Neill 's drama range from simple realism to the most abstruse symbolism but one play -- `` Ah , Wilderness ! '' -- be more in the tradition of straight entertainment and be intersperse with sentiment usually lack in his introspective analysis of human emotions. The play run for 289 performances. Mr. O'Neill do not always meet with approval. At time , even , he be the object of bitter denunciation , especially from person who believe his work smack of immorality. By his choice of theme he several time stir up storm that sweep his play into the courts. `` All God 's Chillun Got Wings , '' which figure in the headline for week , be fight by New York authority on the ground that it might lead to race riots. `` Desire Under the Elms '' kick up a big fuss in New York and almost be close in the face of mount protests. It never do open in Boston. The play be permit to go on in Los Angeles , but after a few performance the police arrest everybody in the cast. `` The Hairy Ape , '' which star Louis Wolheim in the role of Yank , a powerful , primitive stoker , be one of the dramatist 's most popular works. The play run for ten week , go on the road for a long tour and later be popular abroad. `` Electra '' Highly Rated Many critic felt that `` Mourning Becomes Electra , '' which open on Oct. 26 , 1931 , and have fourteen act , be Mr. O'Neill 's great masterpiece. Mr. Atkinson call it `` heroically think out and magnificently work in style and structure. '' John Mason Brown say that it be `` an achievement which restore the theatre to it high state '' and Joseph Wood Krutch observe that `` it may turn out to be the only permanent contribution yet make by the twentieth century to dramatic literature. '' After `` Days Without End '' be produce in 1934 -- a play that receive scant praise and last only fifty-seven performance -- Mr. O'Neill be not represent on Broadway again until 1946 , when `` The Iceman Cometh '' be staged. In the intervening year , he settle in California and begin the most ambitious project of his life- -a cycle of nine related play deal with the rise and fall of an American family from 1775 to 1932. The venture never come off. In 1936 , he win the Nobel Prize but could not go to Stockholm to receive it because of an appendicitis operation. In a letter to the prize committee , Mr. O'Neill say : `` This high of distinction be all the more grateful to me because I feel so deeply that it be not only my work which be be honor but the work of all my colleague in America -- that the Nobel Prize be a symbol of the come of age of the American theatre. `` For my play be merely , through luck of time and circumstance , the most widely know example of the work do by American playwright in the year since the World War -- work that have finally make modern American drama , in it fine aspect , an achievement of which Americans can be justly proud. '' Play About His Family After `` The Iceman Cometh , '' Mr. O'Neill write a play call `` Long Day 's Journey Into Night , '' which will not be produce until twenty-five year after his death. He refuse to talk about it but he have show the manuscript to a few friend , and it be report that the play deal with his own family life. Mr. O'Neill be stricken with Parkinson 's Disease , a palsy , about 1947. The disease cause his hand to jerk convulsively , make it impossible for him to write in longhand. He try to compose a play by dictation but discover he could not work that way. Despite the infirmity , he remain in good spirit and displayed evidence of his wit when friend drop in. The dramatist marry the former Kathleen Jenkins in 1909 , who bore him a son , Eugene O'Neill Jr. The son , who become a noted Greek scholar , commit suicide at Woodstock , N.Y. , on Sept. 25 , 1950. The first marriage end in divorce in 1912 , and six year later , Mr. O'Neill marry the former Agnes Boulton. They be divorce in 1929. A son Shane , and Oona be bear to this marriage. Mr. O'Neill marry Miss Monterey on July 22 , 1929 .