May 30 , 1954 OBITUARY Anne O'Hare McCormick Is Dead ; Member of Times Editorial Board By THE NEW YORK TIMES Mrs. Anne O'Hare McCormick , a member of the editorial board of The New York Times , die yesterday at 6:50 P.M. in Doctors Hospital , which she enter a a patient on May 11. Her age be 72. She have lapse into a coma in the late afternoon and do not regain consciousness. At her bedside be her husband , Francis J. McCormick , and a sister , Mrs. Paul Gill of 7 Gracie Square. Another sister , Mrs. James B. McCalley of Havana , also survives. Mr. and Mrs. McCormick make their home in the Carlyle Hotel. Anne O'Hare McCormick 's wise reportorial pen record and interpret history in the world 's most turbulent times. As a peripatetic correspondent , she bring light without heat to her reader out of increasingly complex national and international politics. She be as much at home in the chancellery of Europe a she be on the shell-pocked Greek mountainside , and equally at home in the cratered desert of Israel a in the vast auditorium during a national election campaign. In whatever part of the shrinking world her dateline put her , the sound , pungent report of her conversation and observation win universal praise. Mrs. McCormick 's keen analysis and interpretation be crisp and markedly free of fuzziness and guesswork. In her early work for The Times in the Twenties she astutely recognize , long before most of her colleague , the come power of Mussolini. Although partisan spokesman disagree with the view she set down thrice weekly in her editorial-page column `` Abroad , '' and in her editorial on the two other day of her work week , none ever fail to pay her tribute for sharp reporting and `` coolheaded analysis of the news. '' In the course of her brilliant newspaper career she become the expert the expert look up to. Although she have no formal , professional training for newspaper work , she school herself for year before file her first cable. The stature of her work be such that only a year after she join the editorial page staff of The Times in 1936 she win the Pulitzer Prize for foreign correspondence. She be the second woman to receive a Pulitzer Prize in journalism. She be bear in Yorkshire , England , of American parent , Thomas and Teresa Beatrice O'Hare. She be bring to America a an infant and be rear in Columbus , Ohio , where she be educate in private school and in the College of St. Mary of the Springs. She receive her only journalistic experience , before she begin her association with The Times in 1922 , a associate editor of the weekly Catholic Universe Bulletin in Cleveland , a publication on which her mother , the poet , be once woman 's page editor. Young Anne O'Hare begin her preparation for her future career in earnest a the wife of Mr. McCormick , a Dayton engineer and importer whom she accompany on frequent buying trip to Europe. Abroad , she study every country they visit , absorb a mine of information that be to stand her in good stead later. Occasionally , Mrs. McCormick write a few piece for The New York Times Sunday Magazine. In 1921 , on the eve of another trip to the Continent , she send a timid note to the late Carr V. Van Anda , then manage editor of The Times , ask if she might send him some dispatch from abroad. Mr. Van Anda reply : `` Try it. '' She do and impress him , particularly with her judgment of Mussolini , when she write : `` Italy be hear the master 's voice. '' Other correspondent be then give him the brush-off a a posturing lout. She be hired. Since that time she live and move with the world 's most influential people , cull for a grow army of reader the event that be to rock and reshape the world. On Editorial Staff 1936 In June of 1936 she join the editorial staff of The Times , the first woman to serve a a regular contributor to it editorial page. Arthur Hays Sulzberger , president and publisher of The Times , tell Mrs. McCormick , when he invite her late in 1935 to join the editorial board : `` You be to be the 'freedom ' editor. It will be your job to stand up on your hind leg and shout whenever freedom be interfere with in any part of the world. '' After her initial success with the Mussolini story , she bring to the page of The Times the personality and thinking of De Valera , Leon Blum , Hitler , Stalin , Venizelos , Dollfuss , Stresemann , Schusnigg , Roosevelt , Truman and Eisenhower. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization , the Korean conflict , the United Nations and the whole gamut of American-European and American-Asian relation be her `` beats. '' Modest to a fault , the short but energetic Mrs. McCormick travel not only to the capital of the world for her news but to the shop , farm and home of the world 's little people who be so frequently the vulnerables in the play of power politics. She have the uncanny knack of be where the news be break , but to hear her tell it she just `` bump into a few '' a the crisis be popping. Mrs. McCormick seldom take notes. Instead , she listen carefully , absorbed fact and figure and drank in the mood of person and places. This be later reduce to neat , clear type prose. She eschew note-taking because `` it make people too cautious , '' and her manner be always quiet , intelligent , penetrating. She treat important figure a human being , and for this they admire and respect her , always aware of the solid grasp she have on the world 's knotty problems. 'Pit Shots. . .Braggart Dares' After Stalin 's death , a Soviet provocation increase and tension mount , Mrs. McCormick saw clearly the way to meet this Communist provocation and write : `` It be tiresome to repeat it all the time , but the truth be that there be no way to meet provocation save to increase the strength and imperviousness of the stone wall it aim to pierce. Unless they have lose Stalin 's sense of caution , the new Soviet ruler can not be 'provoked ' into total war , and the West can not allow itself to be goad into reckless action. Since the aim of our policy be to build up the force and cohesion that would discourage warlike adventure on the other aide , we can not afford to be divert for a moment from our supreme task by pit shot and braggart dares. `` The supreme task be to hold the free nation together. '' In the course of her life , a host of honor , both journalistic and academic , come to Mrs. McCormick. She receive honorary degree from many university and college , include Columbia , Fordham , Ohio State , Dayton and New York Universities and Elmira , Manhattan , Middlebury , Villanova , Lafayette , Smith , Wellesley , Mount St. Vincent , Wilson and Rollins Colleges and the New Jersey College for Women. Among other award , she receive `` The New York Evening Post Medal , 1934 ; the American Woman 's Association Medal , 1939 ; the Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Medal of the Woman 's Roosevelt Memorial Association , 1941 , and the Gold Medal of the National Institute of Social Science , 1942. Other honor include the Siena Medal of Theta Phi Alpha , 1944 ; University of Notre Dame Laetare Medal , 1944 ; International Altrusa Distinguished Service Award , 1945 ; Women 's National Press Club Achievement Award , 1945 ; Chi Omega National Achievement Award , 1946 ; Theodore Roosevelt Distinguished Service Medal , 1950 , and the William the Silent Award for journalism , 1952. She be the author of `` The Hammer and the Scythe , '' publish in 1928 , a book that describe her experience during two trip to the Soviet Union. She also hold membership in a number of society , include the National Institute of Arts and Letters. She be a Chevalier of the French Legion of Honor. Mrs. McCormick also be a delegate to the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization Conferences in 1946 and 1948. Eisenhower Tribute Among the tribute to Mrs. McCormick last night be the follow from President Eisenhower : `` I have just be inform of the tragic passing of Anne O'Hare McCormick. Mrs. McCormick be a truly great reporter , respect at home and abroad for her keen analysis and impartial presentation of the news development of our day. `` She will be greatly miss by all the member of the newspaper profession and the hundred of thousand of reader who follow her column in The New York Times. '' Mr. Sulzberger say : `` With the death of Anne McCormick , a brilliant , sensitive mind and a warm and gracious heart be take from the world. The extent of her interest , her keen analysis of event , her buoyant spirit , her depth of perception. . .the clarity of style with which she present her view of the change scene , all contribute to place her in a unique position to serve her fellow man. This she do untiringly until the end. Those who know her , love her. Those who read her writing relied upon her . ''