August 25 , 1954 OBITUARY Vargas Adopted 'Strong Man ' Role BY THE NEW YORK TIMES Getulio Vargas retain a strong grip on the imagination and affection of many Brazilians. Sometimes he be know by his nickname , `` Ge-Ge '' and again , when he appear in public , his follower would greet him with a chant shout , `` Getul , Getul ! '' From 1945 to 1950 , when many think his political appeal have vanish , mysterious sign read `` He Will Return ! '' appear at rural crossroad in his home province of Rio Grande do Sul in the South. He duly reappeared. Although Senhor Vargas govern by the strong method common in most Latin-American republic , he be a rugged foe of communism and fascism. He take his country into World War II at the side of the United States and his troop fought well in Italy for a free life that they be not exactly enjoy at home. Regime Crumbling at Death In his first administration , from 1930 to 1945 , he move vigorously and sometimes successfully to reorganize Brazil politically and economically. When he come to power a second time he have lose his touch. His regime be crumble at his death. A New York Times correspondent say of Senhor Vargas : `` He be 5 foot 2 inch tall and have a massive forehead , brown eye and a keen sense of humor. He keep in physical trim by rid and golfing. For mental relaxation he turn to the movie , especially Westerns. Vargas like an occasional glass of wine or a cup of mate. '' Getulio Dornelles Vargas be bear April 19 , 1883 , at Sao Borja , Rio Grande do Sul. When he be about 9 the country be sweep by the excitement attend the overthrow of Emperor Dom Pedro II. General Manoel do Nascimento Vargas , `` Getul 's '' father , play a prominent part in the revolt. During his career Senhor Vargas seldom let rural Brazilians forget that he have be rear on a cattle ranch and have lead the life of a pampas gaucho. After have serve a year a an infantry private at 16 , young Vargas enter the Rio Pardo Military Academy. He withdraw after several month to take a law course , which he complete , at the University of Porto Alegre. He be elect to the Chamber of Deputies in 1919. Senhor Vargas ' political adroitness keep him in the public eye. With the advent of the Presidential election of 1929 he be able to take advantage of a complicate situation. The Constitution of 1891 provide that the titular head of the Government should come from one of the country 's two leading state , Sao Paulo and Minas Gerais. Dr. Washington Luiz Pereira de Souza , then President , be from Sao Paulo and it be assume that his successor would be from Minas Gerais. Voters Pick Rival But Dr. Luiz have endorse Dr. Julio Prestes , Governor of Sao Paulo. Senhor Vargas , who have be reward for his service by be name Governor of Rio Grande do Sol , be pick to oppose Dr. Prestes. In the campaign Senhor Vargas receive thunderous ovation wherever he go and it be assume he would be elected. However , Dr. Prestes come out ahead in the count. On Oct. 3 , 1930 , arm force direct by Oswaldo Aranha , Senhor Vargas ' able lieutenant , take over military installation in Rio Grande do Sul and occupy Rio de Janeiro. A military junta be form Oct. 24 , the same day that Dr. Luiz , at the suggestion of Sebastiao Cardinal Leme da Silveira , fled. Senhor Vargas become Provisional President and Senhor Aranha Minister of Justice and Internal Affairs. Counter-revolutions be put down and jail be filled. After some prodding by his supporter , the new President summon an assembly in May , 1933 , to adopt a new constitution and elect a permanent President. On July 16 Senhor Vargas become the first President under the new Constitution and the thirteenth President of the Republic. He make vigorous attempt to combat inflation and unemployment , but his early effort be not very successful. Partly to allay fear in Washington that he be drift toward the Axis dictatorship , President Vargas send Senhor Aranha to Washington a Ambassador early in 1935. President Franklin D. Roosevelt confirm Brazilian-United States solidarity by visit the Brazilian capital in 1936 on his way to the hemisphere peace conference in Buenos Aires. Many Presidential candidate take the field in 1937. German and Italian newspaper in Brazil call for the re-election of Senhor Vargas and promise him the support of the fascist Integralista party. Senhor Vargas reject this support , when the country threaten to dissolve into revolutionary chaos he have the Council of Ministers declare a national emergency. He receive the right to govern by decree , which he exercise for eight year , and the national legislative body be dissolved. Parties Proscribed The President proscribe not only the Integralistas but many other political groups. He set up strict control of the press and public assembly. Governing a a dictator , he carry out an extensive nationalization program. Under Senhor Vargas ' energetic direction , forward step be take in establish a new Brazilian economy along modern lines. However , it soon become evident that certain phase of the change-over have cause dangerous boom and inflationary situations. As dictator during World War II , Senhor Vargas put his country 's meager resource at the disposal of the United States and it allies. Defense measure be take to insure against a possible Axis invasion. A ruthless politician , Senhor Vargas rule largely by star-chamber method through his Tribunal de Seguranca. He suppress many small uprisings. Finally , discontent grow to such proportion that late in 1944 he be constrain to relieve Senhor Aranha a Foreign Minister. Within a few month the President himself be force to announce that he would soon retire. His decision to return to his home in Rio Grande do Sul be hasten on Oct. 29 , 1945 , when revolt troop occupy strategic point in Rio de Janeiro in a bloodless stroke. However , he be still popular. Elected a Senator , he prefer to seek semi-retirement on his ranch. In October , 1950 , he stag a comeback and win the Presidency by an overwhelming majority. In 1911 , Senhor Vargas wed Darcy Sarmanho , sister of Walter Sarmanho , former head of the Pan American Coffee Bureau. Surviving also be two son , Dr. Lutero , a member of congress , and Manuel , and two daughter , Senhora Jandira Costa and Senhora Alzira de Amaral Peixoto , wife of the Governor of the state of Rio de Janeiro .