November 29 , 1954 OBITUARY Enrico Fermi Dead at 53 ; Architect of Atomic Bomb Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES CHICAGO , Nov. 28 -- Dr. Enrico Fermi , an architect of the atomic age and Nobel Prize winner , die at his home here this morning of cancer. His age be 53. He have undergone what be describe a an `` exploratory '' operation in Billings Memorial Hospital on Oct. 9. He return to his home several week ago. Dr. Fermi be Distinguished Service Professor for Nuclear Studies at the University of Chicago. On Nov. 16 he be name the recipient of a special $ 25,000 award give by the Atomic Energy Commission for his work on the atomic bomb. The award be authorize under term of the Atomic Energy Law , enact this year , and it be bestow upon Dr. Fermi with the approval of President Eisenhower. As a member of the University of Chicago 's Metallurgical Laboratory , Dr. Fermi continue his investigation of the atom 's fundamental property , concentrate on the nature of particle constitute the nucleus , or heart of the atom. In his study , the scientist concentrate on meson , the short-lived atomic particle believe to form a kind of cosmic cement hold the atom together. He also serve a a consultant in the design of the university 's synchocyclotron , one of the world 's most powerful atom smashers. After Dr. Fermi have set the atomic furnace into successful operation in 1942 , Dr. Arthur Holly Compton , now of Washington University , St. Louis , and director of the Metallurgical Laboratory , telephone an impromptu cod message to Dr. James B. Conant , then president of Harvard University and also head of the National Defense Research Committee. Dr. Compton say `` The Italian navigator arrive at the shore of the new world. '' Dr. Conant ask , `` How be the native ? '' Dr. Compton reply : `` Very friendly. '' That mean the first atomic fire in history have be kindled. Dr. Fermi hold honorary degree from the Universities of Utrecht , Heidelberg , Columbia , Yale and Washington and Rockford College. In 1947 he win the Franklin Medal of the Franklin Institute , Philadelphia , and in 1950 receive the Barnard Medal from Columbia University. That year , he also be elect to the Royal Society of England. He be a member of the American Philosophical Society , the American Physical Society and Sigma XI , honorary scientific fraternity. In 1928 Dr. Fermi marry Laura Capon. She write a book , `` Atoms in the Family , '' describe her life with the famous scientist , which be publish this year. The couple have two child , Nella and Giulio. A private funeral service will be hold here tomorrow. Memorial service at the University of Chicago will be hold at 2 P. M. Friday in Rockefeller Chapel. `` Father of Atomic Bomb '' More than any other man of his time , Enrico Fermi could properly be name `` the father of the atomic bomb. '' It be his epoch-making experiment at the University of Rome in 1934 that lead directly to the discovery of uranium fission , the basic principle underlie the atomic bomb as well a the atomic power plant. And eight year later , on Dec. 2 , 1942 , he be the leader of that famous team of scientist who light the first atomic fire on earth , on that gloomy squash court underneath the west stand of the University of Chicago 's abandon football stadium. That day have be officially recognize a the birthday of the atomic age. Man at last have succeed in operate an atomic furnace , the energy of which come from the vast cosmic reservoir supply the sun and the star with their radiant heat and light -- the nucleus of the atom of which the material universe be constituted. Enrico Fermi be the chief architect of that atomic furnace , which he name `` pile , '' but have since become well know a a nuclear reactor , the technical name for an atomic power plant. Forerunner of Reactors Dr. Fermi 's first `` pile '' be the forerunner of the giant nuclear reactor at Hanford , Wash. , in which the non-explosive form of uranium -- uranium 238 -- be transmute into the man- make element plutonium , a vital element in both the atomic and hydrogen bomb , along with the natural atomic element , uranium 235. It be also the prototype of the atomic power plant in the U. S. S. Nautilus , first atomic submarine , and of all the atomic power plant now be build and plan for the generation of atomic power for industrial and other peacetime uses. Dr. Fermi , unhappy in Mussolini 's Italy , especially from the time the Italian dictator begin promulgate anti-Semitic law to please Hitler , take the opportunity to escape from the Fascist-ridden land when he receive the Nobel Prize in physic in the autumn of 1938. Leaving Italy with his wife and two young child to go to Stockholm , ostensibly for the purpose of receive the prize , he tell the Italian authority he have accept a temporary teaching post in an American university. He arrive in New York on Jan. 2 , 1939 , and quietly assume a permanent post on the physic faculty at Columbia University. He could not have come at a more opportune time. In Germany , unbeknown to him , Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann , who have be repeat the pioneer experiment begin by Dr. Fermi in Rome in 1934 , stumble upon the world-shaking discovery that the shooting of neutron at uranium result in the splitting of the uranium atom , or uranium fission. Two week to the day after Dr. Fermi 's arrival in New York , another of the world 's great physicist , Niels Bohr of Copenhagen , Denmark , also come to the United States. Though the news of uranium fission have not yet be officially publish when he leave Denmark , Bohr have hear about it from two exiled German scientist , Lise Meitner , a famous woman physicist , and her nephew , Otto Frisch. Lise Meitner , before her exile from Nazi Germany in the middle of 1938 , have be a long-time collaborator of Hahn , who inform her privately of his startle discovery. She at once left Stockholm for Copenhagen to communicate the news to Dr. Bohr and to Frisch. Dr. Bohr arrive in New York Jan. 16 , 1939 , and at once communicate the news to physicist in Princeton. Soon it reach Dr. Fermi at Columbia , who communicate it to other colleagues. On the night of Jan. 25 , 1939 , in the basement of Pupin Hall on the Columbia campus , the first splitting of the uranium atom in America take place. It be not long before the epoch-making experiment be carry out in many other American universities. Dr. Fermi and the other physicist , particularly the exile from Nazi and Fascist- dominate land , realize from the beginning that `` the world be in for trouble. '' Called Upon Einstein As early a March , 1939 , less than three month after his arriving in the United States , Dr. Fermi , arm with a letter of introduction from Columbia to Admiral S. C. Hooper , in Washington , try to interest the Navy Department in the possibility of an atomic bomb. At that conference the physicist `` suggest the possibility of achieve a controllable reaction use slow neutron or a reaction of an explosive character use fast neutrons. '' Meantime , Dr. Fermi and the other exiled physicist have learn through former colleague in Germany that the Nazis have create a special institute in Berlin to which they have assign some of their top scientist to work on an atomic bomb. Realizing the danger that confront the free world , they induce the most famous scientist-exile among them , Albert Einstein , to write the historic letter to President Franklin D. Roosevelt that lead to the eventual development of the $ 2,000,000,000 Manhattan District , a the atomic project be known. Dr. Fermi , in association with Leo Szilard , another exile , then begin work at Columbia on the construction of the first experimental atomic `` piles. '' By the time the Government be ready to support the project with substantial fund , the Fermi-Szilard team have lay down the groundwork that make the first chain reaction `` pile '' possible. Important a his contribution be to the national defense in time of emergency , Dr. Fermi 's reputation among the great in physic have be establish some year before he set foot in the United States. It be he , when still a young man of 33 , who first use the neutron , discover in 1932 by Sir James Chadwick of Cambridge University , England , a a modern Philosophers ' Stone for the transmutation of the element and the creation of more than forty artificial radioactive isotopes. It be in the course of these pioneer experiment that he bombard uranium with neutron and observe the strange phenomenon that remain a puzzle for five year , until they be clear up by the discovery of Hahn and Strassmann in December , 1938. It be then that Dr. Fermi and the rest of the scientific world realize that the strange phenomenon they have be observe and could not explain be in actuality the fission of uranium. Enrico Fermi be bear in Rome , Sept. 29 , 1901. He be graduate from the University of Pisa in 1922 , and in 1924 , after study in Germany and the Netherlands , be appoint lecturer at the University of Florence. In 1926 he become professor of theoretical physic at the University of Rome , where he remain until he leave Italy to join the physic faculty of Columbia. In 1945 , after serve for three year with the atomic bomb project , he join the Institute of Nuclear Studies at the University of Chicago .