November 4 , 1954 OBITUARY Art World Mourns Henri Matisse , Dead at Home in Nice at Age of 84 Special to The New York Times PARIS , Nov. 4 -- The world of art today mourn Henri Matisse , one of France 's great painter , who die in his apartment in Nice yesterday afternoon of a heart attack. He be 84 year old. Death come swiftly to the age artist , who have be a semi-invalid since undergo a serious operation in 1940. At his bedside be his daughter , Mme. Marguerite Duthite ; his physician , a nurse and his secretary. Mme. Duthite have arrive in Nice from Paris a few day ago to visit her father. Jean Cassou , director of the Museum of Modern Art in Paris , recall that Matisse , bedridden much of the time after his operation , continue to work from his room. `` Henri Matisse be one of the last representative of French genius , '' he said. `` If the title of master suit any artist it certainly suit him. All men deserve of this name , all men who think , can consider themselves a his disciples. His thinking have illuminate our era. '' Andre Berthoin , Minister of National Education , in a statement on the death of the artist , say that the `` world will mourn '' with France. `` His be the most French of palettes. Intelligence , reason and the alliance of a sense of finesse and of simplify geometry give to all he paint the rare virtue of be truly French , '' M. Berthoin said. Matisse 's two son , Jean , a Paris sculptor , and Pierre , a New York art dealer , arrive in Nice tonight to attend the funeral. While the date and type of service have not yet be set , it be understand from Matisse 's daughter that the painter have often request a simple service with burial somewhere on the Riviera , where the artist have live since 1939. Variety in His Approach Henri Matisse , leader of young rebel artist who bring the modern art movement into be in Paris a half century ago , be a master of color , a supreme draftsman who imbue a relatively small range of subject matter with constant variety. The artist 's long career , begin with year of academic schooling , become set in it brilliant revolutionary course in 1905 , when , in company with Rouault , Derain , Dufy , Vlaminck and a few others , Matisse set Paris on it ear in the Autumn Salon. The painter be excoriate a fauve -- wild beast -- and their picture , flame defiant canvas , be condemn a impossible. On June 25 , 1951 , thousand of tourist and native crowd the small village of Vence in south France to see the Bishop bless what Matisse have call his `` masterpiece '' -- a chapel on which he have start work four year before. Ailing and bedridden through much of this period , Matisse serenely progress with his decoration for the chapel , draw his design with a long charcoal-tipped stick on the wall of his bedroom , later copy them on tile and transfer them to stain glass. This be his last work , he announce : `` My bag be packed. '' Matisse hold no common ground with those who consider modern art a a new mode. He once say that every art be a logical reflection of the time in which it be produce -- an orderly and rational development of what have go before. Ruled Out Reproduction Representation to him be a mean to an end and not the end itself. On a visit to the United States in 1930 , he answer the challenger of new art form by say , `` By mechanical mean an image be now fix on a photographic plate in a few second -- an image more precise and exact than it be humanly possible to draw. And so , with the advent of photography disappear the necessity for exact reproduction in art. Cezanne no longer paint one individual apple ; he paint all apples. Van Gogh 's 'Postman ' be a portion of humanity. '' The artist be bear on Dec. 31 , 1869 , the son of a grain merchant in Le Cateau in Picardy. The law have be choose a his profession , and it take some persuasion over parental objection for Matisse to begin the art study he yearn for. In Paris he study under Gustave Moreau , and from 1893 to 1896 he produce sober still lifes and other quiet picture influence by Chardin and Corot. He copy old master in the Louvre , earn his way through his schooling. In late year , tell about it , he say , `` One must learn to walk firmly on the ground before one try the tightrope. '' In 1893 he marry Amelie Moellie Parayre. The family be support through the sale of all the painter 's still lifes to a dealer who pay 400 franc apiece for them. Matisse narrate later : `` One day I have just finish one of my pictures. It be quite as good a the previous one and very much like it , and I know that on it delivery I would get the money which I sorely needed. I look at it , and then and there a feeling come over me that it be not I , that it do not express me or express what I felt. '' The artist destroy the picture , count his emancipation from that day. Opinions on the art of Matisse from the beginning of his emancipation through the tide of impressionism , post-impressionism and fauvism , vary considerably during the 1912 exhibition in London of modern French painter ' work. Matisse emerge a an artist of great power , but section of the academic world call his work `` not art , but a dangerous and infectious disease. '' In 1908 , excite comment have follow an exhibition of Matisse 's painting in the Stieglitz Gallery of New York ; in 1913 , at the famed Armory Show , the artist be the center of stormy debate. Through the year that have see his picture become prized piece in public and private collection in all part of the world , the artist grow in stature. He never leave his exploration , and age only increase his daring a a colorist and his brilliance and gaiety. A few have complain that his work of recent year `` complacently repeat , '' but number of authoritative writer on Matisse and lead connoisseur regard him a the foremost painter of the day. Matisse establish himself permanently in Nice in 1917. When World War II start , the artist be in Paris. He make his way in stage by taxi and train back to Nice. In 1941 , his son Pierre , report that Matisse have undergone a serious operation. Friends try to persuade the age artist to leave France , but Matisse say , `` If all the talented people leave France , the country would be much poorer. I begin an artist 's life very poor , and I be not afraid to be poor again. . . . Art have it value ; it be a search after truth and truth be all that counts. '' The artist 's birthday during his last year usually find him work on a limited schedule , with congratulatory message come in from all over the world. At 83 he donate 100 of his work -- value at up to $ 14,000,000 -- to his hometown of Le Cateau. And at about the same time , in a piece he write for the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization , Matisse tell a little more of his theory of art. `` An artist have to look at life without prejudice , a he do when he be a child , '' he wrote. `` If he lose that faculty , he can not express himself in an original , that be , in a personal way. '' By way of illustration he say there be nothing more difficult for a truly creative painter than to paint a rose. `` Because before he can do so , '' explain the artist , `` he have first of all to forget all the rose that be ever paint . ''