December 27 , 1954 OBITUARY Liberty H. Bailey , Botanist , Is Dead Special to The New York Times ITHACA , N.Y. , Dec. 26 -- Dr. Liberty Hyde Bailey , internationally renowned botanist , horticulturist and agricultural educator , die yesterday in his home here at the age of 96. Traveled 250,000 Miles Dr. Bailey 's activity , some of which continue after he be 90 , include write more than fifty book , edit many more , travel more than 250,000 mile to collect more than 275,000 plant , classify thousand of plant , head many society , include the American Association for the Advancement of Science , write poetry and lecturing. Lively and strong-minded , Dr. Bailey think nothing at 91 of make a trip to the West Indies to search for palms. He do that in April , 1949. A huge birthday party plan for him by Cornell University -- he be dean emeritus of it College of Agriculture -- have to be postpone because he be wander through the jungles. Dr. Bailey tell the International Congress of Plant Sciences at it meeting in New York in 1926 that man 's conquest of the plant kingdom be in it infancy ; that in the extension of knowledge of plant and the ability to use them lay one of the great hope of the human race. One of his great achievement be collect in China , South America , New Zealand , the West Indies and elsewhere more than 200,000 plant for the Bailey Hortorium , which , with one of the world 's large collection of plant lore as well a of plant , he present to Cornell in 1935. Two other achievement be edit the four-volume Cyclopedia of American Agriculture and similar work on the six-volume Standard Cyclopedia of Horticulture. Inheritance From Father Born on March 15 , 1858 , in South Haven , Mich. , he be the son of a man of the same name and Mrs. Sarah Harrison Bailey. The senior Liberty Bailey , it be say , `` tramp all the way from Vermont , carry fruit tree for the West , '' a veritable Johnny Appleseed. His son win in 1948 the first award of the Johnny Appleseed Memorial Medal from the Men 's Garden Clubs of America. Dr. Bailey be rear in Michigan on land clear of forest by his father. The family farm the tract , and make it own soap and candle , tan it leather , weave it cloth and fight off bears. In Dr. Bailey 's book , `` The Nature Study Idea , '' he relate that a a boy he collect stone and plant , hatch snake egg in his mother 's oven and make note on the weather. In his teen he plan his life , include twenty-five year of study , twenty-five for practice a vocation and the remainder for do what he most enjoyed. He stick fairly close to that plan. In late year he do much to improve rural life by scientific means. He do some newspaper work a a youth , be graduate from Michigan Agricultural College in 1882 and thereafter receive an M.S. from his alma mater and doctorate from the Universities of Wisconsin , Alfred , Vermont and Puerto Rico. Assistant to Dr. Asa Gray , Harvard botanist , in the early Eighteen Eighties , Dr. Bailey be later Professor of Horticulture and Landscape Gardening at Michigan Agricultural College for three year until he become Professor of Horticulture at Cornell in 1888. In 1903 he become dean of the College of Agriculture at Cornell , resign in 1913. Won Many Awards At Michigan in 1885 he have organize the first college department of horticulture and landscape gardening in the country. That same year his `` Field Notes on Apple Culture , '' a small illustrated volume , win for him the first of many award , that of the American Pomological Society 's Wilder Medal. Most of his book be technical , but some , like `` The State and the Farmer , '' publish in 1908 , the year he become chairman of President Theodore Roosevelt 's Country Life Commission , be intend to improve rural conditions. He decline an offer in 1911 of the State Commissionership of Agriculture and the next year deflate a boom to have him become Progressive candidate for Governor. Until the end , he frequently be shower with honors. He believe one should accept condition a they be , not let money be the primary consideration , but keep a a chief aim the artistic expression of life. His idea be express in `` The Holy Earth , '' `` Wind and Weather , '' `` What Is Democracy ? '' and other books. A widower , he leave a daughter , Miss Ethel Zoe Bailey of Ithaca .