August 13 , 1955 OBITUARY Thomas Mann Dies at 80 ; Novelist Won Nobel Prize By The Associated Press ZURICH , Switzerland , Aug. 12 -- Thomas Mann , a modern literary giant , die in the Cantonal Hospital here early tonight. He be 80 year old. His death follow a thrombosis , or blood clot. Until stricken during a holiday in the Netherlands last month , he live a quiet life in his home above Lake Zurich. He write , read ravenously and take daily walk in his garden. Author of 'Buddenbrooks' Thomas Mann be probably the great of modern German novelists. In his homeland , his fame have grow steadily since his novel `` Buddenbrooks '' be publish in 1901 , when he be 26 year old. The award of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1929 stimulated world interest in his writing , which be translate into many languages. In Europe his name be link with the intellectual movement that seek to bring close harmony among peoples. Students of German literature find that , in his philosophy , Dr. Mann be highly Germanic and at the same time a citizen of the world. They consider him an heir of Goethe in express the German soul , of Heine in tenderness and beauty and of Kant in profundity. `` Buddenbrooks '' have go through fifty edition in German before it be translate into English in 1924. American and British critic at the time compare it with John Galsworthy 's `` The Forsyte Saga , '' also tell the story of a family through several generations. What make `` Buddenbrooks '' particularly interest to the literary student be the fact that the author , show the social decline of a Luebeck Senatorial family , wove much of his own family history into the story. Dr. Mann come from old Luebeck patrician stock. He be bear there on June 6 , 1875. In the house of his father , one of the merchant prince of that ancient and historic Hanseatic city , who be also a Senator and a Mayor , he come in contact with the tradition of his home town. Dr. Mann 's great-grandfather be a courageous free-thinker of the eighteenth century , who become a consul of the Netherlands and , although originally a liberal , return to orthodoxy after his marriage. Dr. Mann 's mother , the former Julia Bruhn da Silva , be bear in South America , daughter of a German planter who have marry a Creole woman of Portuguese and Indian ancestry. It be because of these racial origin that Dr. Mann be regard a and , in fact , become a good European. The father die when his son be 15 , and the youth and his mother move to Munich , where he start work with an insurance firm. At the age of 15 he decide definitely on a literary career and join the staff of Simplicissimus , the well-known satirical weekly. Like Goethe , he go to Italy and during a two-year sojourn in the South complete `` Buddenbrooks. '' 'Magic Mountain ' Published Four year after the latter be publish here `` The Magic Mountain '' appeared. The novel offer a record of profound mental and spiritual experience by exploit a tuberculosis sanitarium in the Alps , where the character of Hans Castorp , one of it patient , provide the novelist with the unusual background of a strange world. When the enchantment of the magic mountain be at last be lift , it be death that take off the victory. In 1938 , with the publication of `` Joseph in Egypt , '' it become evident that Dr. Mann 's recreation of the biblical story of Joseph be a literary event of the first magnitude. This volume be precede by `` Joseph and His Brothers '' and `` Young Joseph '' and succeed by `` Joseph the Provider , '' the last in the famed tetralogy. The sharp irony that be noticeable in his new work arise out of the inner unity of his creative power. The comic spirit reflect upon situation and character to such an extent that in some scene it become Aristophanic. At a time when most author cease to grow , a new and essentially human note in Dr. Mann 's writing become apparent. It be a consequence of the author 's whole evolution , the realization of his early youth that a man must `` die to live '' in order to become a great artist. In his `` Tonio Kroeger '' Dr. Mann consider himself a an oddity and a social outcast ; then , in `` Death in Venice '' a the conscious and perfected artist who live solely for beauty , willing , if need be , to die for it. One of his early novel , `` Royal Highness , '' appear in Germany a far back a 1905 , but be long overlook in this country , where it be not publish until 1916. That it be republish in 1939 point to the fact that the author reveal in this work his prescience of world problems. Aided Political Causes Dr. Mann look on political agitation a part of the series of distraction that prevent the artist from face himself and the humanity in him , and pride himself that while he go through two world war he concentrate on his own work. Nevertheless , he make a considerable contribution of his talent to the political cause he hold dear- -although he like to point out that this noncreative political activity influence him in his own work but do not distract him. Dr. Mann foresee the major cultural problem of this century many year before they become acute and before they be make a subject of open conflict. His devotion to democratic principle make him one of the outstanding personality of the Weimar Republic. To exchange idea and the fruit of creative expression he go to Paris in 1929 to lecture on peace at the Carnegie Foundation. Then French nationalist regard Dr. Mann 's appearance in the French capital and the subject of his lecture a an affront to the French people. But the young generation and French liberal hail him a an intellectual ambassador and welcome him with enthusiasm. When the idea of political democracy be vanish before the onslaught of dictatorial rule , Dr. Mann still hesitate to give up his literary domain for the political battlefield. But with the rise of nazism in 1933 and with the ruthless persecution that mark the Hitler regime , his political consciousness awoke. The more the Nazi movement grow the more outspoken become the German writer , who have be a former member of the Prussian Academy of Art and a Senator of the German Academy , and the more he side with the anti-Nazi force the more he be hat by the ruler of the Third Reich. In 1938 , Princeton University appoint Dr. Mann lecturer in the humanity and announce that he would aid the program of humanistic study by his lectures. The German novelist welcome the occasion , which offer him opportunity to continue his struggle for freedom and democracy. Soon an applicant for citizenship paper he state the case for freedom against despotism a he saw it. In `` The Coming Victory of Democracy '' -- publish here in the summer of 1938 -- Dr. Mann continue his war against totalitarianism. `` The revolutionary opportunism and the glow of false dawn in the Fascist tendency be taint magic , '' he wrote. `` Fascism be so thoroughly false that honorable youth throughout the world should be ashamed to have anything to do with it. '' After the outbreak of the European conflict he write `` This War. '' In it he continue his lucid and penetrate series of commentary on the world and add to his already establish fame a an outstanding pamphleteer. The author , who have analyze the German spirit in essay on Freud , Goethe and Wagner , write now realistically on the extension of Nazi power in term of death , destruction , concentration camp and tyranny. On Radio During War During the war year , Dr. Mann delivered German radio address to his former countryman that be beam by the British Broadcasting Corporation to Germany. Twenty-five of these talk be publish later in a volume , `` Deutsche Hoerer '' ( `` Listen , Germany '' ) . He admonish the Germans that they must repent crime to obtain reconciliation with the world and urge them to break with their Nazi leaders. But he do not believe that the Allies could draw a neat divide line between nazism and the German people. `` Today , '' he tell his erstwhile countryman , `` I be an American citizen. Long before Germany 's terrible defeat I declare publicly and privately , that I have no intention of ever turn my back to America. '' Till the middle of 1941 Dr. Mann and his wife reside in Princeton , where the author finish `` Joseph the Provider , '' the fourth and concluding volume of a work of 8,000 page base upon the Biblical story of Joseph. After the English publication of `` The Transposed Heads , '' a story of legendary India , he move to Santa Monica , Calif. , where he have build a home overlook the Pacific. Dr. Mann join the American League for German Cultural Freedom and publish in Zurich , Switzerland , the magazine Mass und Wert ( Standards and Values ) in which he open war on Nazi concept and ask for recruit in the moral struggle. Frequently , over the head of the Nazi leader , the exiled German speak to his countryman at home , appeal to the truly German spirit and renew his plea for preservation of traditional German culture. Yet , while Dr. Mann make his contribution to a new humanity , while he be fight for the victory of a new humanism over twentieth-century decadence , he finish a novel whose sphere , Weimar , be dear to his heart , and whose spirit , Goethe , lead the author to a new creative climax. The novel , `` The Beloved Returns , '' with the subtitle `` Lotte in Weimar , '' picture Goethe at the age of 68 when he have just emerge from the most passionate love affair of his old age , receive a visit from the great love of his youth. He have not see Lotte , heroine of his tragic romance , since she be 19 and he be 24. Third Biography Involved There be , however , more to this book than the biography of Goethe and Lotte. Involved in the work be a third biography -- that of the author. There be a trend noticeable during Dr. Mann 's first twenty year of productive life , when he could not free himself of his pessimistic conviction that life be beautiful but dull and that death be the best possible release. But in his Goethe novel for the first time the artist have not to die to be creative. He have to live. It be Dr. Mann 's credo. And his message for our time. The author 's seventieth birthday be mark in June , 1945 , by a dinner in the grand ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. Prominent Americans eulogize him while the author himself turn his address of thanks into tribute to the late President Franklin D. Roosevelt. In an editorial , `` Thomas Mann , American , '' The New York Times say upon the occasion : `` Thomas Mann know well where freedom lay ; he have the courage to make his choice and give his full allegiance to this new land. '' During the next five year the novelist be enable to revisit the land he have leave in 1933 in protest against the Nazis and he find himself occasionally accuse of Communist sympathies. He do note a recrudescence of National Socialism in his homeland ; but he repeatedly deny that he have ever be , or would ever be , a Communist or a fellow-traveler -- '' as long a the destination be totalitarianism. '' `` Doctor Faustus , '' a novel publish in 1948 , be a Book-of-the-Month Club selection. Dr. Mann and his wife go to Switzerland to settle in 1953 , after have spend fifteen year in the United States. Despite his American citizenship , Dr. Mann , who once say that his stay in the United States be one of the most productive and satisfy period in his life , decide to return to Europe , where he felt that he have be most deeply rooted. Maintaining a heavy production schedule , Dr. Mann celebrate his eightieth birthday with work on `` Confessions of Felix Krull , Confidence Man. '' In 1952 , in his seventy-eighth year , in a statement on the theme , `` This I Believe , '' the author of `` Buddenbrooks '' say : `` Deep down I believe that creation of the universe out of nothingness and that of life out of inorganic state ultimately aim at the creation of man. I believe that man be mean a a great experiment whose possible failure by man 's own guilt would be paramount to the failure of creation itself. `` Whether this belief be true or not , man would be well advised if he behave a though it were. '' Last Book Published Here `` The Black Swan , '' his last book publish here , in 1954 , be not a great success with critic or with the reading public. `` Confessions of Felix Krull , Confidence Man , '' be warmly welcome in Germany last year and will be publish here in translation this fall by Alfred A. Knopf. In May , 1955 , just before his eightieth birthday , Dr. Mann become , almost in spite of himself , a symbol of German unity. In Bonn , the West German capital , he open the celebration of the 150th anniversary of the death of Friedrich von Schiller , poet and dramatist. In Weimar , across the East German border , he conclude the ceremony there , receive also an honorary doctorate from the Soviet-zone University of Jena. And in Luebeck , just west of the border , the birthplace that have disown him more than half a century ago , the Senator 's son accept honorary citizenship. On Tuesday he be elect to membership in the cultural order establish by the West German government , `` Pour Le Merite , '' in recognition of his contribution to German literature. He be survive by his widow , the former Katja Pringsheim , after fifty year of marriage. They have six child : Erika , who make her home with them in Zurich ; Klaus , also a novelist , who die in 1949 ; Angelus ; Monika , wife of Janoe Lany , Hungarian historian ; Elizabeth , widow of G. A. Borgese , Italian historian , and Michael. An old brother , Heinrich Mann , also a novelist and an exile from Hitler's Germany , die in California in 1950 .