April 19 , 1955 OBITUARY Dr. Albert Einstein Dies in Sleep at 76 ; World Mourns Loss of Great Scientist By THE NEW YORK TIMES Albert Einstein be bear at Ulm , Wuerttemberg , Germany , on March 14 , 1879. His boyhood be spend in Munich , where his father , who own electro-technical work , have settled. The family migrate to Italy in 1894 , and Albert be send to a cantonal school at Aarau in Switzerland. He attend lecture while support himself by teach mathematics and physic at the Polytechnic School at Zurich until 1900. Finally , after a year a tutor at Schaffthausen , he be appoint examiner of patent at the Patent Office at Bern where , have become a Swiss citizen , he remain until 1909. It be in this period that he obtain his Ph.D. degree at the University of Zurich and publish his first paper on physical subjects. These be so highly esteemed that in 1909 he be appoint Extraordinary Professor of Theoretical Physics at the University of Zurich. In 1911 he accept the Chair of Physics at Prague , only to be induce to return to his own Polytechnic School at Zurich a full professor the next year. In 1913 a special position be create for him in Berlin a director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Physical Institute. He be elect a member of the Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences and receive a stipend sufficient to enable him to devote all his time to research without any restriction or routine duties. Elected to Royal Society He be elect a foreign member of the Royal Society in 1921 , have also be make previously a member of the Amsterdam and Copenhagen Academies , while the Universities of Geneva , Manchester , Rostock and Princeton confer honorary degree on him. In 1925 he receive the Copley Medal of the Royal Society and in 1926 the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in recognition of his theory of relativity. He receive a Nobel Price in 1921. Honors continue to be confer on him. He be make a member of the Institute de France , one of the few foreigner ever to achieve such a distinction. Other great university throughout the world , include Oxford , Cambridge , Paris , Madrid , Buenos Aires , Zurich , Yeshiva , Harvard , London and Brussels , award honorary doctorate to him. One of the high American scientific honor , the Franklin Institute Medal , come to him in 1935 , when he startle the scientific world by fail to deliver more than a mere `` thank-you '' in lieu of the scientific address customary on such occasions. He make up for it later by contribute an important paper to the Journal of the Franklin Institute deal with idea , he explain , that be not quite ripe at the time he receive the medal. Dr. Einstein marry Mileva Marec , a fellow-student in Switzerland , in 1901. They have two son , Albert Einstein Jr. , an electrical engineer who also come to this country , and Eduard. The marriage end in divorce. He marry again , in 1917 , this time his cousin , Elsa Einstein , a widow with two daughters. She die in Princeton in 1936. To Institute at Princeton in '32 When the Institute for Advanced Study be organize in 1932 Dr. Einstein be offer and accept , the place of Professor of Mathematics and Theoretical Physics , and serve , also , a the Head of the Mathematics Department. The institute be situate at Princeton , N.J. , and Dr. Einstein make plan to live there about half of each year. These plan be change suddenly. Adolf Hitler rise to power in Germany and essential human liberty , even for Jews with world reputation like Dr. Einstein , become impossible in Germany. He announce that he would not return to Berlin , sail for Europe and go to Belgium. Immediately many nation invite him to make his home in their lands. In the late spring of 1933 Dr. Einstein learn , in Belgium , that his two step-daughters have be force to flee Germany. Not long after that he be notify through the press that he have be oust from the supervise board of the German Bureau of Standards. His home at Caputh be sack by Hitler Brown Shirts on the allegation that the world-renowned physicist and pacifist have a vast store of arm hide there. The Prussian Academy of Science expel him and also attack him for have make statement regard Hitler atrocities. His reply be this : `` I do not want to remain in a state where individual be not concede equal right before the law for freedom of speech and doctrine. '' In September of 1933 he flee from Belgium and go into seclusion on the coast of England , fearful that the Nazis have plan upon his life. Then he journey to Princeton and make his home there. He buy a home in Princeton and settle down to pass his remain year there. In 1940 he become a citizen of the United States. Einstein Noted a an Iconoclast In Research , Politics and Religion His Early Spare-Time Reflections in Bern Led to Strong Belief in Social Equality and Hope for a World Government In 1904 , Albert Einstein , then an obscure young man of 25 , could be see daily in the late afternoon wheel a baby carriage on the street of Bern , Switzerland , halt now and then , unmindful of the traffic around him , to scribble down some mathematical symbol in a notebook that share the carriage with his infant son , also name Albert. Out of those symbol come the most explosive idea in the age-old striving of man to fathom the mystery of his universe. Out of them , incidentally , come the atomic bomb , which , view from the long-range perspective of mankind 's intellectual and spiritual history may turn out , Einstein fervently hop , to have be just a minor by-product. With those symbol Dr. Einstein be build his theory of relativity. In that baby carriage with his infant son be Dr. Einstein 's universe-in-the-making , a vast , finite-infinite four-dimensional universe , in which the conventional universe -- exist in absolute three-dimensional space and in absolute three-dimensional time of past , present and future -- vanish into a mere subjective shadow. Dr. Einstein be then build his universe in his spare time , on the completion of his day 's routine work a a humble , $ 600-a-year examiner in the Government Patent Office in Bern. Published Four Papers A few month later , in 1905 , the entry in the notebook be publish in four epoch-making scientific papers. In the first he describe a method for determine molecular dimensions. In the second he explain the photo-electric effect , the basis of electronics , for which he win the Nobel Prize in 1921. In the third , he present a molecular kinetic theory of heat. The fourth and last paper that year , entitle `` Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies , '' a short article of thirty-one page , be the first presentation of what become know a the Special Relativity Theory. Three of the paper be publish , one at a time , in Volume 17 of the German scientific journal , Annalen der Physik , lead journal of physic in the world at the time. The fourth be print in Volume 18. Neither Dr. Einstein , nor the world he live in , nor man 's concept of his material universe , be ever the same again. Many other scientific paper , of startle originality and intellectual boldness , be publish by Dr. Einstein in the succeeding years. The scientific fraternity in the world of physic , particularly the leader of the group , recognize from the beginning that a new star of the first magnitude have appear on their firmament. But with the passing of time his fame spread to other circle , and by 1920 the name of Einstein have become synonymous with relativity , a theory universally regard a so profound that only twelve men in the entire world be believe able to fathom it depths. Legend Grew With Years Paradoxically , a the year pass , the figure of Einstein the man become more and more remote , while that of Einstein the legend come ever near to the mass of mankind. They grow to know him not a a universe-maker whose theory they could not hope to understand but a a world citizen , one of the outstanding spiritual leader of his generation , a symbol of the human spirit and it high aspirations. `` The world around Einstein have change very much since he publish his first discovery * * * but his attitude to the world around him have not change , '' write Dr. Phillipp Frank , Dr. Einstein 's biographer , in 1947. `` He have remain an individualist who prefer to be unencumbered by social relation , and at the same time a fighter for social equality and human fraternity. `` Many famous scholar live in the distinguished university town , '' ( Princeton ) Dr. Frank continue , `` but no inhabitant will simply number Einstein a one among many other famous people. For the people of Princeton in particular and for the world at large he be not just a great scholar , but rather one of the legendary figure of the twentieth century. Einstein 's act and word be not simply noted and judge a fact ; instead each have it symbolic significance * * * '' `` Saintly , '' `` noble '' and `` lovable '' be the word use to describe him by those who know him even casually. He radiate humor , warmth and kindliness. He love joke and laugh easily. Princeton resident would see him walk in their midst , a familiar figure , yet a stranger , a close neighbor , yet at the same time a visitor from another world. And a he grow old his otherworldiness become more pronounced , yet his human warmth do not diminish. Outward appearance mean nothing to him. Princetonians , old and young , soon get use to the long-haired figure in pullover sweater and unpressed slack wander in their midst , a knit stocking cap cover his head in winter. `` My passionate interest in social justice and social responsibility , '' he write , `` have always stand in curious contrast to a marked lack of desire for direct association with men and women. I be a horse for single harness , not cut out for tandem or team work. I have never belong wholeheartedly to country or state , to my circle of friend , or even to my own family. These tie have always be accompany by a vague aloofness , and the wish to withdraw into myself increase with the years. `` Such isolation be sometimes bitter , but I do not regret be cut off from the understanding and sympathy of other men. I lose something by it , to be sure , but I be compensate for it in be rendered independent of the custom , opinion and prejudice of others , and be not tempt to rest my peace of mind upon such shiftless foundations. '' Center of Controversies It be this independence that make Dr. Einstein on occasion the center of controversy , a the result of his championship of some highly unpopular causes. He declare himself a stanch pacifist in Germany during World War I and bring down upon his head a storm of violent criticism from all sides. When outstanding representative of German art and science sign , follow the German invasion of Belgium in violation of treaty , the `` Manifesto of Ninety-two German Intellectuals , '' assert that `` German culture and German militarism be identical , '' Dr. Einstein refuse to sign and again face ostracism and the wrath of the multitudes. But he never waver when his conscience dictate that he take a course of action , no matter how unpopular. One of these occasion come on Jan. 12 , 1953 , when he write to President Harry S. Truman : `` My conscience compels me to urge you to commute the death sentence of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg , '' the two convict atomic spy who be execute five month later. In June , 1953 , he write a letter to a school teacher in which he characterize certain tactic of a Congressional investigating committee a `` a kind of inquisition '' that `` violate the spirit of the Constitution , '' and advise the `` minority of intellectual '' to refuse to testify on the ground that `` it be shameful for a blameless citizen to submit to such an inquisition. '' Faced with this evil , he say , he could `` see only the revolutionary way of non-cooperation in the sense of Gandhi's. '' Later that year Dr. Einstein advise a witness not to answer any question by Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , Republican of Wisconsin , relate to personal belief , politics , association with other people , reading , think and write , a a violation of the First Amendment , which provide constitutional guarantee of free speech and associations. The witness , in refuse to cooperate with the subcommittee then head by Senator McCarthy , say he be do so on the advice of Dr. Einstein , who confirm the witness 's statement. `` He be a severe critic of modern method of education. `` It be nothing short of a miracle , '' he say , `` that modern method of instruction have not yet entirely strangle the holy curiosity of inquiry. For this delicate little plant , aside from stimulation , stand mainly in need of freedom. '' His political ideal , he emphasize frequently , be democracy. The distinction separate the social class , he write , `` be false. In the last analysis they rest on force. I be convince that degeneracy follow every autocratic system of violence , for violence inevitably attract moral inferior * * *. For this reason I have always be passionately oppose to such regime a exist in Russia and Italy today. '' This be write in 1931 , two year before Hitler come to power. Dr. Einstein believe that a socialist planned economy be the only way to eliminate the inequality of capitalism. However , he fully recognize that `` planned economy a such may be accompany by the complete enslavement of the individual. '' His love for the oppress also lead him to become a strong supporter of Zionism. In November , 1952 , follow the death of Chaim Weizmann , Dr. Einstein be ask if he would accept the Presidency of Israel. He reply that he be deeply touch by the offer but that he be not suit for the position. He never undertake function he could not fulfill to his satisfaction , he say , and he felt he be not qualify in the area of human relationships. Chairman of Atomic Unit On Aug. 6 , 1945 , when the world be electrify with the news that an atomic bomb have explode over Japan , the significance of relativity be intuitively grasp by the millions. From then on the destiny of mankind hung on a thin mathematical thread. Dr. Einstein devote much of his time and energy in an attempt to arouse the world 's consciousness to it dangers. He become the chairman of the Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists , organize to make the American people aware of the potential horror of atomic warfare and the necessity for the international control of atomic energy. He believe that real peace could be achieve only by total disarmament and the establishment of a `` restricted world government , '' a `` supranational judicial and executive body empower to decide question of immediate concern to the security of the nations. '' `` The hydrogen bomb , '' he say in 1950 , `` appear on the public horizon a a probably attainable goal. * * * If successful , radioactive poisoning of the atmosphere , and hence annihilation of any life on earth , have be bring within the range of technical possibilities. '' He find recreation from his labor in play the grand piano that stand in the solitary den in the garret of his residence. Much of his leisure time , too , be spend in play the violin. He be especially fond of play trio and quartet with musical friends. `` In my life , '' he say once , explain his great love for music , `` the artistically visionary play no mean role. After all , the work of a research scientist germinate upon the soil of imagination , of vision. Just a an artist arrive at his conception partly by intuition , so a scientist must also have a certain amount of intuition. '' While he do not believe in a formal , dogmatic religion , Dr. Einstein , like all true mystic , be of a deeply religious nature. He refer to it a the cosmic religion , which he define a a seek on the part of the individual who feel it `` to experience the totality of existence a a unity full of significance. '' `` I assert , '' he write for The New York Times on Nov. 9 , 1930 , `` that the cosmic religious experience be the strong and the noble driving force behind scientific research. No one who do not appreciate the terrific exertion and , above all , the devotion without which pioneer creation in scientific thought can not come into be can judge the strength of the feel out of which alone such work turn away a it be from immediate , practical life , can grow. '' `` The most beautiful and profound emotion we can experience , '' he write `` be the mystical. It be the source of all true art and science. He to whom this emotion be a stranger , who can no longer pause to wonder and stand rapt in awe , be as good a dead : his eye be closed. This insight into the mystery of life , couple though it be with fear , also have give rise to religion. To know that what be impenetrable to u really exist , manifest itself a the high wisdom and the most radiant beauty which our dull faculty can comprehend only in their primitive form -- this knowledge , this feeling , be at the center of true religiousness. In this sense , and in this sense only , I belong in the rank of devoutly religious men. `` I can not imagine a God who reward and punish the object of his creation , whose purpose be model after our own -- a God , in short , who be but a reflection of human fraility. Neither can I believe that the individual survive the death of his body , although feeble soul harbor such thought through fear or ridiculous egotism. It be enough for me to contemplate the mystery of conscious life perpetuate itself through all eternity , to reflect upon the marvelous structure of the universe which we can dimly perceive , and to try humbly to comprehend even an infinitesimal part of the intelligence manifest in nature. `` My religion consist of a humble admiration of the illimitable superior spirit who reveal himself in the slight detail we be able to perceive with our frail and feeble minds. That deeply emotional conviction of the presence of a superior reason power , which be reveal in the incomprehensible universe , form my idea of God. '' `` The most incomprehensible thing about the world , '' he say on another occasion , `` be that it be comprehensible . ''