The first American woman to win an Olympic championship. By MARGALIT FOX The first American woman to win an Olympic championship die without ever know what she have achieved. That woman , Margaret Abbott , win the ladies’ golf competition , a the event be genteelly know , at the 1900 Games in Paris. She receive a gilded porcelain bowl , a smattering of coverage in the newspaper and then nothing. “We didn’t have the coverage that we have today , ” say Paula D. Welch , a historian of woman in the Olympics whose sleuth uncovered Abbott’s triumph. “She come back. She get married. She raise her family. She play some golf , but she didn’t really pursue it in tournaments.” Only the second Olympics of the modern era , the 1900 Games be a scattershot affair , present in fit and start from May to October. There be no opening or closing ceremony , and the competition be little more than a puny appendage of the city’s main attraction that year : the Paris Exposition , familiarly know a the World’s Fair. As a result , many athlete be never make aware that the contest in which they play be be hold under Olympic auspices. Abbott be one of them. “The 1900 Olympics be a sideshow , because they be really an afterthought to the World’s Fair , ” Bill Mallon , an Olympic historian , recently said. “A lot of the event in 1900 be consider demonstration sports. It’s very hard to tell what be an Olympic sport and what be not.” Though men’s and women’s golf appear to have be earmark a Olympic event from the beginning , Welch say , few competitor seem to have realize the fact. Abbott apparently think that she be play in a small , self-contained tournament , hold at a course in Compiègne , some 50 mile north of Paris. She have enter it simply because she play golf and happen to be in France. “They be call it ‘Exposition Competition , ’ ‘Paris World’s Fair Competition , ’” Welch explained. “Because ‘Olympics’ wasn’t attach to it , she didn’t know.” When she die , at 76 , on June 10 , 1955 , in Greenwich , Conn. , Abbott remain unaware that she have ever be an Olympian , much less her country’s first female champion. Then , in the late 20th century , Welch’s work restore Abbott to her place on the podium. In the 1970s , while research her doctoral dissertation on American woman in the Summer Olympics , Welch come across fleeting reference to Abbott. “I say to myself , ‘I’m go to find out about her , ’” she recalled. “It take me 10 years.” Scouring newspaper morgue and United States Olympic Committee record , she confirm beyond doubt that Abbott have be the first American woman to win the equivalent of Olympic gold. She also begin cobble together the outline of a life : The daughter of Charles Abbott and the former Mary Perkins Ives , Margaret Ives Abbott be bear on June 15 , 1878 , in Calcutta , India , now know a Kolkata. After the death of her father , who be an American merchant there , when she be very young , Margaret move to Boston with her mother and siblings. When Margaret be a teenager , her mother — a writer whose work include the 1889 novel “Alexia” — take a job a the literary editor of The Chicago Herald , and the family move to Illinois. At the Chicago Golf Club , in Wheaton , Ill. , Margaret , who stand 5 foot 11 inch tall , take up the game. She be soon win local tournament and , by the turn of the century , be report to have a two handicap. “She could hit the long ball , ” say Welch , now a professor emerita of sport history at the University of Florida. Margaret Abbott during the golf event of the 1900 Olympic Games , where she shoot a 47 for nine hole and come in first among the 10 entrant , win the equivalent of a gold medal. USGA Museum In 1899 , Abbott and her mother travel to Paris , where Mary Abbott research a travel guide , “A Woman’s Paris , ” and Margaret study art with Rodin and Degas. She learn of the tournament at Compiègne , enter and find herself unwittingly in the Olympics. The 1900 Games be a sideshow indeed. Besides conventional summer sport , event include tug of war , kite fly , hot-air ballooning , fishing , firefighting , pigeon racing , pigeon shooting , and taxi and delivery truck racing. These be also the first Olympics in which woman be allow to compete. They take part in five sport : golf , tennis , sailing , equestrianism and croquet. Competing on Oct. 4 , Abbott shoot a 47 — it be a nine-hole tournament — place first in a field of 10 French and American women. All play in long skirt and fashionable hats. Mary Abbott , who have also enter , shoot a 65 and finish tie for seventh. To this day , the Abbotts be the only American mother and daughter to have compete in the same event at the same Games. Women’s golf would not be see again at the Olympics until 2016 , when it return at the Rio Games. The last men’s match before Rio be at the 1904 Games , in St. Louis. Abbott , who remain in France after the Games , go on to win a French championship before return to the United States in 1901. The next year she marry the renowned journalist and humorist Finley Peter Dunne , and they settle in New York. They have three son and a daughter. Like so many woman of her era , Abbott appear to have leave few imprint in the historical record. Her later-life domesticity be largely eclipse by the highly public work of her husband. Their son Philip Dunne also gain renown , become a screenwriter — his credit include “How Green Was My Valley” ( 1941 ) — and a famed public opponent of the Hollywood blacklist. In the mid-1980s , after track down Abbott’s survive family , Welch telephone Philip Dunne. By then , she learn , the gilded bowl his mother have win at Compiègne have long be lost. “Do you realize what your mother do ? ” Welch recall ask him. “Your mother be the first American Olympic champion.” “He be astound , ” Welch said. “She do not know , nor do her family know.” Margalit Fox be a senior writer in the obituary news department of The Times. Her nonfiction book “Conan Doyle for the Defense : The True Story of a Sensational British Murder , a Quest for Justice and the World’s Most Famous Detective Writer” will be publish in June .