March 22 , 1955 OBITUARY Walter White , 61 , Dies in Home Here By THE NEW YORK TIMES Walter White , executive secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , die last night of a heart attack at his home at his home , 242 East Sixty-eighth Street. He be 61 year old. Last October he twice enter the New York Hospital for treatment for a heart ailment that have cause him to take a leave of absence from his duties. Recently he have return from a month 's leisurely visit in Haiti and Puerto Rico. Yesterday he spend two hour at his office. Mr. White , the near approach to a national leader of American Negroes since Booker T. Washington , be a Negro by choice. Only five-thirty-seconds of his ancestry be Negro. His skin be fair , his hair blond , his eye blue and his feature Caucasian. He could easily have join the 12,000 Negroes who pass the color-line and disappear into the white majority every year in this country. But he deliberately sacrifice his comfort to publicize himself a a Negro and to devote his entire adult life to complete the emancipation of his people. Joined N.A.A.C.P. Early Walter Francis White be bear July 1 , 1893 , one of seven light-skinned children. Being bright and of a comparatively well-to-do family -- his father be a postman -- he be able to attend Atlanta Preparatory School and Atlanta University. After graduation in 1916 he become an insurance salesman. He become active in the local chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People a few year after it organization. James Weldon Johnson , then executive secretary of the N.A.A.C.P. , impress by the young man , hire him in 1918 a assistant secretary and bring him to New York. When Mr. Johnson retire in 1929 , Mr. White succeed him. From 1918 until 1929 the assistant secretary personally investigated forty-one lynching and eight race riots. Investigating the notorious race riot in Elaine , Ark. , in 1919 , in which three white and 200 Negroes be kill , he pose a a reporter for The Chicago Daily News. He interview some of the seventy-nine Negro men imprison , some lynchers , and even the Governor of the state , before escape on a train one jump ahead of a mob that have discover his identity. As head of an organization of 580,000 Negroes and white sympathizer , and unofficial champion of 14,000,000 Negroes , Mr. White be a powerful lobbyist for Federal anti-lynching , anti-poll-tax and anti-segregation laws. Influenced Presidents In 1938 he push a Federal anti-lynching bill nearer to passage than ever before in twenty year of effort. The bill be defeat only after seven week of filibuster by Southern Senators. In 1930 he help block the confirmation of President Hoover 's appointment of John J. Parker of North Carolina to the Supreme Court , because of the judge 's approval of racial segregation. He be the author of President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's executive order on Fair Employment Practices in war industry during World War II. And he be responsible for President Harry Truman 's stand on civil right that cause the Dixiecrat bolt from the Democrats in the 1948 campaign. Mr. White travel 1,000,000 mile , include two trip around the world , lecture and investigate racial discrimination. He make perhaps 10,000 public speech , write five book ( include two novel ) , a hundred article for national magazine , and for year write two weekly column , one syndicate in Negro newspaper and the other in white papers. During the Harlem race riot of Aug. 1 , 1943 , he and Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia tour the street all night in a limousine calm the agitated throngs. In 1939 he stag an open-air concert by Marian Anderson in Washington that attract 75,000 person after the Daughters of the American Revolution have refuse their hall to the Negro singer. From 1943 to 1945 he tour every war theatre a a special correspondent for The New York Post. He be on the Advisory Council for Government of the Virgin Islands in 1934 and 1935 , consultant to the United States delegation at the organization meeting of the United Nations in San Francisco in 1945 and consultant to the delegation at the General Assembly meeting in Paris in 1948. In 1922 Mr. White marry Leah Powell , an N.A.A.C.P. secretary. They have two child , Jane , now an actress , and Walter C. D. White. That marriage end in divorce. In 1949 , Mr. White marry Poppy Cannon. Besides his second wife , who be food editor of the magazine , House Beautiful , and his child , he leave three sister , Mrs. Eugene Martin and Miss Madeline White of Atlanta , and Mrs. Alice Glynn of Cleveland .