November 2 , 1955 OBITUARY Dale Carnegie , Author , Is Dead By THE NEW YORK TIMES Dale Carnegie , whose book `` How to Win Friends and Influence People '' be one of the world 's most phenomenal bestseller , die yesterday at his home , 27 Wendover Road , Forest Hills , Queens. He have be ill for some time. He would have be 67 year old on Nov. 24. Mr. Carnegie be bear in poverty on a Missouri farm , but find that a silver tongue could be more useful than a silver spoon in win wealth and fame. While a student at State Teachers College , Warrensburg , Mo. , he have to live at home because he be too poor to pay $ 1 a day for room and board. When he find he could not compete with the campus athlete for popularity , he take to public speaking. He felt this activity would cure his feeling of inferiority. After graduation in 1908 , Mr. Carnegie fail at several job before he start to earn a living here in 1912 a a teacher of public speaking in class at the Young Men 's Christian Association. By the time `` How to Win Friends and Influence People '' be publish in 1936 , Mr. Carnegie have become one of the country 's leading teacher of public speaking. Book a Sensation `` How to Win Friends and Influence People , '' originally publish by Simon & Schuster at $ 2 , be an immediate success. It rise rapidly in the best-seller list and make it author know wherever book be read. A spokesman for Simon & Schuster say yesterday that the book have sell 4,844,938 copy , of which 1,420,938 be in the hard-cover edition. It have have fifty-two printing in the paperback edition , while the regular edition have just go through it seventy-first printing. From last March to last September , more than 20,000 copy of the hardcover edition be sold. It have be translate into twenty-nine language and be say by the spokesman to be second only to the Bible in nonfiction sales. A review of the book in The New York Times of Feb. 14 , 1937 , say in effect that Mr. Carnegie 's prescription for success be to smile and be friendly , not to argue or find fault and never to tell another person he be wrong. The review observe that there be `` a subtle cynicism '' in this approach , but that the book offer some `` simple sound , practical common sense. '' Joined Debating Team Mr. Carnegie be bear in Maryville , Mo. , the second son of James William and Amanda Elizabeth Carnegie. After the family move to Warrensburg , Dale Carnegie find he have an aptitude for reciting , and while in high school join the debating team. He become so impressed with the style of a speaker at a Chautauqua lecture that he decide to emulate him. It be say he practice recitation on the horse he ride to and from college. Mr. Carnegie later become a salesman at Alliance , Neb. , for the International Correspondence Schools , and for the meat-packing concern of Armour & Co. By 1911 , when he have save $ 500 , an acquaintance persuade him to become an actor. He study at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts and later play the part of Dr. Hartley in a road show of `` Polly and the Circus. '' This experience turn him from the theatre. His career a a teacher of public speaking start soon thereafter. After a year and a half of Army service at Camp Upton on Long Island in World War I , Mr. Carnegie become business manager for Lowell Thomas , who be on a lecture tour. After the tour , Mr. Carnegie continue his teaching of public speaking. Mr. Carnegie 's first marriage end in divorce in 1931. On Nov. 5 , 1944 , at Tulsa , Okla. , he marry Mrs. Dorothy Price Vanderpool , who also have be divorced. Mrs. Carnegie later help her husband to establish special course for women. 450,000 Took Courses Since 1953 , the headquarters for all the Carnegie course have be in a converted five-story brownstone at 22 West Fifty-fifth Street. A spokesman there yesterday say that in the last forty year 450,000 person have take Mr. Carnegie 's courses. They be conduct in 750 city in this country and in fifteen foreign country under license issue by Dale Carnegie Publishers , Inc. About 50,000 person a year enroll in these course all over the world , the spokesman said. Among the other book write by Mr. Carnegie be `` Lincoln the Unknown '' ( 1932 ) ; `` Little Known Facts About Well Known People '' ( 1934 ) ; `` Five Minute Biographies '' ( 1937 ) ; `` Biographical Roundup '' ( 1945 ) , and `` How to Stop Worrying and Start Living '' ( 1948 ) . Mr. Carnegie 's advice for successful living might be sum up in two of his maxim : `` Forget yourself ; do thing for others , '' and `` Cooperate with the inevitable. '' In addition to his wife , Mr. Carnegie leave a daughter , Donna Dale , who will be 4 year old next month. Mrs. Carnegie also have a daughter , Rosemary , by her previous marriage .