September 28 , 1956 OBITUARY Babe Zaharias Dies ; Athlete Had Cancer Special to The New York Times GALVESTON , Tex. , Sept. 27 -- Mrs. Mildred ( Babe ) Didrikson Zaharias , famed woman athlete , die of cancer in John Sealy Hospital here this morning. She be 42 year old. Mrs. Zaharias have be under treatment since 1953 , when the malignant condition be discover after she have win a golf tournament. The tournament be one name for her- -the Babe Zaharias Open of Beaumont , Tex. , where she be reared. Mrs. Zaharias have fight valiantly against cancer for the last several months. She remain confident almost to the end that she would get well. Her final week be relatively free of pain , although the malignancy be general. Physicians here have perform a cordotomy -- a severing of certain nerve -- to relieve her of pain. A funeral service be schedule for tomorrow afternoon at the Bethlehem Lutheran Church in Beaumont. Mrs. Zaharias be survive by her husband , George , a professional wrestler , three brother , Ole Didrikson of Beaumont , Louis Didrikson of Newton and Arthur Didrikson of Baytown ; three sister , Mrs. Lillie Grimes of Beaumont , Mrs. Philip Koch of Palisades , Calif. , and Mrs. Dora Willis of Morristown , Ariz. Eisenhower Expresses Sadness Special to The New York Times WASHINGTON , Sept. 27 -- President Eisenhower pay tribute today to Mrs. Zaharias a a woman who have win the admiration of all Americans both in her sport career and in her fight against cancer. Mrs. Zaharias , who die this morning , have `` put up one of the kind of fight that inspire u all , '' the President tell his news conference. `` I think that every one of u feel sad that finally she have to lose this last one of all her battles. '' 'Greatest Female Athlete' From the time she make the headline during the 1932 Olympic Games at Los Angeles , win the javelin throw and 80-meter hurdle , Mrs. Zaharias reign a the world 's top all-around woman athlete. In 1949 she be vote the great female athlete of the half century by The Associated Press , a selection that surprise no one. The athletic career of Mrs. Zaharias be an unusual one. As a youngster -- she be bear on June 26 , 1914 , in Port Arthur , Tex. -- she excel at running , swimming , dive , high- jumping , baseball and basketball in addition to be adept with the javelin and at go over hurdles. She be a success at any sport she undertake and give conclusive proof of this with her prowess in golf -- a game she begin to play in 1935. At least part of Mrs. Zaharias ' success could be attribute to her power of concentration and diligence. When she decide to center her attention on golf , she tighten up her game by drive as many a 1,000 golf ball a day and playing until her hand be so sore they have to be taped. She develop an aggressive , dramatic style , hit down sharply and crisply on her iron shot like a man and average 240 yard off the tee with her woods. She begin win golf title in 1940. In that year she capture the Western and Texas Open Championships. These victory be forerunner of many to come. By the end of 1950 she have the distinction of have win every available golf title. Asked whether she have any idea of retire , Mrs. Zaharias answer in characteristic style : `` As long a I be improve I will go on , and besides , there 's too much money in the business to quit. '' Turned Professional in 1947 She turn professional in 1947 , after her triumph in the British Amateur championship , a distinction that she be the first American to earn. In 1948 she win the world championship tournament and the National Open. She repeat her victory in the `` world '' event the next three years. She be the runner-up in the Nationals in 1949 and come back to win it in 1950. Mrs. Zaharias be an athlete almost from the time she be strong enough to lift a baseball bat. She beat the boy at mumblety-peg , outsped them in foot race and outshine them in basketball and baseball. Her nickname of `` Babe , '' after Babe Ruth , be acquire after she have hit five home run in a baseball game. Instead of `` wasting time with doll , '' she condition herself by use a backyard weightlift machine build of broomstick and her mother 's flatirons. The athlete from Texas be a constant source of colorful story for newspaper men. She once pitch for the St. Louis Cardinals in an exhibition baseball game. She tour the United States give billiard exhibition and show her true versatility with a demonstration of needlework and typing. She could type eighty-six word a minute. She meet her future husband on a golf course in 1937. They be marry a year later and eventually set up house in Tampa , Fla. , just off a golf course they have purchase in 1951. There Mrs. Zaharias design a modern pushbutton kitchen and spent considerable time make chintz curtains. In April , 1953 , she undergo an operation for cancer in Beaumont , Tex. By July she have recover -- to play tournament golf again. Ten month after the surgery she win the $ 5,000 Serbin Women 's Open Tournament at Miami Beach. Won 1954 Women 's Open She regard her comeback a complete when she win the 1954 Women 's United States Open. Mrs. Zaharias ' margin be twelve stroke at Peabody , Mass. , a she recapture the title she have hold twice previously. `` It will show a lot of people that they need not be afraid of an operation and can go on and live a normal life , '' she comment shortly after this triumph. Early in 1955 , however , a hip pain sideline Mrs. Zaharias. After an operation for a ruptured spinal disk , her physician find that she be again suffer from cancer. She be in and out of the hospital repeatedly after that , undergo X-ray treatment for the disease , and early this year she successfully pull through a siege of pneumonia. But last July it become necessary to operate to relieve her pain from cancer , and the next month to operate again to bypass an intestinal obstruction. Her condition steadily become worse. Mrs. Zaharias accept stoically the news that the disease have returned. `` Well , that 's the rub of the green , '' she tell her husband. Together they establish the Babe Didrikson Zaharias Fund to support cancer clinic and treatment centers. Her autobiography , `` This Life I 've Led , '' a told to Harry Paxton , be publish late in 1955. And last July while critically ill , she establish the Babe Didrikson Zaharias trophy , to be award annually to the American woman amateur athlete who have do the most during the year for woman 's sports. Mrs. Zaharias win many golf prizes. One of these be the Ben Hogan Trophy , name for another famous golfing Texan. This be award to her in 1953 by the Golf Writers of America for overcome a physical handicap to play golf. She be the first winner of this trophy. During the latter stage of her career a a golfer it be estimate that she be earn more than $ 100,000 a year for exhibition , endorsement and other activity connect with sports. She draw a considerable salary from a sport good company that manufacture equipment bear her name. Mrs. Zaharias also dip into the journalistic field , write instructional article and a book entitle `` Championship Golf. '' While she captivate many with her versatile stunt a a youngster , it be her achievement and deportment later in life that gain for her the most popularity. As a young girl she have disdain lipstick , plaster her hair back and talk out of the side of her mouth. But a a top player and draw power in golf , her attitude and demeanor changed. The once lonely tomboy become a social success. She develop into a graceful ballroom dancer and become the life of many a social gathering. She be too skillful at gin rummy for most and at time , to change the pace at a party , she would take out a harmonica and give a rendition of hillbilly tune she have learn a a youngster. This change be the cause of a more convivial feeling toward her by rivals. In her young day her desire to win have serve to toughen her as far a any opponent be concerned. But in her late day , instead of goad her rival with , `` Yep , I 'm gon na beat you , '' she begin encourage the young girl on the golf circuit. Mrs. Zaharias be the sixth of seven child bear to Mr. and Mrs. Ole Didrikson. Her father be a Norwegian ship carpenter who have sail nineteen time around Cape Horn before settle down at Port Arthur .