October 7 , 1956 OBITUARY Charles Merrill , Broker , Dies ; Founder of Merrill Lynch Firm Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES Southampton , L.I. , Sunday , Oct. 7 -- Charles Edward Merrill , a directing partner of Merrill Lynch , Pierce , Fenner & Beane , investment banking and brokerage firm , die at his home on Dune Road early last night. His age be 70. In 1914 Mr. Merrill found the firm that grow into Merrill Lynch , Pierce , Fenner & Beane. His death be attribute to complication from a heart condition of log duration. Mr. Merrill , who have be in semi-retirement since he first suffer a heart attack in 1944 , become critically ill a week ago. He be survive by a daughter , Mrs. Robert A. Magowan of Oakland , Calif. ; two son , Charles E. Jr. of St. Louis and James I. of New York , and ten grandchildren. Funeral service will be hold in New York at the Protestant Episcopal Church of the Ascension , Fifth Avenue and Tenth Street. No date have be set yet. Burial will be in Palm Beach , Fla. Mr. Merrill be one of the first New York stockbroker to realize the importance of sell stock and bond to small investor by furnish for them simple , conservative and sound financial advice. A mine of provocative idea about how to interest the little and often Wall Street-shy man in acquire a stake in his country 's economy , Mr. Merrill be a frequent and firm spokesman for the importance of a free capital market in this nation of free enterprise. If Mr. Merrill have be addict to the I-told-you-so attitude , he could have point to a moment in the country 's financial history when he be painfully right. In 1928 , Mr. Merrill and Roger Babson be almost alone in the financial community in sense possible disaster in the stock market. Although Mr. Merrill be less widely know at the time and , unlike Mr. Babson , do not carry enough weight with his customer to depress the market , he be no less forceful in counsel caution. He be convince that the dizzy joy ride then under way would not last and his firm mail out a market letter in which he say : `` Now be the time to get out of debt. We think you should know that with a few exception all the large company finance by u today have no funded debt. This be not the result of luck but of carefully consider plan on the part of their management and ourselves to place these company in an impregnable position. The advice that we have give important corporation can be follow to advantage by all class of investors. We do not urge you to sell security indiscriminately , but we advise you in no uncertain term that you take advantage of present high price and put your own financial house in order. We recommend that you sell enough security to lighten your obligation , or good yet , pay them entirely. '' Learned a Lesson Many year later , when he be ask how he have come to the conclusion that caution be in order , Mr. Merrill say : `` The lesson that I have learn -- when stock be too high they come down -- stand me in good stead in 1928-29. '' It be estimate at the time of the stock market crash that Mr. Merrill 's foresight have save over $ 6,000,000 for his customers. Mr. Merrill 's concern for the small investor caught in the 1928 crash be so great that he beg President Calvin Coolidge to align himself with the more conservative Wall Street forces. He even offer to make Mr. Coolidge a partner in his firm. Mr. Merrill 's word of caution be lose in the thunderous stock market crash of October , 1929 , but he have place his firm , then E. A. Pierce & Co. , in the best possible position. It never have to borrow a dollar for it own account. Born in Florida Charles Edward Merrill be bear in Green Cove Springs , Fla. , on Oct. 19 , 1885. He be a son of Dr. Charles Morton Merrill , country physician and drug-store proprietor. His mother be the former Octavia Wilson. Young Charles do odd job about the drug store and have a newspaper route. After study at the secondary school of Florida 's Stetson University and at Worcester Academy , he attend Amherst College. He live in the small room in the Chi Psi fraternity house and wait on table to defray part of his expenses. During one year at Amherst he make $ 1,300 in commission sell men 's clothes for Renison & Coe of Springfield , Mass. Leaving Amherst after his sophomore year , Mr. Merrill edit a small newspaper in West Palm Beach , Fla. , and play a bit of semi-professional baseball. After a brief period in the New York office maintain by a group of textile manufacturer , Mr. Merrill enter upon the career in which he be to establish himself a one of the nation 's leaders. He join the firm of George H. Burr & Co. , a commercial paper house , and in a short time be head of the company 's new bond department. His salary in this new job be $ 25 a week , but he share in the profit and do very well. Founded Firm in 1914 Young Mr. Merrill 's hustle and his straightforward approach to his job gain him a high pay position with Eastman Dillon. However , he have long have the idea of own his own firm , and on Jan. 3 , 1914 , potential customer receive notice of the establishment of the firm of Charles E. Merrill & Co. The firm 's office consist of one room sublet from the Eastman Dillon firm. It be on the seventh floor of 7 Wall Street. By the middle of the year Mr. Merrill and a partner or two begin to expand the firm of Charles E. Merrill & Co. into the brokerage firm with a name so resound that Wall Street jokester say that it sound like a beer barrel be roll downstairs. Years later , it unroll itself a Merrill Lynch , Pierce , Fenner & Beane. In the early day Mr. Merrill and his associate -- the first one be a young bond salesman name Edmund C. Lynch -- face the struggle for survival that be the lot of most new Wall Street enterprises. There be time out from Wall Street for Mr. Merrill during World War I. He enlist in the United States Army and serve a a first lieutenant in the signal Corp 's fledgling air force. After his military service Mr. Merrill return to Wall Street and find the firm in good condition , thanks largely to a timely loan approve by Gates W. McGarragh , then president of the Mechanics and Metals Bank. Underwrote McCrory Stores The ingenuity of Mr. Merrill and his partner be test when they win their first big selling victory. They underwrite the McCrory Stores , a real coup for a firm with no capital. The prestige of the McCrory deal enable them to underwrite Kresge , Spicer , Superior Steel , Marland Oil , Safeway Stores , Grand Union , Dana and other similar concerns. There be some revers ; not all the organization they underwrite be successful. There be a debacle with Saxon Motors. Mr. Merrill recall that Saxon stock have always be offer frankly a a speculative venture. During World War I the Merrill firm add to it composition Winthrop H. Smith , a young Amherst man with extraordinary sale and executive ability. In 1928 , Mr. Smith become a Merrill Lynch partner and be finally the firm 's sale manager. By the early Twenties , Mr. Merrill and Mr. Lynch be long past the stage of conduct business meeting in the Public Library. They have many successful underwritings to their credit and they have come to be regard a expert in sell common stock on commission and in personal investments. Persons associate with Mr. Merrill long regard his creation of Safeway Stores a one of his great successes. By 1953 , Safeway Stores be the nation 's second large food chain. As a sideline -- one that be extraordinarily successful -- Mr. Merrill and his associate begin `` Family Circle , '' a mass circulation magazine that be one of the first for distribution in chain stores. Weathered Storms By the Thirties , Merrill Lynch & Co. operate a taut shop and come through in the face of many trials. Mr. Lynch die in 1938. In 1940 , Mr. Merrill 's firm become Merrill , E. A. Pierce & Cassett and it be not long until Fenner & Beane , a widely-known firm , have be draw into a merger. In 1941 , the Merrill firm become the firm that continue to expand in the middle Fifties. Mr. Merrill 's great capacity for hard work take it toll in 1944 when he develop a heart condition. He be force to curtail his activity for some time. Mr. Merrill amass great wealth and be widely interested in aid many of the nation 's educational and religious institutions. On April 12 , 1912 , Mr. Merrill marry Eliza Church. They have two child , Charles Edward and Doris , who marry Robert A. Magowan , chairman of the board of Safeway Stores , Inc. After the termination of this marriage by divorce , Mr. Merrill marry Hellen Ingram on Feb. 19 , 1925. One son , James Ingram Merrill , be bear to this marriage , which also end in divorce .