June 20 , 1956 OBITUARY Thomas J. Watson Sr. Is Dead ; I.B.M. Board Chairman Was 82 By THE NEW YORK TIMES Thomas J. Watson Sr. , who build the fabulous International Business Machines Corporation , die of a heart attack yesterday in Roosevelt Hospital. He be 82 year old and have be hospitalize since Sunday. Often call `` the world 's great salesman , '' Mr. Watson be the company 's board chairman at his death. On May 8 he have turn over the post of chief executive officer to his son , Thomas J. Watson Jr. , who have be president since Jan. 15 , 1952. The elder Mr. Watson last appear at his office in the subsidiary I.B.M. World Trade Corporation , of which he be also board chairman , on May 28. The office be at 807 United Nations Plaza. Mr. Watson have be live at his summer home , 88 Weed Street , New Canaan , Conn. , where he be stricken over the week-end. Present when he die be his wife and their four children. Mr. Watson be of that breed of capitalist to whom the accumulation of huge personal fortune and the building of a vast business empire become opportunity for the spreading of huge personal benefaction and the accomplishment of widespread public service. To a great extent , the International Business Machines Corporation be a reflection of the character of the man who lead it to a position of eminence among the business machine manufacturer of the world. From the slogan that adorn it wall in eighty nation and the expenditure make form it treasury for good work , to the method by which it introduce recruit to what may be call the I.B.M. way of life , the company be the creature of the man who command it for forty-two years. His be a time not so much of smoothly efficient , colorless corporate management a of intensely personal direction. Mr. Watson lead I.B.M. from an uncertain amalgam of small company to a position so akin to a monopoly that competitor and Government antitrust official hale it into court. It would have cost $ 2,750 to buy 100 share of the company 's stock in 1914 , the year Mr. Watson take over. Anyone exercise right accrue to those share through 1925 would have increase his cash investment to $ 6,364 for 153 shares. Such a person would now hold 3,990 share , and would have obtain a value of $ 2,164,000 base on market price this year and cash dividend of $ 209,000 pay thus far. Mr. Watson 's own first earnings be $ 6 a week. His I.B.M. compensation , base on salary and percentage of net profit , climb to a Government-announced $ 546,294 in 1940. It be surpass that year only by the $ 704,425 receive by Louis B. Mayer , motion-picture producer. During World War II , in 1942 , Mr. Watson choose to forego compensation on his company 's profit from war contracts. In 1943 the company report that Federal and state income tax combine have exceed his $ 427,349 compensation that year. His 1955 earnings be $ 346,590. Optimistic in Outlook The cloud of doom never gather on Mr. Watson 's horizon. Habitually he saw nothing but the best of day ahead. In the early day of the depression , he keep his plant go and add to his sale force. Even during that era 's darkest hour he refuse to lay off factory help. Instead , he pile up a massive inventory of part for which there be no immediate use. Today I.B.M. electronic computer come off assembly line in six United States city , and plant be be build in two others. The company have 200 office throughout the country. It operate factory also in Brazil , Canada , England , France , Germany , Italy , Japan , the Netherlands , Scotland and Sweden , and assembly plant in Argentina , Australia , Belgium , Norway and Switzerland. The company have 60,000 employes. Its gross asset last year be report a $ 629,510,998 , and it 1955 net income after tax reach a record total of $ 55,872,633. Mr. Watson be a tall , dignified man whose impeccable , ascetic appearance fail to suggest the variety of his interests. His activity include education , the art , opera , sail and horseback riding. He be bear Feb. 17 , 1874 , in Campbell , N. Y. , a small Steuben County community not far from the Pennsylvania line. His parent want him to become a lawyer , and his father , a lumber dealer , offer to send him to college. Although he be later to be honor with doctorate from many college and university , Mr. Watson cut short his formal education after a course in the Elmira School of Commerce. At Painted Post , N. Y. , he take a selling job in a store that carry sew machine , piano and organs. He move on to the National Cash Register company and rise to the post of general sale manager. It be during this period that he coin and adopt the motto `` THINK. '' He and his associate be work on advertising material but could not seem to make it sufficiently effective. To stimulate himself and others , Mr. Watson have a `` THINK '' sign make -- the first of thousand -- and hang it in the conference room. Slogan Always in Sight John H. Patterson , head of the company , be so impressed with it that he order copy for every office in his organization. Later , Mr. Watson make it possible for I.B.M. employes to gaze in almost any direction without lose sight of the admonition to `` THINK. '' His first job with the National Cash Register Company be an itinerant salesman. Mr. Watson be no smashing success , and after ten day on the road , during which he have not sell a machine , he return for a talk with his sale supervisor. The supervisor administer a pep talk , litter with homily of the kind that football coach find useful between the halves. The effect of this conference be such that Mr. Watson be ever afterward a champion of the catchword and of the idea that one of the chief duty of a supervisor be the encouragement of those below him. Mr. Watson 's personal rise start when , on May 1 , 1914 , he assume the presidency of the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company. This concern have be incorporate in June 1911. The Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company be a small organization when he take over with few than 400 employes. Its product be a punch-card tabulator , which have be invent in time for use in the 1890 census ; time clock and other business machines. In February , 1924 , the company be merge with the International Business Machines Corporation and assume it name. In talk to employ at Endicott , N. Y. , and later at other installation , Mr. Watson quickly set about expound his ideas. Industrial 'Family ' Concept He develop the concept of the industrial `` family , '' whose duty be first to the customer , who must receive good value for his money ; next to the member of the `` family , '' who must receive proper compensation ; and then to the owner of the corporation , who must receive profits. For the customer , Mr. Watson saw to it that new machine be devise to meet new need and new need be discover to stimulate the sale of new and old machines. One of his proud `` sell '' job be the negotiation of a $ 40,000 loan , without the customary collateral , from the Guaranty Trust Company of New York -- of which he later become a director. Most of the borrow fund be use for the establishment of an engineering laboratory for the development of new machines. Greatly enlarge , the corporation 's laboratory have contribute to the I.B.M. catalogue , which include computer , machine for simultaneously weigh and count item , translator for the simultaneous broadcast of a speech in several language , intricate calculating machine and other scientific specialties. Under Mr. Watson 's management , the company long have retain ownership of it machine , make them available under a system of annual rentals. In 1952 , the Government start a civil antitrust suit against I.B.M. , charge that the corporation own more than 90 per cent of all tabulate machine use in the United States. Its rental be estimate at $ 100,000,000 annually. The annual rental be estimate by Government lawyer to have amount to $ 250,000,000 before a consent decree be sign in Federal Court here last Jan. 25. Under this decree , the company agree to offer it machine for sale , to set up a separate company to service machine , to supply part and data to other company service equipment and to release it patent for licensing. Mr. Watson 's wide civic activity range from the presidency of the old Merchants Association here to host for city celebration for king , president and dignitary of many descriptions. In the international area , his slogan be `` World Peace Through World Trade. '' He have serve a president of the International Chamber of Commerce. His United Nations effort include a gift of a $ 25,000 demountable stage for the General Assembly hall here. A recipient of many award and degree , Mr. Watson have be a trustee of Columbia University for twenty-three years. Dr. Grayson Kirk , the university 's president , say yesterday his interest in the university have be wide , from the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory , which he establish at 612 West 115th Street , to annual alumnus reunions. Was Friend of Presidents A friend of Presidents , Mr. Watson help to bring General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower to Columbia a president. The late President Franklin D. Roosevelt name Mr. Watson United States Commissioner General to the 1937 International Exposition in Paris. Former President Harry S. Truman confer the Medal for Merit on him in 1947 for his war service and in 1948 appoint him a special ambassador to the jubilee of Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands. Mr. Watson 's philanthropy include Protestant , Roman Catholic , Jewish and nonsectarian organizations. In 1955 , he give $ 1,000,000 to the Genesee ( N. Y. ) Conference of the Methodist Church. He have be active in the Boy Scouts and the Masonic organization and in art and many other programs. His home here be at 4 East Seventy-fifth Street. I.B.M. headquarters be at 590 Madison Avenue , at Fifty-seventh Street. Mr. Watson be survive by his widow , the former Jeanette M. Kittredge , whom he marry April 17 , 1913 ; another son , Arthur K. Watson , president of the foreign subsidiary ; two daughter , Mrs. John N. Irwin 2d , wife of a New York lawyer , and Mrs. Walker C. Buckner of Bronxville , N. Y. , wife of a New York investment banker ; two sister , Mrs. Richard G. Day of Schenectady , N. Y. , and Mrs. Frank B. Earl of Columbus , Ohio , and fifteen grandchildren. A funeral service will be hold at 11 A. M. tomorrow at the Brick Presbyterian Church , 1140 Park Avenue , at Ninety-first Street. The Rev. Dr. Paul A. Wolfe will officiate. Burial will be in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery , Tarrytown , N. Y. Mr. Watson 's body will repose at the church chapel today from 2 to 8 P. M. All company facility throughout the world will be close tomorrow .