November 21 , 1957 OBITUARY Gerard Swope , 84 , Ex-G.E. Head , Dies By THE NEW YORK TIMES Gerard Swope , former president of the General Electric Company and onetime chairman of the New York City Housing Authority , die yesterday at his home , 161 East Seventy-ninth Street. He be 84 year old. Although retire , Mr. Swope keep office hour until last Friday , when he become ill with a cold. He die of pneumonia. Until last December he reside at his estate , The Croft , near Ossining , N.Y. Up to three year ago he be a familiar figure rid horseback early every morning along bridle trail in the area. Mr. Swope 's fascination with electricity start in his early childhood. As a boy in St.. Louis where he be bear Dec. 1 , 1872 he tinker with electric toy and appliance , and read book on the subject. In his high school day he draw plan for a motor. His father , Isaac Swope , a watchcase manufacturer , purchase the necessary casings. To the surprise of his family , the motor actually work , and the decision be make to send him to Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In the summer of 1893 , after have complete his second year at M.I.T. , young Swope decide to visit the World 's Fair at Chicago. Lacking fund , he obtain a daytime job -- '' it be a dirty , oily job , '' he say later -- with General Electric in Chicago , and visit the fair in the evenings. Thus do his name enter , for the first time , the book of the company he later be to head. `` Swope , G. , helper , per day , $ 1 , '' the notation read. Received E. E. Degree Two year later , he graduate from M. I. T. with a degree in electrical engineering. Times be hard , but a foreman for the Western Electric Company grudgingly put him to work pull transformer apart in the company 's Chicago plant -- again at $ 1 a day. A few year later Mr. Swope become a design engineer in the power apparatus department and in 1901 he be send to St. Louis to organize an office of the company. In 1906 Mr. Swope return to Chicago to take charge of the company 's power apparatus business. Two year later he be general sale manager in the New York office. He become a vice president and director in charge of commercial work in the United States and of the manufacturing , engineering and commercial work in the foreign field in 1913. In his twenty year with Western Electric he open several branch in this country and also in China and Japan. During World War I Mr. Swope be a member of the general staff of the Army , serve a assistant director of purchase , storage and traffic. For this service he receive the Distinguished Service Medal from this country , the Order of the Rising Sun from Japan and be make a Chevalier of the French Legion of Honor. After the war Mr. Swope become president of the International General Electric Company. In 1922 he be make president of the General Electric company. Under his guidance General Electric 's sale increase steadily. Before 1922 the only product it sell directly to the public on the basis of mass production and wide distribution be the incandescent electric lamp. Its principal product have be apparatus for generate , transmit and control electricity. Under Mr. Swope 's direction the company begin extensive manufacture of electric appliance for home use. Director of N. B. C. Mr. Swope be also closely identify with the development of the radio and radio accessories. He be a director of the National Broadcasting Company , the RCA Phototone Company , the RCA Victor Company and the RCA Radiotron Company. He be also a director in fourteen other company associate with the electric and power industry. In 1939 , after eighteen year a president , Mr. Swope relinquish the office. He have reach G. E. 's retirement age of 67. Soon thereafter he become chairman of the New York City Housing Authority , a full-time job. He leave that post in 1942 to resume the presidency of G. E. for two year while Charles Edward Wilson serve with the War Production Board. At Mr. Wilson 's return Mr. Swope be elect honorary president. Both during his busy industrial career and after retirement from it Mr. Swope be active in a variety of organization and a leader in many of them. For the last few year he have be chairman of Queensview , Kingsview and Queensview West , privately finance cooperative housing project for middle-income families. It be a voluntary , unpaid position inspire by Mr. Swope 's interest in provide good housing for this group. Queensview , in Long Island City , Queens , be build in 1950 ; Kingsview , in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn , be complete last year , and Queensview West , also in Long Island City , will be open shortly. Among the organization he head be national Mobilization for Human Needs , National Electrical Manufacturers Association , Westchester County Park Commission , Business Advisory and Planning Council , Department of Commerce ; Eighth American Red Cross Roll Call , Greenwich House in New York , Citizens Committee for Reciprocal World Trade and the Institute of Pacific Relations. In 1931 Mr. Swope propose the `` Swope Plan '' for stabilize industry. It emphasize the responsibility of industry for prevent unemployment and include a provision for unemployment insurance. For this proposal and other social service he receive the gold medal of the National Academy of Social Sciences in 1932. Ten year later he win the Hoover Medal for his `` Constructive public service in the field of social , civic and humanitarian effort. '' Honorary degree be confer on Mr. Swope by Union College and Rutgers , Colgate and Washington Universities and by Stevens Institute of Technology. Last May , Mr. Swope , accompany by his daughter , visit Israel for the first time. He receive an honorary Doctor of Science in technology from the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa. In 1901 Mr. Swope marry Miss Mary Dayton Hill , who die in 1955. Surviving be three son , Gerard Jr. and David , both of Westchester County , and John of Beverly Hills , Calif. , and his daughter , Miss Henrietta H. Swope , an astronomer at the Mount Wilson Observatory in Pasadena , Calif. Mr. Swope also leave his younger brother , Herbert Bayard Swope , former executive editor of The World and first State Racing Commissioner .