October 24 , 1957 OBITUARY Dior , 52 , Creator Of 'New Look , ' Dies By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS MONTECATINI , Italy , Thursday , Oct. 24 -- Christian Dior , for many year the leader in the world of fashion design , die here early today of a heart attack. His age be 52. M. Dior , who tend to conservative suit and tie for his own attire , die at the Hotel La Place. He have be vacation in northern Italy for the last week. M. Dior 's great feat be the `` New Look '' in 1947 , when he seize and hold for France the style leadership of the world after it have threaten to pass to the United States in the post-war years. For his achievement the French Government award the Legion of Honor to him. Because his business sense match his creative genius , M. Dior make fashion pay off. In 1953 his business total $ 17,000,000. He always deny any intention of make fashion sensations. `` Changes just come about and many thing contribute when everybody be ready for them , '' he once said. In a book , he write that style go in cycle , with a complete revolution about every seven years. The post-war year 1947 , he say , be the psychological time to bring back femininity. One of his precept be `` to make elegant woman more beautiful ; to make beautiful woman more elegant. '' 'Tyrant of Hemlines' Crowned by tacit consent a monarch of the haute couture ( but sometimes also a the `` tyrant of the hemline '' ) M. Dior once credit the fame of his creation to this credo : Please the lady by enable them to please their men. `` Cri-cri , '' a he be call by his intimate , be by his scope as well a by his style Designer Number One in the world of high fashion. He branch out faster and far than any other couturier ever had. The Dior interest at his death include not only the original Maison Dior on the Avenue Montaigne in Paris -- a business structure of mirrored and chandeliered elegance -- but also Dior enterprise in twenty-four country , report gross $ 15,000,000 a year. His creation of the long hemline and full skirt in 1947 set off an international controversy , but clearly re-established Paris on it fashion throne. But behind the vast Dior enterprise be always the plump , pink-cheeked master , who twice each year go into seclusion to create the new designs. And much of that time each year he spend in the bathtub , usually his Empire tub of green marble line with silvery metal and fit with swan's-head faucets. There he soak , and ponder a new line , and sketch his idea on scrap of paper. M. Dior 's `` New Look '' come out about a year after he have establish his own salon , but he create almost a much of a sensation three year ago with his `` H-line , '' often call the `` flat look. '' Other Dior innovation include the Zigzag ( generous decollete ) , the Vertical ( high value on the bosom , leave to the leg their length and elegance ) , the Oval ( underline the roundness of the hip ) , the Profile ( `` precision '' in mold the contour ) and the Tulip ( high bosom ) . 'Luxury Must Be Defended' M. Dior saw more than mere cloth-cutting in his world of fashion. `` In a machine age , '' he once declare , `` dressmaking be one of the last refuge of the human , the personal , the inimitable. In an epoch as somber a ours , luxury must be defend inch by inch. '' He have no intention , a a young man , to become a dressmaker. The son of a wealthy chemical fertilizer manufacturer , young Dior -- bear at Granville , France , on Jan. 21 , 1905 -- be expect to go into diplomacy. He prepare for college at Janson de Sailly , the fashionable Paris preparatory school , and then be send to the School of Political Science of the University of Paris. But at the age of 23 , influence by friendship he have form with a number of artist , he turn his back on diplomacy to become an art dealer. His art gallery be say to have be among the first to exhibit surrealist painting , display picture by such friend of his a Salvador Dali , Christian Berard and Jean Cocteau. In 1934 Mr. Dior become ill and be force to give up the little art gallery. He spend a year convalescing , then return to Paris during the world-wide crisis of the Nineteen Thirties. The Dior family have lose much of their fortune and young Dior have to do something more than sell picture to exist. The Figaro Illustrated engage him a an illustrator for a weekly page devote to haute couture. His design for hat quickly capture feminine fancy in Paris , and Agnes , the famous Place Vendome milliner , order entire collection from him. He go briefly into dress design for Piguet , but then the war break out and he be muster into the French Army a a private first class in the Engineers. In 1941 he become a designer again , this time for Lucien Lelong. In 1946 , when the French Ministry of Production lift cloth rationing , M. Dior , with the backing of Marcel Boussac , French cotton millionaire , set up his own salon. It be almost big business from the start , operate on term of big business unknown to other firm in the fashion world. The Dior organization include general statistical survey , the control of revenue and cost through the use of business machine and a program against copy that permit the immediate identification of dress sell in France and overseas. M. Dior , who remain a bachelor , once be describe a `` diffident , unassuming , balding. '' He be a hard worker , often insist that his lunch -- usually a salad , boil ham and fruit -- be take to him in his studio , where the light often stay ablaze long into the night. A Dior presentation be one of the high point of the fashion world , but M. Dior once describe the opening of his show this way : `` The dressing room be a picture of hell , whereas to the public it have to appear a a bouquet . ''