March 29 , 1958 OBITUARY W. C. Handy , Composer , Is Dead ; Author of 'St. Louis Blues , ' 84 By THE NEW YORK TIMES W. C. Handy , composer of the jazz classic `` St. Louis Blues , '' die before dawn yesterday at the age of 84. He have be in Sydenham Hospital in Harlem since Sunday with acute bronchial pneumonia. Mr. Handy suffer a stroke three year ago. Since then he have be able to travel only in a wheelchair. With the exception of a few special occasion , he have be confine to his home at 19 Chester Drive , Yonkers. At his bedside when Mr. Handy die be his wife , Mrs. Irma Louise Logan Handy , whom he marry three year ago ; two son , William C. Handy Jr. and Wyer Handy ; a daughter , Mrs. Katherine Lewis ; a brother , Charles , and a grandson , William C. Handy 3d. Mr. and Mrs. Handy have plan to fly to St. Louis on April 7 for the opening of the Paramount film `` St. Louis Blues , '' a fictionalized biography of the composer , and feature , of course , many of his blue songs. The film will open also in New York and other major city on the same date. In announce Mr. Handy 's death , radio station throughout the country play `` St. Louis Blues , '' `` Memphis Blues , '' `` Beale Street Blues '' and other of his song in tribute to him throughout the day. Honored at Party Here Mr. Handy 's last public appearance be on Nov. 17 , 1957 , at a birthday party for him in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. More than 800 actor , musician and public personality gather in the Grand Ballroom to hail the `` father of the blues. '' President Eisenhower , Vice President Richard M. Nixon and Governor Harriman be among the notable who send telegram of congratulations. Mayor Wagner proclaim `` W. C. Handy Week '' in New York. William Christopher Handy , son of emancipated slave , rise from an Alabama log cabin to a Westchester mansion by capture in song the melancholia of all loneliness and the sadness of his race. Yet the composer of more than sixty other melody , be outwardly cheerful , despite blindness during his late years. Moon-faced and benign , with the deep chest of the trumpet player , the chunky composer be a bit of a philosopher. One day , in his eighty , he tell school child how , in his youth , he have sleep on cobblestone and Mississippi levees `` and hear the roustabout sing on the steamboat and it hang in my ears. '' He pat his trumpet and say : `` Life be something like this trumpet. If you do n't put anything in it you do n't get anything out. And that 's the truth. '' By then most of his friend be dead and , though the music for `` I hate to see that evenin ' sun go down '' be still in most jazz repertoire , his blue style , so popular for thirty year , seem to have yield to new jazz fads. This do not disturb Mr. Handy 's good cheer. `` The Negroes , '' he say , `` invented jazz , and the white folk make an industry out of it. '' In a sense politics start the `` blue '' in 1910. In that year Mr. Handy write a campaign song for Edward H. Crump that help the `` Boss '' to become Mayor of Memphis. The song become more widely know than the Mayor after it be record in 1917 a `` Memphis Blues , '' which describe `` that melancholy strain , that ever-haunting strain be like a darky 's sorrow song. '' Mr. Handy be bear on Nov. 16 , 1873 , in Florence Ala. His father and grandfather be Methodist preacher , pastor of the first Negro church in that community. Describing his early childhood in his autobiography publish in 1941 under the title `` Father of the Blues , '' Mr. Handy recall that his upbringing be rather more strict than that of most of his white contemporaries. `` With all the difference , '' he write , `` most of my forebear have one thing in common : if they have any musical talent , it remain buried. My mother admit a fondness for the guitar , but she could not play it because the church put a taboo on such instruments. '' When a small boy , Mr. Handy save enough money to buy a guitar of his own , but his father order him to trade it for a dictionary. At 15 he graduate into a minstrel show from his school sing class , only to return home when the travel show run out of money. His second venture from home , with 20 cent in his pocket , have a it goal the World 's Far in Chicago in 1893. The year follow find him alternately employ , penniless , hungry and cold , and in St. Louis he reach his nadir. `` I have try to forget that first sojourn in St. Louis , '' he once said. But he must never quite have obliterate it all from his memory , for out of the experience grow `` St. Louis Blues. '' Written in 1914 , it set the pattern for hundred of blue songs. Upon that melancholy composition a whole new school of popular music writing be based. From it simple , sob lyric of frustration grow score of song that later be to become the `` torch numbers. '' Organized Minstrels Mr. Handy 's break into the theatre occur at the turn of the century. Before that he have eked out his musical education at the Negro Agricultural and Mechanical College near Huntsville , Ala. From this time on he be increasingly successful in organize orchestra and minstrel and in arrange the popular tune of the day for minstrel performance. In 1898 Mr. Handy marry his boyhood sweetheart , Elizabeth V. Price. They have six children. She die in 1937. In 1954 , when he be 80 year old , Mr. Handy marry his secretary. President and treasurer of the Handy Brothers Music Company , Mr. Handy be a member of the American Federation of Musicians and the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers. He also belong to the Negro Actors Guild. Mr. Handy have be totally blind since he fell from a subway station platform in 1943 and suffer a skull fracture. He have lose his sight after World War I , but have partially regain it. In late year , his work have be perform at the Stadium Concerts here. He be in the audience a few year ago when Louis Armstrong wind up a world tour there by play `` St. Louis Blues . ''