July 18 , 1959 OBITUARY Billie Holiday Dies Here at 44 ; Jazz Singer Had Wide Influence BY THE NEW YORK TIMES Billie Holiday , famed jazz singer , die yesterday in Metropolitan Hospital. Her age be 44. The immediate cause of death be give a congestion of the lung complicate by heart failure. Miss Holiday have live at 26 West Eighty-seventh Street. She have be under arrest in her hospital bed since June 12 for illegal possession of narcotics. Miss Holiday set a pattern during her most fruitful year that have prove more influential than that of almost any other jazz singer , except the two who inspire her , Louis Armstrong and the late Bessie Smith. Miss Holiday become a singer more from desperation than desire. She be name Eleanora Fagan after her birth in Baltimore. She be the daughter of a 13-year-old mother , Sadie Fagan , and a 15-year-old father who be marry there year after she be born. The first and major influence on her singing come when a a child she run errand for the girl in a near-by brothel in return for the privilege of listen to recording by Mr. Armstrong and Miss Smith. Miss Holiday take her professional name from her father , Clarence Holiday , a guitarist who play with Fletcher Henderson 's band in the Nineteen Twenties and from one of the favorite movie actress of her childhood , Billie Dove. She come to New York with her mother in 1928. They eked out a precarious living for a while , partially from her mother 's employment a a housemaid. But when the depression struck , her mother be unable to find work. Miss Holiday try to make money scrub floor , and when this fail she start along Seventh Avenue in Harlem one night look for any kind of work. At Jerry Preston 's Log Cabin , a night club , she ask for work a a dancer. She dance the only step she know for fifteen chorus and be turn down. The pianist , take pity on her , ask if she could sing. She brashly assure him that she could. She sing `` Trav'lin ' All Alone '' and then `` Body and Soul '' and get a job -- $ 2 a night for six night a week work from midnight until about 3 o'clock the next afternoon. Recommended to Goodman Miss Holiday have be sing in Harlem in this fashion for a year or two when she be hear by John Hammond , a jazz enthusiast , who recommend her to Benny Goodman , at that time a relatively unknown clarinet player who be the leader on occasional recording sessions. She make her first recording , `` Your Mother 's Son-in-Law '' in November , 1933 , sing one nervous chorus with a band that include in addition to Mr. Goodman , Jack Teagarden , Gene Krupa and Joe Sullivan. Two year later Miss Holiday start a series of recording with group lead by Teddy Wilson , the pianist , which establish her reputation in the jazz world. On many of these recording the accompany musician be member of Count Basie 's band , a group with which she felt a special affinity. She be particularly close to Mr. Basie 's tenor saxophonist , the late Lester Young. It be Mr. Young who give her the nickname by which she be know in jazz circle -- Lady Day. She in turn create the name by which Mr. Young be identify by jazz band , `` Pres. '' She be the vocalist with the Basie band for a brief time during 1937 and the next year she sign for several month with Artie Shaw 's band. Miss Holiday come into her own a a singing star when she appear at Cafe Society in New York in 1938 for the major part of the year. It be at Cafe Society that she introduce one of her best-known song , `` Strange Fruit , '' a biting depiction of a lynch write by Lewis Allen. During that engagement , too , she establish trade-marks that follow her for many year -- the swatch of gardenia in her hair , her finger snap lazily with the rhythm , her head cock back at a jaunty angle a she sang. Arrested in 1947 In 1947 , a cloud that have be gather over Miss Holiday and which be to cover the rest of her career , burst on her. She be arrest for a narcotics violation and , at her own request , be commit to a Federal rehabilitation establishment at Alderson , W. Va. , for a year and a day in an attempt to rid herself of the habit. Ten day after her release Miss Holiday give a concert at Carnegie Hall to a packed house but , although she appear at concert hall in New York from time to time after that , she be not allow to appear in New York night clubs. As a result of her narcotic conviction , she could not get the necessary cabaret license. During the Nineteen Fifties Miss Holiday 's voice begin to lose it useful elasticity. This , combine with occasional brush with narcotic agent , make her last year difficult , although she continue to record frequently. Miss Holiday appear in a film , `` New Orleans , '' in 1946 and be feature in a Broadway revue for a short run a few year later. In 1954 she make a tour of Europe and be feature in a widely acclaimed television program , `` The Sound of Jazz , '' in 1958. She be survive by her husband , Louis McKay. A previous marriage , to Joe Guy , a trumpet player , end in divorce .