April 10 , 1959 OBITUARY Frank Lloyd Wright Dies ; Famed Architect Was 89 Special to The New York Times PHOENIX , Ariz. , April 9 -- Frank Lloyd Wright , regard by many a the great architect of the twentieth century , die early today in St. Joseph 's Hospital. He be 89 year old. Mr. Wright , who have consider himself to be `` the great living architect , '' be admit to the hospital Monday night for emergency surgery to remove an intestinal obstruction. His physician say he be `` get along satisfactorily and then suddenly died. '' From his estate , Taliesin West , northeast of Phoenix , Mr. Wright design a new Capitol for Arizona. He propose an `` oasis in the desert , it fountain and greenery contrasting with the sand and rock around it. '' The plan create a controversy , but be rejected. When a group of architect propose a skyscraper type of building for a Capitol , Mr. Wright look at the drawing and describe it a `` a sidewalk-happy chimneypot with a derby hat on top , a poor version of a poor original -- the United Nations Building in New York. '' This be typical of Mr. Wright 's comment , for which he be almost as well know a his buildings. He condemn retire at 60 a a `` murderous custom '' and plead for a curb to America 's `` lust for ugliness. '' A gradual change in the architect 's fame , fortune and attitude might have be mark on May 28 , 1953 , when he receive the Gold Medal Award of the National Institute of Arts and Letters. He then say : `` A shadow fall ; I feel come on me a strange disease -- humility. '' From Radical to Leader During his lifetime Mr. Wright be in turn the great radical of American architecture and the acknowledged leader of a flourishing modern school of building. This change in status of the white-haired iconoclast of American architecture do not evolve through any relaxation of his uncompromising theory that form in building should follow function , but rather in the public 's gradual acceptance of his doctrine and deviations. Hailed in Europe in his early year a the creator of an American architecture , he do not so readily gain acceptance in his own country , where the skyscraper be king. Although train by Louis Sullivan , who be know a the `` father of the skyscraper , '' Mr. Wright be strong in his condemnation of that peculiarly American architectural phenomenon. Mr. Wright scathingly condemn the topless tower of New York. He have no use for the great steel and stone city ; he denounce the `` box '' house in this country , declare that `` a box be more of a coffin for the human spirit than an inspiration. '' His own philosophy of architecture be enunciate in low terrain-conforming home that become know a `` prairie architecture '' ; in functional office building of modest height utilize such material a concrete slab , glass brick and tube ; in such monumental structure a the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo that withstand the great earthquake of 1923. Native of Wisconsin Mr. Wright be bear on June 8 , 1869 , at Richland Center , Wis. , the son of William Cary Wright and the former Anna Lloyd-Jones. His family be intensely religious. His father become a minister , and give Mr. Wright a religious training. From his mother , who be a school teacher , it be say that he develop the idea of be an architect. From both parent he develop a strong individuality and the rebellious quality that characterize him and his work. As a boy he attend public school in Wisconsin and then be send to the University of Wisconsin to study civil engineering. Deciding he want to be an architect , Mr. Wright leave college in his last year and head not for Paris and the Ecole de Beaux Arts , but , with his typical individuality , for Chicago. There he find work in the drafting room of Mr. Sullivan , the French-Irish Bostonian who have rebel against classic architecture taught in France and at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Although he and Mr. Sullivan be inevitably to disagree , they have in common an opposition against the classic form. Mr. Sullivan teach the young apprentice the ground rule of architecture and instill in him his idea for radical design. After four year they quarrel and Mr. Wright set up his own office. But throughout his life he refer to Mr. Sullivan , who die in 1927 , a `` der Meister '' and freely acknowledge his great debt to the man who build the famed Wainwright Building in St. Louis and the Chicago Auditorium. Trip to Germany Mr. Wright naturally take to rebellion. From the very begin his design be different from anything that have be build before -- '' designed-for-living '' bungalows. He build the first one for himself. It be the home for his bride , the former Catherine Tobin , whom he marry when he be 21. She be 19. They meet at a church social , married and go to live at Oak Park , a Chicago suburb note for it many churches. There the Wrights 's six child be bear : Lloyd and John , who become architect ; Catherine , David , Frances and Llewellyn. The architect 's Oak Park house be low bungalow , free of fancy woodwork , dormer window , corner tower or tower chimneys. The horizontal plane of the structure be accentuated. They `` hug the earth. '' Among architects the house create a sensation. Soon Mr. Wright 's design become know in this country a `` prairie architecture '' because they fit so snugly into the flat landscape for which they be made. In Europe they be widely hail and in Germany several book be write about them and a portfolio of them be published. America , for the most part , still choose to ignore both the builder and his creations. Suddenly Mr. Wright gain fame , not through his already substantial contribution to modern American architecture , but through scandal and tragedy. In 1909 he go to Germany to arrange for publication of the portfolio of his work and some essay on architecture he have written. A short time before , he have build a house for E. H. Cheney , a neighbor at Oak Park. When the architect sail for Germany , Mrs. Cheney go with him. When they return , Mr. Wright build perhaps his most famous structure , his own home , Taliesin ( `` Shining brow '' in his ancestral Welsh ) , in Spring Green , Wis. He build his country home on a commanding site overlook the Wisconsin River. It be to be a `` refuge '' for Mrs. Cheney , whose husband have divorce her. On Aug. 15 , 1914 , tragedy strike Taliesin. Mrs. Cheney , her two child and four other person be kill by a crazed servant , who also burn the house to the ground. Mr. Wright later rebuild Taliesin , determine , a he say , `` to wipe the scar from the hill. '' Meanwhile , publication in Germany of Mr. Wright 's work have come to the attention of the Emperor of Japan , who , in the fall of 1915 send a delegation of official and architect to see him and to ask him to submit plan for a $ 4,500,000 hotel the Emperor hop to build in Tokyo. The architect make sketch , which be accept , and he go to Japan to superintend the building of the hotel. His great problem be to foil the earthquake that periodically bring destruction and death to Japan. The brilliance with which he solve his problem be demonstrate twice -- once before the hotel be complete , when a minor quake shook Tokyo , and again when it have be up for two years. The Imperial Hotel be an elastic structure , the wall and floor have a sliding quality never before attained. Its plumbing be design so that pipe would not break and the electric wiring be place so that temblor would not cause short circuit and charge the building with high- voltage death. It be complete in 1922. A year later fierce quake rock Tokyo and Yokohama. Nearly 100,000 person die under collapse wall and fall roof or be burn to death in the holocaust that followed. Days later , when communication between Tokyo and the outside world be re- establish , word go out that the Imperial Hotel be the only large structure that have survive the disaster. In the next few year domestic trouble continue to harass the architect. He have be estrange from his first wife , who finally consent to divorce him after his return from Tokyo. His second marriage , to Miriam Noel , a sculptor , be brief. They be marry in 1923 and divorce in 1927. The next year Mr. Wright marry Olga Lazovich. They have a daughter , Iovanna. In 1927 , when he lose Taliesin by foreclosure of a mortgage , Mr. Wright call in his friend , many of them wealthy business men , and incorporate himself under Wisconsin law , sell stock on his earn power. He regain Taliesin , build several house and plan extensive project , most of which be too `` visionary '' and do not materialize. In 1929 he incorporate himself again and establish the Taliesin Fellowship Foundation , where he train many apprentice architects. Through controversy and criticism the architect rise steadily while his critic declare he be not only ahead of his time , but also ahead of all time , and his disciple and admirer make extravagant claim for his work. In 1940 , when a comprehensive exhibition of Mr. Wright 's work be show in New York , he be reckon a a great force in American architecture , but not a the last word. Gradually he begin to gain vogue and commissions. Among the structure for which the architect become famous be the Midway Gardens in Chicago , the Larkin Company administration building in Buffalo , the S. C. Johnson Company building at Racine , Wis. ; the Falling Water House of Edgar J. Kaufmann at Bear Run , Pa. , which he build above a waterfall , and the Price Tower at Bartlesville , Okla. There also be the circular Friedman house near Pleasantville , N.Y. , in a cooperative development know a Usonia Houses. Usonia be the descriptive word use by Mr. Wright to typify what he consider to be the ideal American architectural style. Taliesin West Added He add Taliesin West , his own home in Phoenix , Ariz. , to the rapidly grow list of Wright showplace throughout the nation. This home , situate in Paradise Valley , he use a he do Taliesin East , a headquarters for his foundation teach program. Approximately forty young apprentice architect yearly spend the term from April through November in the Wisconsin Taliesin and from December through March in the Arizona home. One of Mr. Wright 's large commission be the $ 10,000,000 campus of Florida Southern College in Lakewood. The project be begin in 1936 and sixteen structure be to be complete by 1960. Again Mr. Wright receive mixed reaction for one of the edifice -- a modern chapel building. Even a an octogenarian who have receive many prize and honor , include election to the American Academy of Art and Letters , the white-haired individualist be still capable of stir up the critics. Mr. Wright be the author of many book , include `` Modern Architecture '' and `` Two Lectures on Architecture , '' 1931 ; `` An Autobiography , '' and `` The Disappearing City , '' 1932 ; `` An Organic Architecture , '' 1939 ; `` When Democracy Builds , '' 1945 ; `` Genius and Mobocracy , '' 1949 ; `` An American Architecture , '' 1955 , and `` A Testament , '' 1957. Honors Bestowed He receive the Royal Gold Medal for Architecture from King George VI in 1941 , the Gold Medal of the American Institute of Architects in 1949 , the Italian Star of Solidarity in 1951 and the Gold Medal of the City of Florence in 1951. Mr. Wright hold honorary degree from Wesleyan , Princeton University , the University of Venice and Florida Southern. He be an honorary member of the Academie Royale de Beaux Arts of Antwerp , the Akademie der Kunst of Berlin , the Royal Institute of British Architects and of the National Academies and architectural society in Mexico , Portugal , Uruguay , Cuba , Brazil and Finland. He be a member of the National Academy of Design , the American Institute of Decorators and Phi Delta Theta. Rejections be still possible even to the famous octogenarian. His plan for a building in Yosemite National Park be reject ( `` politics , '' he snort ) ; and Venice turn down his plan for a glass and marble palace on the Grand Canal ( `` the tourist have win , '' he say ) . Mr. Wright open fire on plan for the Air Force Academy in Colorado , dub it a `` factory for birdmen. '' He build a skyscraper in a small Midwest town ; be commission to do a million-dollar synagogue in Philadelphia and a $ 45,000,000 cultural center in Baghdad ; plan a mile-high building for Chicago 's lakefront ; design prefabricate houses. And so he continue to live his late year , much a the early one , hard at work and deep in discussion with his fellowman. At 89 he continue his teaching at Taliesin with sixty-five architectural students. Working a full day , he emerge often to make a public appearance in flow tie , white hair under porkpie hat , and to make a characteristic utterance. Besides his wife and child , Mr. Wright leave a sister , Mrs. Maginel Wright Barney of New York ; nine grandchild and eight great-grandchildren. His daughter Frances die last February. One of his grandchild be Anne Baxter , the film actress. Only Commission in New York Was Guggenheim Art Museum After more than a half-century of renown Frank Lloyd Wright receive in 1945 his first commission in New York -- the new home of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum on Fifth Avenue between Eighty-eighth and Eighty-ninth Streets. He do not live to see it completed. When the dean of architecture receive the commission , a project involve more than $ 2,000,000 , he say : `` For the first time art will be see a if through an open window , and , of all place , in New York. It astound me. '' One of Mr. Wright 's favorite target for caustic comment and criticism be New York 's forest of skyscrapers. An exponent of what he call `` organic '' architecture -- a term that baffle many -- he devise a museum building he saw a a `` little temple in a park. '' When the design of his initial venture here be publish , an avalanche of cheer and derision be loosed. The `` little temple '' be hail by Wright partisan ; by others it be call , variously , a `` washing machine , '' a `` hot cross bun , '' a `` marshmallow. '' Even some of the stanchest supporter of the gifted architect `` shudder '' to envision the museum -- cylindrical in shape -- in it environment of staid , decades-old apartment buildings. Mr. Wright be imperturbable. When he submit plan for his six-story building to the city authority in 1953 , the Department of Housing and Building refuse to grant a license. It say the structure would violate building codes. With an elasticity that infrequently characterize his reaction to criticism , Mr. Wright comply with the request to make a few alterations. He stand firm on other disputed specification , such a a plexiglas dome for the building and glass doors. The plan to start building be delay several time but , finally , the museum be in construction in 1956. It be expect to be complete in a month or two. Criticism come from a new source -- the artists. Mr. Wright plan a continuous gallery in the form of a spiral ramp from ground floor to the top. The picture would n't hang right , the artist complained. Mr. Wright be adamant -- the artist be wrong , he said. The grade of the ramp be no steep than the grade of a sidewalk from build line to curb. It be an open secret , too , that the museum staff be bitter about the ramp , and find serious fault with Mr. Wright 's lack of adequate provision for art storage and overlook space for a restoration laboratory .