January 22 , 1959 OBITUARY Cecil De Mille , 77 , Pioneer of Movies , Dead in Hollywood Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES HOLLYWOOD , Calif. , Jan. 21 -- Cecil B. De Mille die of a heart ailment today in his home on De Mille Drive here. He be 77 year old. At his bedside when he die be a daughter , Cecilia , and her husband , Joseph Harper. Mrs. De Mille , who be 85 and have be ail for several year , be not inform until later in the morning. They have be marry for fifty-six years. Although confine to his home since last Saturday , Mr. De Mille continue to work. He be prepare to start film `` On My Honor , '' a history of the Boy Scout movement and it founder , the late Lord Baden-Powell. More than 1,000 message of condolence from person in all walk of life have be receive by late afternoon at the Hollywood office of Western Union. In addition to their own daughter Cecilia , Mr. and Mrs. De Mille adopt three children. They be Mrs. Katherine Quinn , a former actress and wife of Anthony Quinn ; Richard De Mille , who be study for a doctorate in psychiatry at the University of Southern California , and John De Mille , who be in the real estate business here. Also survive be thirteen grandchild and two great- grandchildren. A funeral service will be conduct Friday at 11 A.M. by the Rev. Harry E. Owings Jr. , rector , in St. Stephen 's Protestant Episcopal Church in Hollywood. Barnum of the Movies Cecil Blount De Mille be the Phineas T. Barnum of the movie -- a showman extraordinary. A pioneer in the industry , he use the broad medium of the screen to interpret in `` colossal '' and `` stupendous '' spectacles the story of the Bible , the splendor that be Egypt , the glory that be Rome. He dream in term of million , marble pillar , golden bathtub and mass drama ; spend enormous sum to produce the rich effect for which he become famous. During his lifetime , Mr. De Mille produce more than seventy major film , note for their weight and mass rather than for subtlety or finely shaded artistry. In 1953 he win an Academy Award for `` The Greatest Show on Earth , '' which have be release a year earlier. Previously he have win neither an Oscar nor the New York Film Critics annual award. Since then , however , he have be shower with honor , include : The Milestone Award of the Screen Producers Guild , the Great Living Americans Award of the United States Chamber of Commerce , the Fame Award of Achievement of the motion picture industry and the Washington Pilgrimage Award of the Religious Heritage of America , Inc. Mr. De Mille also receive citation from the Salvation Army and , for ten consecutive year , be vote the industry 's top producer-director by the Motion Picture Exhibitors. France confer upon him the honor of Knight of the Legion of Honor , the Netherlands induct him into the Order of Orange Nassau and Thailand confer on him the Most Exalted Order of the White Elephant. Won Box-office Awards The fact that his first Oscar do not come until forty year after he have produce one of the early four-reel feature film , `` The Squaw Man , '' be brush off with a characteristic De Millean gesture : `` I win my award at the box office. '' This be true. His pageant and colossals awe the urban , suburban and backwoods audiences. By 1946 his personal fortune , despite his regal spending habit , be estimate at $ 8,000,000. The producer bask in publicity 's intense glare in late 1944-45 when he make a heroic issue of a demand by the union of which he be a member that he pay a $ 1 contribution to it political action fund. He have be in radio about a decade by that time , stag show for a soap company at a reported salary of $ 5,000 a week. Mr. De Mille carry the fee fight to the court , be defeat , and then go on a one-man campaign against political assessment by unions. He later seek reinstatement in the union , but fail to get it. Mr. De Mille be bear at De Mille Corners , a backwoods crossroad in Ashfield , Mass. , on Aug. 12 , 1881 , while his parent be tour New England with a stock company. His father , Henry Churchill De Mille , be of French-Dutch ancestry ; his mother , the former Matilda Beatrice Samuel , of English stock. At 17 he go on the stage. He play in `` Lord Chumley , '' `` The Warrens of Virginia '' ( which he adapt to the screen later ) , `` The Prince Chap '' and `` Hearts Are Trumps. '' In the cast of `` Hearts Are Trumps , '' be Constance Adams , daughter of a New Jersey judge , engage in a small part. They be marry Aug. 16 , 1902 , four day after Mr. De Mille 's twenty- first birthday. In 1908 he be have lunch with Jesse Lasky when the talk turn to movies. Mr. De Mille throw in his lot with the ambitious Lasky and with a newcomer in the theatre , Sam Goldwyn. All three reach the top run in the movie world , though finally along separate paths. The first product of the new movie company -- The Jesse L. Lasky Feature Play Company -- be a screen version of `` The Squaw Man. '' It be turn out in an abandon stable in Los Angeles with crude equipment , but it bore Mr. De Mille 's mark. He be credit with many motion picture innovations. Indoor lighting be first try out on an actor in `` The Squaw Man. '' This picture , besides be the screen 's first epic , be also the first to publicize the name of it stars. On his first day a head of the Lasky-Goldwyn-De Mille combine , Mr. De Mille sign three unknown -- a $ 5 cowpoke name Hal Roach , an oil-field hand name Bill ( Hopalong Cassidy ) Boyd and a thin-nosed teenager who call herself Gloria Swanson. This be the nucleus around which he build his galaxy of screen stars. To Mr. De Mille be attribute the inspiration for do different version of a popular picture , a possibility everyone else have overlooked. He be also suppose to have conceive of open film with a printed cast of characters. The so-called `` sneak preview '' -- show a film to a test audience -- be another contribution. Switched to Americana The first `` Ten Commandments , '' produce in 1923 at a cost of $ 1,400,000 , make money. From that time on Mr. De Mille wallow in extravagant prop and super-gorgeous sets. It be a good formula. It work in `` The Crusades , '' `` The Sign of the Cross , '' `` King of Kings , '' `` Cleopatra '' and a long list of other De Mille spectaculars. In the latter part of his career Mr. De Mille switch from Scriptural subject to the American scene. He turn out flamboyant chunk of Americana in `` The Plainsman , '' take from the life of Wild Bill Hickok and Buffalo Bill ; `` The Buccaneer , '' a dramatic account of the life of the pirate Jean Lafitte ; `` Union Pacific , '' and `` Reap the Wild Wind , '' a story about Key West. `` The Buccaneer , '' originally produce in 1937 , be remake last year , with Mr. De Mille act in a supervisory role. Unlike the new `` The Ten Commandments , '' `` The Buccaneer '' be what the trade call a `` remake. '' `` The Ten Commandments , '' however , be a completely new version of the Bible story and differ greatly from his first film of that title. `` The Ten Commandments , '' issue in 1956 , have gross a report $ 60,000,000 here and abroad by last fall. Other expensive picture Mr. De Mille produce be `` Unconquered , '' in 1947 , and `` The Greatest Show on Earth , '' which cost an estimated total of $ 4,000,000 each. In 1949 he produce `` Samson and Delilah '' for about $ 3,000,000. During that same year he be name chairman of the Motion Picture Industry Council. Mr. De Mille , who give the University of Southern California a theatre in memory of his parent , be lavish with gift to other institutions. In June , 1958 , he learn that plan to place translation of the hieroglyphic on the Egyptian obelisk in Central Park be be put aside for lack of funds. He offer to pay the cost of erect four bronze plaque at the base of `` Cleopatra's Needle , '' say : `` As a boy , I use to look upon the hieroglyphic a so many wonderful pictures. '' Two week ago , the Department of Parks announce that Mr. De Mille have donate $ 3,760 for the project .