October 1 , 1959 OBITUARY Ross G. Harrison , Yale Zoologist , 89 Special to The New York Times NEW HAVEN , Sept. 30 -- retire director of the Osborn Zoological Laboratory of Yale University and a pioneer in the embryonic transplantation and culture of animal tissue outside the organism , die at his home here today. He be 89 year old. Dr. Harrison , who be Sterling Professor of Biology Emeritus at Yale , have earn international fame a a zoologist and biologist. He formerly serve a chairman of the National Research Council and head that body from 1938 to 1946. In 1907 Dr. Harrison first adopt the hang drop culture method to the study of embryonic tissues. His observation that the outgrowth of the nerve from the parent cell body demonstrate that the outgrowth be a form of protoplasmic movement settle a long-standing controversy a to the formation and fundamental nature of nerve fibers. An outgrowth of the tissue-culture technique be the growth of poliomyelitis virus on monkey kidney cells. The technique be cite in an $ 8,000 award Dr. Harrison receive in 1956 from the Academia Nazionale dei Lincei , the old of Italy 's scholarly national societies. Through his successful development of a method of transplant organ by remove embryonic cell at early stage of development from their normal position and place them either in another part of the same embryo or even another embryo it become possible to trace the subsequent development of the particular cell or organ that have be transplanted. Dr. Harrison have serve for seventeen year a Sterling Professor at Yale. He be bear in Germantown , Philadelphia , a son of Samuel and Katherine Diggs Harrison , on Jan. 13 , 1870. He be graduate from Johns Hopkins University with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1889 and receive a Ph.D. there in 1894. Five year later he receive a Doctor of Medicine degree at Bonn University in Germany. He subsequently be grant honorary degree by Yale , Harvard and Columbia Universities and the Universities of Cincinnati , Michigan , Dublin , Chicago , Freiburg and Budapest. Dr. Harrison begin his teach career at Bryn Mawr College a a lecturer in morphology in 1894. For many year Dr. Harrison , who write numerous paper in his field of study , be the editor of The Journal of Experimental Zoology. He serve also a a trustee of the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole , Mass. , and the Bermuda Biological Station. Surviving Dr. Harrison be his widow , the former Ida Lange ; three daughter , Miss Dorothea Harrison of Concord , Mass ; Dr. Elizabeth Ross Harrison , a New Haven pediatrician , and Mrs. Rufus Putney of Boulder , Col. ; two son , Ross Granville Harrison Jr. , of Darien , Conn. , and Richard Edes Harrison of New York ; seven grandchild and one great-grandchild .