May 25 , 1959 OBITUARY Dulles Formulated and Conducted U.S. Foreign Policy for More Than Six Years By THE NEW YORK TIMES For six year John Foster Dulles dominate both the making and the conduct of United States foreign policy. In the realm of foreign affair he be President Eisenhower 's chief adviser , his chief representative on Capitol Hill and his chief agent and negotiator at home and abroad. Mr. Dulles be a highly controversial Secretary of State. Those who follow his career be rarely dispassionate ; they divide , usually , between ardent admirer and those who dislike or distrust him. Certain thing , however , be incontestable. First be the extent of his role. He be undoubtedly the strong personality of the Eisenhower Cabinet , and a such he constantly play a leading role in Washington and often in the council of the Western alliance. Secondly , whatever his quality a a policy-maker , he have few peer a an advocate. No one could equal him a a persuader in the White House councils. In face the Senate Foreign Relations Committee he sometimes encounter criticism and skepticism , but he inevitably have his way. Thirdly , he have extraordinary vitality. He maintain personal contact and seek to exercise American leadership by constant travel in all part of the world. As Secretary he fly a total of 479,286 mile outside the United States. Successful Lawyer And a Moralist Mr. Dulles be a man of complex character , full of paradoxes. A shrewd and successful corporation lawyer , he be also a moralist and political philosopher. He could marshal his idea swiftly , fluently and extemporaneously ; he coin many phrase , but he be not note a an originator of new ideas. He be gregarious , but he work alone , to the despair of his State Department staff. Gracious in private , he be often awkward in public , yet he hold news conference more regularly than any other member of President Eisenhower 's Cabinet. Handsome a a young man , Mr. Dulles in late year assume the characteristic of a stern church elder. When in repose the corner of his mouth droop in an expression of extreme gravity that some observer have relate to his strict Presbyterian upbringing. But this expression be relieve by frequent broad smiles. His physique , a display on the occasion when he take time for a swim , be impressive. He be muscular , lean , with powerful shoulder , the result of much swimming , boating and fishing during boyhood. This physical equipment make it possible for him to put in eleven-hour working day in Washington and then go on to his evening 's social obligations. It also enable him , when travel , to transform his airplane into an office , so that after a grueling flight he be ready for the conference table. Cabin in Ontario Was His Retreat Part of Mr. Dulles ' secret be his ability to relax. During negotiation he would be see slump in his chair , doodle or sharpen pencil , seemingly without a care in the world. Mr. Dulles also know the virtue of `` get away , '' for five-day break at his log cabin retreat on Duck Island in Lake Ontario. In 1941 he buy this tiny island , where the only other inhabitant be a lighthouse warden and radio operator. He and his wife Janet discover and fell in love with it during their many summer sail expedition in the Great Lakes. They like to withdraw to the privacy of their island and rough it , haul water , chop wood , fishing and cooking. Mr. Dulles take pride in his cooking , especially fish. In Washington the Dulleses live comfortably in a spacious stone house on a wooded hillside ten minute from the State Department offices. This be their choice. Prosperous year a a corporation lawyer -- the best paid in the history of New York City , accord to some account -- have leave him financially independent. The Dulles family never suffer particularly for lack of money. John Watson Foster , Mr. Dulles ' grandfather , saw to that. Born in a log cabin in Indiana , he become a brigadier general in the Civil War , United States Minister to Mexico and Russia and Secretary of State under President Benjamin Harrison. He amass his fortune a a successful lawyer. This grandfather , in whose Washington home he be bear on Feb. 25 , 1888 , and who start him on his legal and diplomatic career , be the great formative influence in Mr. Dulles ' life. Grandfather Foster , however , be only a part of an active and rich family life that produce two other notable personality -- one be Mr. Dulles ' young brother , Allen W. , director of the Central Intelligence Agency. The other , his young sister , Eleanor , join the State Department before her brother get there and be at present the officer in charge of Berlin in the Office of German Affairs. The Dulles family say it can trace it ancestry to Charlemagne. That it do not take this too seriously , however , be indicate by the fact that Mrs. Dulles name her French poodle `` Pepi '' after Pepin Le Bref , Charlemagne 's father. Mr. Dulles ' father be the Rev. Allen Macy Dulles , pastor of the First Presbyterian Church at Watertown , N. Y. A liberal clergyman , he question whether belief in the Virgin Birth be essential to be a Christian , and he marry divorced persons. Of his child he require rigorous and intensive religious life involve attendance at church three or four time a week and memorization of long passage from the Bible. Enjoyed Swimming , Fishing and Sailing Much of this stay with Mr. Dulles throughout his life. He be always ready with a quotation from two book , and keep them within reach at home and at the office : the Bible and the Federalist. They represent , respectively , the religious influence of his father and the political influence of his grandfather. Over the dinner table the Dulles child hear talk of morality and diplomacy. Sometimes `` Uncle Bert '' -- Robert Lansing , later Secretary of State under President Woodrow Wilson -- be there. Grandfather Foster would argue the case for the Boers and Uncle Bert the case for the British in the Boer War. The family be fond of boating. When Foster be 13 , after a bad case of typhoid fever , his grandfather present him a twelve-foot St. Lawrence cat boat. From then on sailing , fishing and swimming be his great pleasures. For the rest of his life , in all kind of weather , he take every opportunity to cruise Lake Ontario , the St. Lawrence , the coast of Nova Scotia , Maine and Long Island. The Rev. Mr. Dulles have a private income to supplement his pastor 's stipend , so the family could afford some summer in Europe. These be spend at Left Bank hotel in Paris and bicycle through the Lowlands and Germany. John Foster Dulles learn good French , some German and passable Spanish. After grammar school and high school at Watertown , Foster go to Princeton University. At that time he expect to follow his father into the ministry and concentrate on the study of philosophy. But an invitation to accompany Grandfather Foster , in the summer of 1907 , to the second Hague Peace Conference , begin to turn his interest toward diplomacy. Foster be then 19. His grandfather , who act a delegate for the Imperial Government of China , get him a job a a secretary to the Chinese delegation on the strength of his knowledge of French. Foster be graduate from Princeton in 1908 a valedictorian of his class , with a Phi Beta Kappa key and a $ 600 scholarship for a year 's study at the Sorbonne in Paris. By the end of that year he have make up his mind to study law rather than theology. To be able to live with his grandfather , he decide to study at George Washington University in Washington. Through his grandfather he be draw into a gay social life , but manage at the same time to absorb three year of law study in two year with the high grade ever achieve at the university. Received Law Degree 25 Years Late Because he have be in attendance only two year instead of three , the university decline to give him a degree. ( It do so twenty-five year later. ) But the young Mr. Dulles pass the New York State bar examination and move on to New York City in search of a job. To his chagrin , he discover that the big law firm on whose door he knock be not interested in graduate from George Washington University , much less one who have not even receive a degree. Harvard and Columbia Law School , it seem , be the `` right '' place to study law. It take a letter from Grandfather Foster to William Nelson Cromwell , senior partner of the firm of Sullivan & Cromwell , to win the young man a chance to start -- at $ 50 a month. On June 26 , 1912 , he and Janet Avery , of Auburn , N.Y. , be marry at Auburn. He then have a salary of $ 100 a month , but Grandfather Foster make it possible for the newlywed to live fairly comfortably. The income of Foster Dulles , the young lawyer , grow steadily a he distinguish himself in assignment after assignment , usually in the international field. Rejected for military service during World war I because of poor eyesight , Mr. Dulles get an Army commission a captain in the War Industries Board. This , in turn , lead to his be send to the Versailles Peace Conference to deal with reparation questions. At the age of 31 Mr. Dulles make a preliminary mark a a junior diplomat by clearly and forcefully argue against impose crush reparation on Germany. President Wilson write a personal letter ask him to stay on in Europe after the conference to handle reparation questions. The fact that he be one of five men -- another be Thomas W. Lamont , a partner in J. P. Morgan -- who serve a the President 's economic adviser at Versailles give John Foster Dulles ' career another lift. He become a partner in Sullivan & Cromwell with a substantially enhance income. One international assignment follow another -- to Norway , Denmark , Poland , Uruguay , Chile and other lands. Usually Mrs. Dulles accompany him on his trip abroad. In 1937 Mr. Dulles try to hire a a trial lawyer for his firm a young man name Thomas E. Dewey who be win a reputation a prosecutor of underworld characters. Mr. Dewey agree , but change his mind and ran instead for election a district attorney. Thus begin a long political association between Mr. Dulles and Mr. Dewey. In 1939 Mr. Dulles join George Z. Medalie , a Republican lawyer , and Roger W. Straus , chairman of American Smelting and Refining Company , in plan Mr. Dewey 's strategy in seek the Presidential nomination. Mr. Dewy lose to Wendell L. Willkie in 1940 , but in 1944 he win the nomination and John Foster Dulles step in a his foreign policy adviser. In this capacity Mr. Dulles be maneuver into a conference with Cordell Hull , then Secretary of State , on the formation of the United Nations. This lead to a bipartisan approach to the United Nations issue and to the appointment of Mr. Dulles a a senior United States adviser at the San Francisco conference of the United Nations in 1945. Mr. Dulles ' stature in international affair be establish by his work at the San Francisco conference. Mr. Dewey again seek the Presidency in 1948 and Mr. Dulles be again his advisor on foreign affairs. It be generally believe that Mr. Dulles would have be Secretary of State if Mr. Dewey have win , but Harry S. Truman be the surprise victor. Mr. Dulles be a member of the United States delegation to the United Nations General Assembly in Paris in November , 1948 , when Secretary of State George C. Marshall be force to return to the United States for surgery. President Truman name Mr. Dulles act chairman of the delegation. He be with Secretary of State Dean Acheson at the Big Four foreign minister ' conference in Paris in 1949. On July 7 of that year Governor Dewey name him to the United States Senate in an interim appointment to fill the vacancy cause by the resignation of Senator Robert F. Wagner. Campaigning on a platform critical of the Fair Deal of President Truman , Mr. Dulles seek election to the Senate in a special election in November , 1949. His opponent be former Gov. Herbert H. Lehman. Mr. Dulles be defeat by 196,293 vote -- 2,573,934 to 2,377,641. In April , 1951 , when President Truman remove General of the Army Douglas MacArthur from his Far East command during the Korean fighting , Mr. Truman send Mr. Dulles to Tokyo to assure the Japanese Government that General MacArthur 's departure signify no important change in United States policy in the Far East. That there should be no misunderstand on this point be of special importance to Mr. Dulles , who be engage on his last and big job for President Truman -- conclude a peace treaty with Japan. This be a task that Mr. Dulles have sought. He have urge Secretary Acheson that the only way to get the long-delayed treaty be to pick one trust man and give him a year , full-time , to work it out. Mr. Dulles get the job. Treaty With Japan Was His Handiwork During the next twelve month , he fly 125,000 mile between Washington and Tokyo and from capital to capital , resolve difference , line up support for a `` peace of reconciliation '' with Japan. On Sept. 8 , 1951 , just a year after Mr. Dulles get his assignment , the treaty be sign at San Francisco. Surveying Mr. Dulles ' handiwork , State Department official admiringly pay tribute to a `` master craftsman. '' During the Presidential campaign of 1952 Mr. Dulles forget bipartisanship. The vitriolic assault on Democratic foreign policy he write for the Republican party platform cause critic to tax him for the first time -- but not the last -- with act more like a corporation lawyer serve his client than a statesman. After the election , Mr. Dulles be one of the first men President Eisenhower name to his Cabinet. The job of Secretary of State be one that he apparently have be after for a long time. Certainly he have have it in mind when he involve himself in the Presidential campaign of 1940 , 1944 and 1948. But when he have it in his grasp he be say to have have doubts. He realize that what he want be the foreign-policy function , and that a Secretary of State he would be burden with many other task a well. He be say to have remark that what he would really have like be a quiet office in the White House a foreign-policy consultant , far from the cumbersome machinery of the State Department. Yet there be never any question about Mr. Dulles ' conviction that he , with experience in foreign affair date to the Hague Conference of 1907 , with a rich family background of diplomacy , be the man best qualify to call the turn of United States foreign policy. He have it all in his head. He do not need the ambassadorial analysis and the study of the policy planning staff and the host of departmental experts. He have a big yellow pad at his bedside and he jot down thought a they occur to him. Thus be bear the phrase around which United States foreign policy revolve for nearly seven years. For example , during his campaign speech in 1952 , Mr. Dulles maintain that the Democratic party 's policy of `` containment '' must be replace by a policy of `` liberation. '' What United States foreign policy need , he say , be more `` heart. '' President Eisenhower put these thought into practice by withdraw the Seventh Fleet from the Formosa Strait , thereby `` unleashing '' President Chiang Kai-shek of Nationalist China for action against the mainland. For a time undercover operation in the Far East and in Eastern Europe be somewhat stimulated. But when the test come , in the anti-Communist Berlin riot in 1953 , the French call for help at Dienbienphu in 1954 , the Chinese Communist threat to Quemoy in 1954-55 , the Hungarian rising against the Russians in 1956 , the United States do not act. As thing work out , there be a wide margin between Mr. Dulles ' bold word and the United States Government 's actions. Although Mr. Dulles never specifically confirm it , there be good reason to believe that during the month of July , 1954 , he and Admiral Arthur H. Radford twice try to get the British to agree to a United States air strike , with plane base on carrier and in the Philippines , against the Communist force attack Dienbienphu , a key French stronghold in the north of Indochina. But the British would not go along , a Mr. Dulles might have expected. The plan be abandon , and Dienbienphu be lost. SEATO Filled Gap In Asian Defense In public Mr. Dulles speak only of the need for `` united action '' by the Western Allies and their friend in Asia to oppose the Communists. And this in the end lead to the formation of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization at Manila on Sept. 8 , 1954. Embracing Pakistan , Thailand and the Philippines in addition to the United States , Britain , France , Australia and New Zealand , SEATO go far toward close the gap in the world-wide network of military alliance , gap that be a constant subject of concern to Mr. Dulles. The philosophy behind Mr. Dulles ' maneuverings concern Dienbienphu and other crisis be spell out in an article that he apparently inspire in Life magazine on Jan. 16 , 1956. It contain the definition of what some have call `` brinkmanship '' : `` The ability to get to the verge without get into the war be the necessary art. '' And he explain that his skill in do just that have end the Korean war ( with an implied threat to drop atomic bomb on Manchuria ) , have restrain the Communist Chinese from send their force into Indochina ( with a show of force by two aircraft carrier and an invitation to Allied nation to form a `` united front '' ) and have head off Communist invasion of Quemoy ( with the bipartisan Formosa resolution authorize arm United States intervention ) . An important part of Mr. Dulles ' `` brinkmanship '' be `` massive retaliation , '' the bold of all his phrases. He say in a speech on Jan. 12 , 1954 , that the President and National Security Council have decide `` to depend primarily upon a great capacity to retaliate instantly , by mean and at place of our own choosing. '' The storm arouse by these word oblige Mr. Dulles to explain later that of course the punishment must always suit the crime , that he be not talk about indiscriminate bombing of Moscow. There be some other phrase that symbolize his tenure. Addressing State Department employes on his first day in office , Mr. Dulles call for `` positive loyalty. '' He also say on another occasion : `` I 'm not go to be catch with another Alger Hiss on my hands. '' As result of this attitude he tolerate for several year the operation of Walter Scott McLeod , a former agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and later a member of the staff of Styles Bridges , Republican Senator from New Hampshire. Mr. Dulles ' administrative Under Secretary hire Mr. McLeod a security chief. When the case of Jon Carter Vincent and John Paton Davies , State Department career men , come up for review , Mr. Dulles find nothing in their record show lack of loyalty. But he retire them anyway , on the ground that they have become burdensome and that a Secretary of State could not afford to carry excess baggage. Under this doctrine no Foreign Service officer could be sure that , if he be falsely accuse of disloyalty , he would be back up by his boss. 'Reappraisal ' Talk Distressed French Still another phrase be bear on Dec. 14 , 1953 , when Mr. Dulles say in Paris that if the French Assembly do not approve the European Defense Community treaty `` that would compel an agonizing reappraisal '' of basic United States foreign policy. The surprising thing about this statement be that after spend so many month in France Mr. Dulles do not realize that among sensitive Frenchmen his word would boomerang , and almost guarantee the defeat of the defense community. Mr. Dulles fly to Caracas , Venezuela on March 28 , 1954 , for a Pan American conference. He be largely responsible for the adoption of an anti-Communist resolution by which American Republics pledge `` countermeasure '' to prevent Communist control of any American state. Getting the resolution adopt be a victory of a kind for Mr. Dulles , but many of the Latin Americans resent the pressure bring by the United States on behalf of the resolution. The phrase `` open sky '' -- mutual freedom to engage in aerial inspection -- be not coin by Mr. Dulles. However , Mr. Dulles pick up the `` open sky '' proposal that President Eisenhower make to the Russians at the summit conference of 1955 and use it to underline the essentiality of mutual inspection during long and inconclusive negotiation on all aspect of disarmament. Always the talk break down on the inspection issue. At Iowa State College on June 9 , 1955 Mr. Dulles say `` neutrality have increasingly become an obsolete and except under very exceptional circumstance , it be an immoral and shortsighted conception. '' India and many other nation with neutralist tendency in the Afro-Asian world take this a a gratuitous affront. Later Mr. Dulles concede that neutral of the immoral kind be `` very few '' in number. And toward the end of his period in office he acquire a grow appreciation of the value of genuine neutrality. Indians be also offend by an illusion to `` Portuguese province in the Far east , '' mean Goa , a Portuguese-owned territory on the coast of India. Mr. Dulles permit the phrase to appear in a joint statement with Portugal 's Minister of Foreign Affairs on Dec. 2 , 1955. Mr. Dulles consider himself an expert on the Soviet Union. More often than on other topic he would make declaration about the Soviet without consult his State Department aides. Particularly striking , and particularly criticize , be his assertion of Soviet weakness. On Feb. 24 , 1956 , he tell the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that `` at this moment in Moscow they be have to revise their whole program. They have failed. '' Mr. Dulles felt at home talk about Europe and the Soviet Union , but he be much less at ease when deal with the Middle East. It be possible , nonetheless , that the concept of a `` northern tier of defense '' against the Soviet Union in the Middle East may have be his most original single contribution to foreign policy. Originally intend a an association of the nation in the area , which the great power would back but not join , the concept be radically change by the British , who encourage and join the `` Baghdad Pact. '' Still another foreign-policy concept , the Eisenhower Doctrine , proclaim by both house of Congress on March 9 , 1957 , be really the Dulles Doctrine. Mr. Dulles conceive and defend this resolution before Congress , assert that the President be prepare to use armed force to support any Middle Eastern country that ask for help against Communist aggression. Conceived Doctrine For the Mideast Mr. Dulles do not succeed in preserve the momentary goodwill of the Arabs that have be generate by United States opposition to British-French-Israeli operation against Egypt in the fall of 1956. By the spring of 1958 the United States find itself sharply oppose to President Gamal Abdel Nasser 's penetration of Lebanon. Once again Mr. Dulles have a phrase for it : `` indirect aggression. '' When revolution flare in Iraq in 1958 Mr. Dulles counter `` indirect aggression '' by the United Arab Republic with landing by United States force in Lebanon. Mr. Dulles will be remember for his part in lead the Republican party out of it long tradition of isolationism into a new era of internationalism. Often criticize during his tenure for seem inflexibility in his dealing with the Soviet Union , there be grow appreciation during his last month in office that his line be basically sound. He achieve his objective best in Europe , in spite of the rebuff he suffer on the issue of the European Defense Community. With Mr. Dulles ' encouragement West Germany regain sovereignty a a member of the North Atlantic alliance while at the same time progressively close economic rank with France. In the Far East he stand inflexibly attach to alliance with Nationalist China and oppose to recognition of Communist China. With United States help , President Chiang Kai-shek be able to hold the island of Quemoy and Matsu in spite of heavy Communist bombardment. Chiang Reinforced Offshore Islands Disregarding Mr. Dulles ' advice , Chiang retain the heavy manpower commitment to these island through which , in another crisis , the United States could be draw into war. In the Middle East he lose heavily. By not make it possible for Egypt to acquire arm in the United States he open the way for a Soviet-Egyptian arm deal that carry Soviet influence into the heart of the Middle East. By dramatically withdraw United States support for the Aswan high dam in Egypt he provoke President Nasser 's seizure of the Suez Canal Company , which lead to an abortive British-French invasion of the Canal Zone and further deterioration of Western prestige. By send troop into Lebanon on the heel of the Iraqi revolution , he convince the Iraqi revolutionary that the United States might oppose them by force. They turn to the Soviet Union for help. Mr. Dulles ' personal skill a a negotiator make him look almost indispensable. Time after time he mix the diplomatic glue with which difference among the ally be paper over. Mr. Dulles believe that to spend too much time in Washington would be to neglect his high duty a leader in the Western alliance. Nevertheless his absence lead to neglect of his administrative task and make it impossible for him to make full use of the State Department and the Foreign Service a diplomatic tools. After the crisis on the European Defense Community the French call him brutal. After the Suez crisis the British accuse him of double-dealing. After his remark on Goa and neutrality the Indians tend to write him off. But when Mr. Dulles have to withdraw from the international scene one word be hear over and over among the diplomat of Europe and Asia : `` Indispensable. '' When President Eisenhower announce Mr. Dulles ' resignation he have tear in his eyes. The moment be so move that no one could bring himself to ask a question. With mixed pity and consternation some remember a remark attribute to the President several year ago : `` If anything happen to Foster , where could I find a man able to replace him ? ''