May 31 , 1960 OBITUARY Pasternak Is Dead ; Wrote 'Dr. Zhivago' By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS MOSCOW , Tuesday , May 31 -- Boris Pasternak , note Russian poet , author of the controversial novel `` Doctor Zhivago '' and winner of the 1958 Nobel Prize for Literature , die in his sleep last night , family friend reported. He be 70 year old. As a result of the novel -- never publish in the Soviet Union but a best-seller in Western country -- Mr. Pasternak be the center of world-wide uproar. The novel be judge highly for literary merit and insight into Communist society. Mr. Pasterak become ill on May 1 at his home in Peredelkino , a writer ' colony about twenty mile outside of Moscow. Along with a heart ailment he suffer from lung cancer , stomach bleeding and other infirmities. Spanned Joy and Pathos The life of Boris Pasternak span the height and depth , the glory and tragedy , the joy and pathos that be Russia of the twentieth century. So closely be he identify with the soil , the history , the tradition and the mystery of Russia that he could not imagine life away from the land where he be bear on Feb. 10 , 1890. At the peak of the political controversy within the Soviet Union over his great novel , `` Doctor Zhivago , '' and the award to him of the Nobel Prize Communist propagandist demand that he leave Russia. Mr. Pasternak write a letter to Premier Khrushchev decline the Nobel Prize and add what his friend felt be the simple truth : `` Leaving the motherland will equal death for me. I be tie to Russia by birth , by life and work. '' World fame come to Mr. Pasternak very late in life -- with the publication of `` Doctor Zhivago , '' the award to it in 1958 of the Nobel Prize , it translation into dozen of language and almost overpowering barrage of publicity in every kind of media. But long before this he have take his place in the literary life of Russia a one of the great master of the century. Mr. Pasternak have make his mark and reputation before the Bolshevik Revolution. His place in the high rank of Russian poetry be secure even before World War I. By the late Nineteen Thirties Mr. Pasternak be turn more and more to the translation of foreign classics. His translation into Russian of Shakespeare 's Hamlet , '' `` Henry IV , '' `` Romeo and Juliet , '' `` Anthony and Cleopatra '' and `` Othello '' be of a quality seldom equaled. Considered Himself a Poet It be a a poet that Mr. Pasternak make his mark in the world and it be a poet that he consider himself. The fact that his world fame be base upon a novel he regard as more an accident of time , place and history than anything else. The publication of `` Doctor Zhivago '' be the great literary event of postwar Russia. Yet the novel still have not be publish in the land of it composition. By early 1954 , the novel have be reduce to approximately the shape in which it finally be published. Some poetical excerpt from it be publish in a Moscow literary journal , arrangement have be make to serialize it in the lead Soviet magazine , Novy Mir , and book publication be under contract. When Giangiacomo Feltrinelli , an Italian publisher , visit Moscow , Mr. Pasternak readily give him a copy of the book for publication in Italy. It be to be bring out simultaneously with the Soviet edition. But publishing and politics be inextricably intertwine in Russia. By 1956 , despite -- and in part because of -- the anti-Stalin revelation of Mr. Khrushchev , the whole of Soviet policy be in flux. Concern be widespread over the consequence of too rapid relaxation. The symptom of the Polish and Hungarian uprising be only too apparent on the political landscape. In this atmosphere the decision to publish `` Doctor Zhivago '' in Russia be countermanded. Book Widely Acclaimed Every effort be make to withdraw the manuscript from Signor Feltrinelli. But it be in vain. The book be publish abroad , acclaim in a torrent of adjective such a have not be pour out upon a Russian writer since the time of Tolstoy , Chekhov and Turgenev. The central figure in `` Dr. Zhivago , '' Yuri Zhivago , be the son of a rich pre-Revolutionary Russian Industrialist. An excellent physician , he study philosophy and literature , and develop idea of his own -- his main aim be to preserve his own spiritual independence. He welcome the Russian Revolution , enjoy it dream of universal justice. But when the Communists start tell him how to live and how to think , he rebels. He leave Moscow for a tiny village beyond the Urals , where the main romantic theme of the novel develops. His loved one be exile to Manchuria by the Soviet Government , and he return to Moscow , a broken man , to die in the street of a heart attack. Novy Mir say that the spirit of the book be that of `` nonacceptance of the socialist revolution. '' Soviet writer heap scorn on Mr. Pasternak , call him a `` traitor , '' a `` bourgeois reactionary , '' a `` malevolent Philistine '' and a `` low-grade hack. '' Mr. Pasternak be a product of the rich intellectual tradition and ferment of idea that stir middle-class Russia in the year immediately precede World War I and the 1917 revolutions. He be one of four child of Leonid Osipovich Pasternak and Roza Kaufmann Pasternak. His parent be of Jewish descent and he be bring up in a household in which the great poet , painter , musician and writer of Russia be visitors. Mr. Pasternak 's mother be a concert pianist. His first urging be to a life of music. He felt strongly under the influence of Scriabin , and it be his ambition to become a composer , too. However , the young Pasternak lack absolute pitch , and suddenly , and apparently without regret , he give up his musical ambitions. His next interest be philosophy. He study under the famous Prof. Hermann Cohen , a disciple of Hegel and Kant , at the University of Marburg after have attend the Moscow Gymnasium and Moscow University. By 1913 , however , Mr. Pasternak have finally find his metier -- poetry. After travel in Italy , he settle down in Moscow and devote himself to muse. His poetry be deeply lyrical , fill with magnificent imagery and strongly under the influence of symbolism -- one of the dominant literary tendency of pre-World War I Russia. Mr. Pasternak do not see military service in the Czar 's army because of a leg injury. He do spend some time -- a year or two -- work in a remote area of the Urals in a munition plant. Like almost all Russian intellectual , he welcome the 1917 Revolution , which long have be await by the nation 's writer and artists. He be not , however , attract by the Bolshevik movement , although in the early day he work under the Bolshevik government in the Commissariat of Education. One of the question that never be fully clarify during Mr. Pasternak 's life be the nature of his relationship with Stalin. There be many who felt that in some manner he have come under Stalin 's protection , and that this be the reason why Mr. Pasternak seem to lead a charmed life during the purge of the Nineteen Thirties. Beginning in 1957 almost every foreign literary , musical or creative figure to journey to Moscow make the pilgrimage to Peredelkino. The pilgrimage be halt only for a few month after the enormous agitation over `` Doctor Zhivago. '' There be evidence that Premier Khrushchev himself have intervene to end the attack on Mr. Pasternak. Whatever the cause , it be apparent that there be profound second thought about the persecution of Mr. Pasternak. All of the lead literary and party figure who participate in the verbal lynching be downgrade or demoted. Mr. Pasternak put aside the translation task he have tackle at the height of the `` Zhivago '' controversy -- a new version of Tagore -- and turn to a work dear to his heart , a play center on Alexander II 's freeing of the serf in 1856. He be hard at work on this project late in 1959 and early this year and be still talk of another novel that he plan to write -- for he be far from satisfy with `` Doctor Zhivago. '' His other principal work in English translation include `` Childhood , '' publish in 1941 ; `` Collected Rose Works '' in 1945 ; `` Selected Poems , '' in 1946 , and `` Selected Writings , '' in 1949. His first book of poem , `` Twin in the Clouds , '' appear in 1914. The author be marry twice. He and his first wife , Eugenia , be divorce in 1931. His second wife be the former Zinaida Nikolaevna Neuhaus. He have three son -- a pianist , an engineer and a physic student. Mr. Pasternak 's parent have migrate to England about the time of the Revolution. He have two sister , Lydia and Josephine , live there , and a brother , Alexander , an architect in Moscow. In one of the poem include at the end of `` Doctor Zhivago , '' Mr. Pasternak say through the voice of Hamlet : The stir be over. I step fourth on the board Leaning against an upright at the entrance , I strain to make the far-off echo yield A cue to the event that may come in my day. The order of the act have be scheme and plot , And nothing can avert the final curtain 's fall , I stand alone. All else be swamp by Pharisaism. To live life to the end be not a childish task. The word might well have serve a the poet 's epitaph .