September 27 , 1960 OBITUARY Emily Post Is Dead Here at 86 ; Writer be Arbiter of Etiquette By THE NEW YORK TIMES Mrs. Emily Post , for many year a leading authority on all matter of social good form , die Sunday in her apartment at 39 East Seventy-ninth Street after a brief illness. Her age be 86. In a time when many believe that good manner be necessarily elaborate , Mrs. Post be a pioneer in simplify them. If you pick up the wrong fork , there be a possibility that your hostess be wrong in have too many fork , Mrs. Post taught. It be n't necessarily you who be wrong. She believe that what be socially right be what be socially simple and unaffected. She teach a the basis of all correct deportment that `` no one should do anything that can either annoy or offend the sensibility of others. '' Thousands find their social problem solve by her simple counsels. Her name become synonymous with good manners. Mrs. Post 's advice be varied. She give suggestion about how to inculcate good manner in an active 7-year-old boy and she could and do answer complicate question about the proper way to address titled person of Europe. But for the most part she advise the debutante , the confused suitor and the newly marry couple who wish to establish themselves in good relation with the world about them. She always avoid give lonelyhearts advice and never suggest way to capture a husband or wife , although many young person find courtship easy because of what she said. When Mrs. Post 's first widely know book , `` Etiquette , '' be publish in 1922 , many of the exist handbook of social usage presuppose wealth and elegance on the part of the reader. Mrs. Post offer advice to society a it be and answer basic problem that confront ordinary people who want to have good manners. Every edition of her book emphasize the basic rule of etiquette : make the other person comfortable. The book be revise ten time and be in it eighty-ninth printing. For many year Mrs. Post have a radio program and a daily column , which be still be syndicate to more than 200 newspapers. Her mail be enormous and she have to set up a special office to handle it. Chaperones Decline It be largely due to Mrs. Post 's gentle guidance in the modern frame of mind that the chaperone tend to become a less important feature of society. The duty of the chapeone and , indeed , the very chaperone herself , tend to disappear from late edition of Mrs. Post 's book. However , when a bachelor girl ask her if it be correct to visit a man alone in his apartment , she always say no. Mrs. Post never make capital out of her own social position , which be excellent. She have first-hand knowledge of the social world at Bar Harbor , Me. , where she spend her summer , and she travel extensively in Europe. In addition to establish herself a a lead authority on good manner , Mrs. Post enjoy some success a a fiction writer. She write a novel , `` The Title Market , '' and her short story as well a her article on good social usage appear in such magazine a Scribners and Colliers. She even write a cook book , which be widely sell under the title , `` The Emily Post Cook Book. '' Other book by Mrs. Post include `` The Personality of a House , '' `` Children Are People , '' `` How to Behave Though a Debutante , '' `` Purple and Fine Linen , '' `` By Motor to the Golden Gate '' and `` The Eagle 's Feather. '' Her first book , `` Flight of the Moth , '' appear in 1904. In 1946 Mrs. Post found the Emily Post Institute , where problem of gracious living be to be studied. Mrs. Post train the staff herself. Born in Baltimore in 1873 , Mrs. Post be a daughter of Bruce and Josephine Lee Price. Her father be an architect. She be educate privately at home and atttended a finishing school in New York , where her family move when she be 10. Mrs. Post be about 5 foot 9 inch tall and have soft gray hair and blue eyes. Her pet dislike be pretentious people , dirty silver and hostess who serve themselves first. She like terrapin , boil hominy and strawberry and could tell how they should be cook and serve and when each be appropriate in a meal. For many year she spend part of her summer in a 170-year-old house in Edgartown , Martha 's Vineyard , Mass. She design the decoration of the house herself and supervise it remodeling. Last year Mrs. Post write a series of column about motor manners. She have long be appal by the thoughtlessness of person drive in traffic and seek to set down a few simple maxim of good manner to take the scowl and snarl out of automobile driving. Mrs. Post be the center of a notable contretemps when she spill a spoonful of berry at a dinner of the Gourmet Society here in 1938. With faultless etiquette , the ninety-two member of the society pretend not to notice , and continue eating. The press , perhaps a bit less mannerly , make the most of the little faux pa , but Mrs. Post laugh it off. Applied Common Sense Mrs. Post seldom hesitate to answer a question in her field and often she simply apply common sense to the problem. Once she be call upon to settle the question : Is dunk doughnut correct ? '' She answer : `` Any place that would have doughnut would be like a picnic , where , short of smear wet doughuts from ear to ear , you could do pretty much a you pleased. You would n't have doughnut at a formal dinner anyway. '' Elbows on the table while eat ? Mrs. Post say : `` The rule be against elbow on the table while eating. If not use the arm a a lever swing a fork or spoon from plate to mouth , it really do n't make much difference. '' `` Etiquette , '' she once say , `` be the science of living. It embrace everything. It be the code of sportsmanship and of honor. It be ethics. '' In 1892 Emily Price be marry to Edwin Main Post , a banker , member of a family widely know in social circle on Long Island. This marriage be terminate by divorce. Mr. Post drown in a sailboat accident in Fire Island Inlet. Two son , Edwin M. Post Jr. and Bruce Price Post be bear to this marriage. Bruce Price Post die in 1927. A grandson , William Goadby Post , also survives. A funeral service will be hold Thursday at 10.30 A.M. in St. James Protestant Episcopal Church , Madison Avenue at Seventy-first Street. Burial will be private .