November 30 , 1960 OBITUARY Richard Wright , Writer , 52 , Dies Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES PARIS , Nov. 29 -- Richard Wright , the American Negro writer , die of a heart attack last night in a Paris clinic. He be 52 year old. Mr. Wright , author of `` Native Son '' and `` Black Boy , '' have live abroad , mostly in Paris , for more than fifteen years. According to friend , he find here a great degree of freedom from discrimination against member of his race than in his homeland. Once attract to communism , Mr. Wright be disillusion and become notably anti- Communist during his stay in France. He refuse to have any contact with the party here. His most recent work , `` Fishbelly , '' a study of Negro reaction to race prejudice and discrimination , be publish recently. Surviving Mr. Wright be his widow , Ellen , and two daughter , Julia and Rachel. Eloquent Spokesman Mr. Wright be hail by critic a the most eloquent spokesman for the American Negro in this generation and one of the most important literary talent of contemporary America. His great success , both financial and literary , be `` Native Son , '' a harsh , realistic , brutal , angry novel that appear in 1940. This story be base partly on Wright 's own experience in the Chicago slum and partly on the case of Robert Nixon , a Chicago Negro who be put to death in the electric chair in 1938 for the murder of a white girl. The novel win almost universal acclaim from reviewers. Charles Poore in The New York Times say that it be `` enormously stir , '' and Peter Monro Jack , write in The Sunday Times Book Review , call it the `` Negro American tragedy. '' `` Native Son '' be a Book-of-the-Month Club selection and enjoy a large sale not only in the United States but also in most other country , include the Soviet Union. Paul Green dramatize it for the stage. It be a hit on Broadway in 1941 with the late Canada Lee in the lead role of Bigger Thomas , the scared Negro boy who kill two person and be capture and put to death. In 1950 Mr. Wright make `` Native Son '' a a film in Argentina , with himself in the lead role. But he be a poor actor and the movie failed. Born on Plantation Mr. Wright 's own life have make him bitter. He be bear Sept. 4 , 1908 , on a plantation near Natchez , Miss. His mother be hard-working and devoted to her child , but his father be drunken and brutal. After his father desert the family they move to Memphis , Tenn. , when Richard be 6 year old. His genius with word be show early ; at the age of 14 , a short story of his be publish in a Negro paper in the South. He begin to work at menial job in a Memphis optical business before go to Chicago by himself at the age of 19. He work a a porter , street cleaner , dishwasher , postal clerk , any odd job. Sometimes he be unemployed and hungry , and during the early Nineteen Thirties be on relief. It be then that he join the Communist party. All the time he be write about his experience in fictional form. In 1937 , Mr. Wright be in the Federal Writers Project and the next year his book of four novella , `` Uncle Tom 's Children , '' be publish and win a $ 500 prize from Story magazine. He win a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1939 and the next year `` Native Son '' make him independent and famous. In 1941 he win the Spingarn Medal a the American Negro who make the high achievement during the precede year. Wrote Autobiography His next big success be the autobiography of his youth , `` Black Boy , '' issue in 1944. This be also a Book-of-the-Month Club choice and sell throughout the world. After World War II , Mr. Wright expatriate himself to Paris , where he could live more congenially with his white wife , Ellen Poplar of Brooklyn , whom he have marry in 1940. This coincide with Mr. Wright 's break with the Communists , although he remain leftist , materialist and atheist. In 1950 he be one of several distinguished writer who contribute testimony to `` The God That Failed , '' a disavowal by former Communists. None of Mr. Wright 's other book equal `` Native Son '' and `` Black Boy '' in critical or commercial success , although all be review with adequate publicity and respect. In 1953 appear `` The Outsider , '' a philosophical novel complicate with several murder ; in 1954 , `` Black Power , '' his impression of the Gold Coast of Africa ; in 1956 , `` The Color Curtain , '' a report on the Bandung Conference in Java of Asian and African delegate ; in 1957 , `` Pagan Spain , '' severely critical personal observation of Spain , and the same year , `` White Man , Listen ! '' a lecture on the evil of racial injustice. His `` The Long Dream , '' publish in 1958 , a novel about a Negro corruptionist , be dramatize by Ketti Frings and present unsuccessfully in New York this year .