September 19 , 1961 OBITUARY Hammarskjold Greatly Extended U.N. 's Scope Through Leadership and Personal Initiatives By THE NEW YORK TIMES Dag Hjalmar Agne Carl Hammarskjold be a respected Swedish diplomat but little know to the rest of the world when , in 1953 , he become Secretary General of the United Nations. By the force of circumstance and his own personality he be able greatly to extend the influence of the United Nations and the prestige of the Secretary General. In many corner of the world he become the symbol of the United Nations itself. It be largely because of his leadership and the personal initiative he assume -- a in the conduct of the Congo operation -- that the Soviet Union come to attack him and demand his ouster. Ironically , the big power have select Mr. Hammarskjold to succeed Trygve Lie of Norway , the United Nations ' first Secretary General , because they believe he would be content to be the efficient administrator and avoid a politically controversial role. Strategic Position However , the `` cold war '' and the United States ' willingness to relinquish important policy initiative to the United Nations put Mr. Hammarskjold in a particularly strategic position to utilize his own brand of `` private diplomacy. '' In his year of service a Secretary General he score a number of success but also suffer some disappointments. His first major triumph come in 1955 , when he make a dramatic flight to Peiping to seek the release of fifteen United States airman hold by the Chinese Communists. When word come of the prisoner ' release , Mr. Hammarskjold be away on one of his rare holiday -- a holiday that coincide with his fiftieth birthday -- cod fishing at a small Swedish village. Again , in 1956 , the Hungary and Suez crisis project the Secretary General into the center of the world political stage. The United Nations never succeed in get representative into Budapest after Soviet tank crush the Hungarian revolt -- despite ten resolution and numerous personal effort by Mr. Hammarskjold. In the Suez crisis , Mr. Hammarskjold surprise many people by the force of his attack on Israel , Britain and France for their invasion of Egypt follow the seizure of the Suez Canal by President Gamal Abdel Nasser. The British and the French , who have propose Mr. Hammarskjold a Mr. Lie 's successor , be unprepared for the new political role he have assumed. Under pressure from the United Nations and the United States , they and the Israelis withdraw their forces. On instruction from the General Assembly Mr. Hammarskjold also organize in forty-eight hour the United Nations Emergency Force for the Middle East , which remain on watch along Israel 's frontier and have reduce border incident to a few minor infraction a year. When he accept a second five-year term a Secretary General in 1958 , Mr. Hammarskjold take the occasion to underscore his determination to maintain his office a an independent force and to act without political dictation from any state a he saw need for action developing. It be in the same year that the Soviet Union begin attack decision by the Secretary General and criticize him for independent action. But it be not until the United Nations intervention in the Congo that he incur the full force of Soviet attacks. The attack on Mr. Hammarskjold be even more bitter than those Moscow have direct at Mr. Lie for his support of the United Nations intervention in the Korean war in 1950. Khrushchev Joins In The Soviet campaign against Mr. Hammarskjold reach it peak with the angry speech of Premier Khrushchev just a year ago in the Assembly. Mr. Khrushchev upbraid Mr. Hammarskjold for not have use military force in support of Patrice Lumumba , the Soviet back Congolese Premier. Mr. Lumumba be later slain. Mr. Khrushchev link the attack to a Soviet demand that Mr. Hammarskjold be replace a Secretary General by a three-man executive represent the Western , Soviet and neutral camps. The Soviet castigation of Mr. Hammarskjold a a tool of the `` colonialist '' leave many United Nations delegate stunned. But the supporter of Mr. Hammarskjold among the small nation respond with a stand ovation a few day later when the Secretary General coolly reply that he would remain in his job as long a `` they wish '' -- they be the small state and middle- ranking powers. Favored Direct Contacts Just prior to his hurried departure for the Congo last week , Mr. Hammarskjold say it be difficult for him to absent himself so soon before the opening of the Assembly session. That session begin today. However , Mr. Hammarskjold add , he appreciate the need for direct personal contact with the leader of the Congo. Mr. Hammarskjold have repeatedly express his confidence in direct talks. He say he regard personal contact a a `` must '' if he be to serve properly the interest of the United Nations. In line with this philosophy , Mr. Hammarskjold make himself available last July a a sort of go- between in hope of resolve the French-Tunisian conflict over Bizerte. Although President Habib Bourguiba of Tunisia invite him to his North African country , the French make no move to follow up the overtures. Characteristically , Mr. Hammarskjold decline at least publicly to regard the French attitude a a snub and say at the time : `` People really be too sensitive on my behalf. '' Although he have write extensively about his political philosophy , lecture occasionally and converse with thousand of diplomat , Hammarskjold the man have remain almost as obscure a the day he arrive in April , 1953 , to take over the post that his predecessor call `` the most impossible job in the world. '' A slim bachelor of medium height with blue eye , Mr. Hammarskjold manage even under pressure to give the impression , at the age of 56 , of a man year younger , relax in manner but with a certain aloofness. Millions of television viewer have watch him a he sit in silent think with two finger press to his jaw -- a characteristic pose. He look the intellectual and aristocrat. His serious interest include music , literature and art , with a preference for the French impressionists. But by far his great interest be his post a Secretary General. He speak of his 3,500-member international staff a the `` United Nations family. '' The modernistic glass and marble United Nations headquarters be to him `` this house. '' And he be as concerned about it furnishing a any home owner. Declined Invitations In his first year a Secretary General Mr. Hammarskjold be much in demand by New York hostess , but he decline to attend almost all social functions. He prefer to give fairly small dinner party in his Park Avenue apartment. Although he rarely find time for opera or the theatre -- two favorite pastime -- he manage to keep informed about current performances. He encourage the use of the United Nations Assembly Hall for concert on such occasion a United Nations Day. When he first take over from Mr. Lie , staff morale be at it low point because of United States Senate `` loyalty '' investigation , lead by the late Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , of United Nations staff members. It be the new Secretary General 's job to try to raise morale. He begin the custom of meeting with the staff for a party or talk before each Assembly. In those early year he occasionally turn up on a cafeteria queue carry a tray. Pressures Increased But a time go by and the pressure of the office increase , these personal contact be largely abandon and he keep to his thirty-eighth-floor office , which be off limit to all but a few lieutenants. He try to spend Christmas with United Nations troop on duty in the Gaza Strip , in the Middle East. Just before his fatal Congo trip , he revive the old practice of meet with the staff privately and promise to look into some grievance about such matter a salaries. He be give a stand ovation. His relation with the United Nations diplomatic corp range from correct to cordial but he have few close friendship and even few confidants. In time of stress -- and the history of the United Nations have be one of almost constant crisis in recent year -- he would work all day and into the night in his office , which be decorate with painting he have select personally at the Museum of Modern Art. He work at an uncluttered desk , smoke a pipe or small brown cigar , often with the window open to catch the sound of riverboat whistles. He write his own speech , usually in a diffuse prose that render them difficulty to interpret. He deliberately choose cautious gray word rather than highly colored ones. He once object to a question from a newsman saying : `` You use such drastic language -- my own be rather flat. '' Mr. Hammarskjold be at home in German , French and Swedish as well a in English , speak with a slight accent. It be one of his few diversion in recent year to translate literary works. One of his translation be a slim volume of the poetry of St. John Perse , who win the Nobel prize two year ago. The Secretary General 's translation from French into Swedish be acclaim by Scandinavian critic , who say the translator must have be something of a poet to have render the author 's thought a he did. Two Hammarskjold mission of a sort have a place in United Nations history. Once the Secretary General go for a five-mile walk across the Negev Desert with Prime Minister David Ben- Gurion of Israel. The two men talk a they walk about Israel 's armistice trouble with her Arab neighbors. On another occasion , in day when Mr. Hammarskjold 's relation with Mr. Khrushchev be smoother , the Soviet Premier take the visiting Secretary General for a rowboat trip at Sochi , the Black Sea resort. About their conversation Mr. Hammarskjold say only that they have `` talk the language of the sea. '' Mr. Hammarskjold have other critic besides Mr. Khrushchev and his representatives. One complaint concern his reluctance to share confidence or delegate authority. Some observer felt that he have undergone a change during his year at the United Nations and have grow overly self-confident. This observation be hear at the time of his offer to mediate the Bizerte crisis. Even earlier there be some diplomat without a stake in the Suez venture who object that Mr. Hammarskjold have in his `` private diplomacy '' with Cairo fail to get President Nasser's Government to heed United Nations resolution on the right of passage through the canal , although it be a United Nations effort that clear the canal of ship order scuttle in it by Cairo. However , these criticism and others be infrequent. In the opinion of the vast majority of diplomat and United Nations personnel who work with him , Mr. Hammarskjold perform his task brilliantly and with a single-minded devotion that would be almost impossible to match. Made Perilous Trips Although he eschew dramatic gesture , the Secretary General twice undertook dangerous assignment to participate personally in United Nations missions. The first time be in the summer of 1958 when he fly to Lebanon , then tear by a political crisis , to confer with the United Nations observation group there. The second instance be his trip to the Congo in August of last year to enter secessionist Katanga Province with the first United Nations troops. Although political development be his prime concern , Mr. Hammarskjold be almost equally concerned with economic affair and demand for the United Nations an important role in help the world 's under-developed country achieve a high living standard. One of his special interest lay in the establishment of OPEX -- Operational and Executive Personnel -- which be to provide administrative-level official to help establish Government service in newly emerge countries. Was Premier 's Son Dag Hammarskjold -- the name Dag mean day -- be bear July 29 , 1905 , in Jonkoping , in south central Sweden. He be the fourth son of Hjalmar Hammarskjold , who be Sweden 's Premier during World War I and who steer a neutral course that keep Sweden out of the war. The young Hammarskjold grow up in the university town of Uppsala , where he study French literature , philosophy and political economy and earn a reputation a a brilliant student. He take advanced study in economics and receive a Bachelor of Law degree in 1930. Three year later , he be award his doctorate from the University of Stockholm. He choose for his thesis `` Konjunk-turspridinngen '' -- the spread of the business cycle. At 31 year of age he become permanent under secretary in the Ministry of Finance and concurrently serve a chairman of the board of the National Bank of Sweden for seven years. The story be tell that the boyish-looking board chairman keep up his habit of cycle around the country on holiday , hatless and wearing short and a sport shirt. Once when he be 36 , cycle in southern Sweden , he ask for a room at a hotel. The clerk take a quick look at the would-be guest and direct him to a local youth hostel. The chairman of the national bank cheerfully accept the suggestion. Takes Foreign Affairs Post Mr. Hammarskjold become an adviser to the Cabinet on financial and economic problem in 1945 and help to shape Sweden 's fiscal policies. Two year later he move to the Foreign Ministry with the rank of under secretary. In 1951 he join the Cabinet a Minister Without Portfolio and then become Deputy Foreign Minister. Mr. Hammarskjold be a delegate to the Paris conference in 1947 that establish the Marshall Plan machinery for United States aid to war-ravaged Europe. A year later he attend the conference of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation. Although he serve with a Social Democratic Cabinet , Mr. Hammarskjold never formally join any party and prefer to be describe a a political independent. His first connection with the United Nations be a a delegate. In 1951 he be vice chairman of Sweden 's delegation to the General Assembly session in Paris. The following year he be act chairman of the country 's delegation to the Assembly session hold in New York. He be the second-ranking official of the Swedish Foreign Ministry when he be ask to become chief of the United Nations. Mr. Hammarskjold be unanimously name Secretary General by the Assembly April 7 , 1953 , on the recommendation of the Security Council. He be re-elected unanimously for another term of five year in Sept. , 1957. His duty a Secretary General lead to many and varied mission , apart from his trip to Peiping and his visit to the Middle East. He twice visit Asia , once to observe the cease-fire line in Kashmir that have be arrange by the United Nations after it bring an end to Indian-Pakistani fighting over the border state. In 1959 , he tour twenty-one African land and come away impress by the political maturity of many of the leader he have met. He also come away convince that financial and economic aid on a huge scale have to be find for those countries. Although travel economy be not expect of the Secretary General , Mr. Hammarskjold insist on go tourist class to the tenth anniversary conference of the United Nations , hold in San Francisco in 1955. One of the few pleasure Mr. Hammarskjold permit himself be to steal away for a week-end to his country home near Brewster , N.Y. Once an enthusiastic mountain climber and skier , he long ago relinquish these interest because of the pressure of his job. But over the fireplace in his New York apartment hang a mountain climber 's pick send to him by Tenzing Norkay , the Sherpa conqueror of Mount Everest. It bear the inscription : `` So you may climb to even great heights. '' Mr. Hammarskjold become a member of the Swedish Academy Dec. 20 , 1954. He be elect to the seat in the academy previously hold by his father. Mr. Hammarskjold hold honorary degree from Harvard , Yale , Princeton , Columbia , Pennsylvania , Amherst , Johns Hopkins , the University of California , Upsala College and Ohio University. He also hold degree from Oxford University in England and Carleton College and McGill University in Canada .