July 3 , 1961 OBITUARY Hemingway 's Prize-Winning Works Reflected Preoccupation With Life and Death By THE NEW YORK TIMES Ernest Hemingway achieve world-wide fame and influence a a writer by a combination of great emotional power and a highly individual style that could be parody but never successfully imitated. His lean and sinewy prose ; his mastery of a kind of laconic , understated dialogue ; his insistent use of repetition , often of a single word , or name -- build up and transmit an inner excitement to thousand of his readers. In his best work , the effect be accumulative ; it be a if the creative voltage increase a the page turned. Not all reader agree on Mr. Hemingway ; and his `` best '' single work will be the subject of literary debate for generations. But possibly `` The Old Man and the Sea , '' publish in 1952 , have the essence of the uncluttered force that drive his other stories. In it , character stand hard and clear , indomitable in failure. Man -- an ordinary although an unusual man- -is a victim of , and yet rise above , the elemental harshness of nature. Won the Nobel Prize The short novel win the Pulitzer Prize in 1953 ; it unquestionably move the judge who award Mr. Hemingway the Nobel Prize for Literature the following year. And it be an occasion for relief and joy among those devotee of the novelist to whom `` Across the River and Into the Trees , '' in 1950 , have mark a low point in his career. A great deal of Mr. Hemingway 's work show a preoccupation -- frequently call obsession -- with violence and death. He love gun ; he be one of the great aficionado of the deadly bullfight. He identify with the adventure of partisan warfare ; he swing a burp-gun in guerrilla fighting. He write a great deal of hunting , fishing , prizefight ; with directness and vigor ; with the accuracy of a man who have handle the artifact of a sport , take them apart , love them. He be at time a hard liver and a hard drinker. But in a sense this be all part of his be a hard and constant worker -- at his profession of observe life and record it faithfully a he saw it. Barb From Max Eastman Mr. Hemingway 's fascination with the caliber of cartridge , and exactly what each could do to a living target , and physical conflict generally , bring a barb from Max Eastman in 1937. Mr. Eastman , a writer who have flex his own muscle in Marxist dialectic rather than in battle or in the hunt , write : `` Come out from behind that false hair on your chest , Ernest. We all know you. '' When Mr. Hemingway and Mr. Eastman meet in the New York office of Charles Scribner 's Sons , blow be exchange a Mr. Hemingway bar his chest to prove that the hair be not false. In the late part of his life , Mr. Hemingway wear a beard , coarse and grizzled. It become one of the most famous beard in the world , and a kind of symbol of the man himself. After Mr. Hemingway become a successful writer , much effort be make by psychologist , amateur and professional , to discover why he write a he did. In spite of much rummage around in his childhood and in his day a a young man in Paris , many of the conclusion about him be contradictory. Mainly by trial and error , he have teach himself to write limpid English prose. Apprentice a a Writer Of his apprentice day a a writer in Paris , he write this : `` I be try to write then and I find the great difficulty , aside from know what you really felt , rather than what you be suppose to feel , be to put down what really happen in action : what the actual thing be which produce the emotion that you experience the real thing , the sequence of motion and fact which make the emotion I be try to learn to write , commence with the simple things. '' `` All I want to do be write well , '' he once said. Mr. Hemingway have a deadpan wit to which he give many a special twist , a when he translate Spanish literally. Santiago , the man character in `` The Old Man and the Sea , '' be a great American baseball fan and engage in the following dialogue : `` The Yankees can not lose. '' `` But I fear the Indians of Cleveland. '' `` Have faith in the Yankees , my son. Think of the great DiMaggio. '' `` I fear both the Tigers of Detroit and the Indians of Cleveland. '' `` Be careful or you will fear even the Reds of Cincinnati and the White Sox of Chicago. '' The man who could thus put the nuance of American baseball into the Spanish locution of a humble fisherman ; who rarely lose his sense of the humor that he find be as much a part of war and disaster a be courage itself , be bear in Oak Park , Ill. , a middle-class suburb of Chicago. The date be July 21 , 1899. Ernest Miller Hemingway be the second child of a family of six child ; there be four sister and a young brother. His father be Dr. Clarence Edmonds Hemingway , a large bearded physician who be more devoted to hunt and fishing than to his practice. His mother be Grace Hall Hemingway , a religious-minded woman who sing in the choir of the First Congregational Church. She give her son a cello , and for a year make him practice on it. But the boy 's father have great lures. He give the boy a fishing rod when he be 3 and a shot-gun when he be 10. Ambulance Driver With his graduation from Oak Park High , he complete his formal education. He read widely , however , and have a natural facility for languages. It be wartime , and torment for a spirited young man not to be in the fighting. Finally he manage to get to Italy , where he wangle his way into the fighting a a Red Cross ambulance driver with the Italian Army. Although he arrive too late for the great Italian rout at Caporetto , he learn all about it and describe it brilliantly in `` A Farewell to Arms , '' publish in 1929. On July 8 , 1918 , while he be pass out chocolate candy to frontline troop at Fossalta di Piave , Mr. Hemingway be badly wound in the leg by an Austrian mortar shell and be hospitalize for many weeks. He receive the Medaglia d'Argento al Valore Militare , a high Italian military decoration. He return to Chicago , suffer from chronic insomnia. For a while , he edit The House Organ of the Cooperative Society of America. But , inexorably , he drift to the expatriate Left Bank world of Paris. He have a letter from Sherwood Anderson to Gertrude Stein , and he be soon one of the group of writer who frequent the bookstore of Sylvia Beach -- Shakespeare & Co. , at 18 Rue de l'Odèon. Here he meet , among many others , Andrè Gide and James Joyce. Mr. Joyce and Mr. Hemingway do a certain amount of drinking together. The author of `` Ulysses '' be a thin , wispy and unmuscled man with defective eyesight. When they be make the round of the cafe and Mr. Joyce become embroil with a brawler , a he frequently do , he would slip behind his hefty companion and cry , `` Deal with him , Hemingway. Deal with him. '' It be in Paris that Mr. Hemingway begin to write seriously. He be greatly aid by the advice of the austere and sometimes curmudgeonish Miss Stein , whose unadorned style of write influence him greatly. If she be exact , she be also sympathetic , although she be incline to deride Mr. Hemingway 's mania for firearm and thereby often hurt his feelings. After several trip back to the United States , Mr. Hemingway settle in Europe. But instead of sit his life away at the Cafè de Deux Magots , a many of his contemporary do , he work hard at his writing. He write with discernment about the person around him. They be his expatriate countryman , together with the `` Lost Generation '' British and general European post-war stray , and he limn them with deadly precision. Underwent Privations Before he be establish a a writer , Mr. Hemingway undergo the privation that be almost standard for young men of letter in Paris. He live in a tiny room and often subsist on a few cent worth of fried potato a day. With the publication in 1926 of `` The Sun Also Rises '' after three year of indifferent response to his work , he achieve sudden fame. In `` The Sun Also Rises , '' Mr. Hemingway show the felicity for title that characterize his work. The title be from the book of Ecclesiastes in the Bible and be in a passage that show the seemingly meaningless come and go of the sun , the tide and the wind a the life of his character seem to the author to come and go pointlessly. A concise biography of Mr. Hemingway that focus on his Paris year be write by his friend , Archibald MacLeish : Veteran out of the war before he be twenty ; Famous at twenty-five : thirty a master -- Whittled a style for his time from a walnut stick In a carpenter 's loft in a street of that April city. In 1928 , Mr. Hemingway return to the United States , where he live for the next ten year , mostly in Florida. He hat New York City and it literary life and keep away from it as much a he could. He be still only 30 when he publish his highly successful `` A Farewell to Arms. '' When `` Death in the Afternoon '' be publish in 1932 , Mr. Hemingway say he have see 1,500 bull killed. The great success of the book establish it author a one of the great popularizer of bullfighting. For several year Mr. Hemingway hunt big game in Africa and do much shooting and fishing in different part of the world. `` Winner Take Nothing '' be publish in 1933 and `` The Green Hills of Africa '' in 1935. The latter be one of the best contemporary account of the complex relationship between the hunter , the hunt and the African native who be essential to the ritual of their confrontation. At the same time , the book tell a much of Hemingway , the writer 's writer , a of Hemingway , the big game hunter. For example : `` ... the feeling come when you write well and truly of something and know impersonally you have write it that way and those who be pay to read it and report on it do not like the subject so they say it be all a fake , yet you know it value absolutely ... '' Like many American intellectual , Mr. Hemingway offer some degree of support to Left-Wing movement during the Nineteen Thirties. In at least one of his book , `` To Have and Have Not '' ( 1937 ) -- his only full-length novel with an American setting -- one critic find he have speak favorably of `` social consciousness , '' and to another he have sound `` vaguely Socialist. '' Action and Tragedy But more reader will remember the work a a tale of action and tragedy in the Florida Keys. They will recall not so much the social aspect of Harry Morgan 's career , but probably the remarkable love affair between the doom boatman and his slatternly wife. Mr. Hemingway might stir the `` social consciousness '' of individual reader ; but if so , he do it by exact characterization , never by didactics. Nor have Mr. Hemingway ever join the cafè-sitters , who cheer on the progress of the Left. In 1936 , with characteristic directness , he go to Spain. He cover the war for the North American Newspaper Alliance. And in 1940 his novel of the Spanish Civil War , `` For Whom the Bell Tolls , '' show both that his own deepest sympathy be with the Loyalists , and that he be agonizingly aware of the destructive effect upon their cause of the Communist commissars. Indeed , the novel be in the broad sense a lament for everyone involve in the conflict. Its striking title come from John Donne , who have remind that no man be an island , and have write ( in his seventeenth `` Devotion '' ) : `` ... never send to know for whom the bell toll ; it toll for thee. '' In the year World War II break out , Mr. Hemingway take up residence in Cuba. But soon he be back in action in Europe , resume the combat correspondence he have begin in Spain. Mr. Hemingway be with the first of the Allied arm force to enter Paris , where , a he put it , he `` liberate the Ritz '' Hotel. Later he be with the Fourth United States Infantry Division in an assault in the Huertgen Forest. The Bronze Star be award to him for his semi-military service in this action. In 1950 , `` Across the River and Into the Trees '' -- the story of a frustrated and generally `` beat up '' United States infantry colonel who go to Venice to philosophize , make love and die -- disappointed critics. It touch off `` Across the Street and Into the Grill , '' by E.B. White in The New Yorker. This be probably the supreme parody of Hemingway. In 1950 , The New Yorker also publish a multi-part profile of Mr. Hemingway by Lillian Ross , who have spend several day with him in New York. It be a brilliant but savage series ; it stir much controversy and appear to have make more friend for Mr. Hemingway than for Miss Ross. But the most impressive riposte come from the novelist himself. When the profile be publish in hard cover , Mr. Hemingway in The New York Herald Tribune list it among the three book he have find most interesting that year. `` The Old Man and the Sea , '' two year later , please virtually everyone. It rely on the elemental drama of a fisherman who catch the great marlin of his life -- only to have it eat to the skeleton by shark before he can get it to port. Hurt in Air Crash The 1954 Nobel Prize citation from the Swedish Academy say in part : `` For his powerful , style-forming mastery of the art of modern narration , a most recently evince in 'The Old Man and the Sea. ' '' On Jan. 23 , 1954 , the writer and the fourth Mrs. Hemingway , the former Mary Welsh ( whom he call Miss Mary ) figure in a double crash in Uganda , British East Africa. First report say both have be killed. Actually , after one light plane crash , a second have pick up the couple unhurt. Both Mr. Hemingway and his wife suffer injury in the crack-up of the rescue plane ; and a friend who visit them in Havana soon after find that the novelist 's injury have be more severe than be generally supposed. Mr. Hemingway 's other publish writing include `` Three Stories and Ten Poems , '' 1923 ; `` In Our Time , '' 1925 ; `` The Torrents of Spring , '' 1926 ; `` Men Without Women , '' 1927 , and `` The Fifth Column and First-Forty-nine Stories , '' in 1938. Mr. Hemingway earn million of dollar from his work ; for one thing , a great many of his story and novel be adapt to the screen and television. These include `` The Killers , '' an early gangster story , celebrate for it dialogue ; `` The Snows of Kilimanjaro '' and `` The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber , '' both set in East Africa ; `` The Sun Also Rises , '' `` A Farewell to Arms , '' `` For Whom the Bell Tolls '' and `` The Old Man and the Sea. '' Mr. Hemingway 's first wife be a boyhood sweetheart , the former Hadley Richardson , whom he marry in 1919. She accompany him on one of his early trip to Paris. They be divorce in 1926. The next year Mr. Hemingway marry Pauline Pfeiffer. This marriage be terminate by divorce in 1940 and in that year Mr. Hemingway marry a novelist , Martha Gellhorn. After their divorce Mr. Hemingway marry Miss Welsh. A son , John , be bear to Mr. Hemingway and his first wife. Two other son , Patrick and Gregory , be bear to the author and his second wife .