December 14 , 1961 OBITUARY Grandma Moses Is Dead at 101 ; Primitive Artist 'Just Wore Out' Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES HOOSICK FALLS , N. Y. , Dec. 13 -- Grandma Moses , the spry , indomitable `` genuine American primitive '' who become one of the country 's most famous painter in her late seventy , die here today at the age of 101. She die at the Hoosick Falls Health Center , where she have be a patient since August , after a fall at her home in nearby Eagle Bridge. Her physician , Dr. Clayton E. Shaw , say she have die of hardening of the artery , but the best way to describe the cause of death , he suggest , be to say `` she just wear out. '' The simple realism , nostalgic atmosphere and luminous color with which Grandma Moses portray homely farm life and rural countryside win her a wide following. She be able to capture the excitement of winter 's first snow , Thanksgiving preparation and the new , young green of oncoming spring. Gay color , action and humor enliven her portrayal of such simple farm activity a maple sugaring , soap-making , candle-making , haying , berrying and the making of apple butter. In person , Grandma Moses charm wherever she went. A tiny , lively woman with mischievous gray eye and a quick wit , she could be sharp-tongued with a sycophant and stern with an errant grandchild. Cheerful , a a cricket , even in her last year , she continue to be keenly observant of all that go on around her. Until her last birthday , Sept. 7 , she rarely fail to do a little painting every day. Grandma Moses be survive by her daughter-in-law , Mrs. Dorothy Moses ; nine grandchild and more than thirty great-grandchildren. A funeral service will be hold Saturday at 2 P. M. from the painter 's home. Burial will be in the Maple Grove Cemetery here. Crippled by Arthritis Grandma Moses , whose painting hang in nine museum in the United States and in Vienna and Paris , turn out her first picture when she be 76 year old. She take up painting because arthritis have cripple her hand so that she no longer could embroider. She could not hold a needle , but she could hold a brush , and she have be too busy all her life to bear the thought of be idle. Two year later a New York engineer and art collector , Louis J. Caldor , who be drive through Hoosick Falls saw some of her painting display in a drug store. They be price from $ 3 to $ 5 , depend on size. He buy them all , drive to the artist 's home at Eagle Bridge and buy ten others she have there. The next year , 1939 , Grandma Moses be represent in an exhibition of `` contemporary unknown painter '' at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. She do not remain unknown for long. A one-man show of her painting be hold in New York in 1940 , and other one-man show abroad followed. Her painting be soon reproduce on Christmas card , tile and fabric here and abroad. She be the guest of President and Mrs. Harry S. Truman in 1949 at a tea at which the President play the piano for her. Honored by Governor Governor Rockefeller proclaim the painter 's 100th and 101st birthday `` Grandma Moses Days '' throughout the state , declare this year that `` there be no more renowned artist in our entire country today. '' Yesterday the Governor say , `` she paint for the sheer love of painting , and throughout her 101 year she be endear to all who have the privilege of know her. '' But to say that she be an American painter be less than the full portrait of Grandma Moses ; European critic call her work `` lovable , '' `` fresh , '' `` charming , '' `` adorable '' and `` full of naive and childlike joy. '' A German fan offer his explanation for her wide popularity : `` There emanate from her painting a light-hearted optimism ; the world she show u be beautiful and it be good. You feel at home in all these picture , and you know their meaning. The unrest and the neurotic insecurity of the present day make u inclined to enjoy the simple and affirmative outlook of Grandma Moses. '' As a self-taught `` primitive , '' who in childhood begin paint what she call `` lambscapes '' by squeeze out grape juice or lemon juice to get color , Grandma Moses have be compare to the great self-taught French painter , Henri Rousseau , as well a to Breughel. Until the comparison be make , she have never hear of either artist. Painted from Remembrance Grandma Moses do all of her painting from remembrance of thing past. She like to sit quietly and think , she once say , and remember and imagine. `` Then I 'll get an inspiration and start painting ; then I 'll forget everything , everything except how thing use to be and how to paint it so people will know how we use to live. '' She would sit on an old , batter swivel chair , perch on two large pillows. The Masonite on which she paint would lie flat on an old kitchen table before her. There be no easel. Crowding her in her `` studio '' be an electric washer and dryer that have overflow from the kitchen. For subject matter , Grandma Moses draw on memory of a long life a farm child , hire girl and farmer 's wife. Her first painting have be send to the county fair along with sample of her raspberry jam and strawberry preserves. Her jam have win a ribbon , but nobody notice those first paintings. She would paint for five or six hour , and prefer the first part of the session because , a she say , her hand be fresher and `` stiddier. '' At night , after dinner , she like to watch television Westerns , not for the drama but because she like to see horses. Grandma Moses , who be bear before Abraham Lincoln have yet take office , spend a lot of her time on what she call her `` old-timey '' New England landscapes. She paint from the top down : `` First the sky , then the mountain , then the hill , then the tree , then the house , then the cattle and then the people. '' Her tiny figure , disproportionately small , cast no shadows. They seem sharply arrest in action. She learn a a child to observe nature when her father take the child out for walks. He be a Methodist , but never go to church , and he allow his child to believe what they wanted. Instead of go to church , they go for long walk in the woods. Grandma Moses have have a hard life most of her many year , but neither her fame nor her advanced year cut into her formidable production. During her lifetime she paint more than 1,000 picture , twenty-five of them after she have pass her 100th birthday. Her oil have increase in value from those early $ 3 and $ 5 work to $ 8,000 or $ 10,000 for a large picture. Otto Kallier , owner and director of the Galerie St. Etienne in New York and president of Grandma Moses ' Properties , Inc. , will not discuss her earnings , but they be reliably estimate to have reach nearly $ 500,000. Two one-man show of Grandma Moses ' work tour Europe , each for two year , and a third tour abroad be schedule in 1962-63. `` Grandma Moses Story Book , '' an anthology for child illustrate by forty-seven color reproduction of her painting , be publish this year by Random House , and 20,000 copy be sell before publication. Grandma Moses , the former Anna Mary Robertson be bear at Greenwich , N. Y. , in 1860 , one of five daughter and five son of Russell King Robertson and the former Margaret Shannahan. What little formal education she have be obtain in a one-room country school. At the age of 12 she leave home to work a a hired girl. She work in the same capacity until she be 27 year old , when she be marry to Thomas Salmon Moses. He be the hired man on the farm where she be do the housework. Invested in Farm The couple take a wedding trip to North Carolina. On the way back , they decide to invest their $ 600 saving in the rental of a farm near Staunton , Va. They remain in Virginia for twenty years. Ten child , five of whom die in infancy , be bear to them. In addition to care for the child and run the house , Mrs. Moses make butter and potato chip , which she sell to neighbors. The couple return to New York State and begin farm at Eagle Bridge. Mr. Moses die there in 1927. For several year his widow continue to operate the farm with the help of her son , Forrest. But she have to give up farm chore , and then embroidery , when arthritis attack her hands. She have be embroider in wool picture that be reminiscent of Currier and Ives print of country scenes. Grandma Moses ' first painting be copy from the print and post cards. Gradually , however , she begin to compose original scene , drawn from her memory of farm life in past generations. For her work , the painter receive honorary doctoral degree from Russell Sage College in 1949 and from the Moore Institute of Art , Science and Industry , Philadelphia , in 1951. Late in life she become a member of the Daughters of the American Revolution and the Society of Mayflower Descendants after the local chapter have trace her ancestry and invite her to join. `` My Life 's History , '' her autobiography , be publish in 1951 by Harper & Brothers. `` Grandma Moses , American Primitive , '' a biography write by Mr. Kallir , be publish in 1947 by Doubleday & Co. It be in `` My Life 's History '' that Grandma Moses express her basic philosophy : `` I look back on my life like a good day 's work , it be do and I feel satisfied with it. I be happy and contented , I know nothing well and make the best out of what life offered. And life be what we make it , always have be , always will be. '' Kennedy Pays Tribune WASHINGTON , Dec. 13 ( AP ) -- President Kennedy pay the follow tribute today to Grandma Moses : `` The death of Grandma Moses remove a beloved figure from American life. The directness and vividness of her painting restore a primitive freshness to our perception of the American scene. Both her work and her life help our nation renew it pioneer heritage and recall it root in the countryside and on the frontier. All Americans mourn her loss . ''