January 11 , 1961 OBITUARY Emily Balch Dies ; Won Nobel Prize Special to The New York Times Cambridge , Mass. , Jan. 10 -- Emily Greene Balch , a leader of the pacifist movement throughout the world and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , die here yesterday at the age of 94. Miss Balch have be live in the Vernon Nursing Home here since December , 1956. Before that she make her home in Wellesley for many years. Surviving be three sister , Miss Elizabeth B. Balch of Cambridge and Miss Marion C. Balch and Mrs. Robert Bowditch Stone , both of Jamaica Plain. Lost Teaching Job Miss Balch lose her college teach job because she be an outspoken pacifist. Some year later she win the Nobel Peace Prize for the same reason. All who know this forthright , earnest New England woman know that this recognition be the result of a change in the time , not a change in Miss Balch. Social worker , economist as well a a college professor , she begin her new career in 1918 at the age of 52 , have firmly and forever declare herself against war. Miss Balch , who describe herself a `` only the plain of New England spinster and ex- teacher , '' be a founder of the Women 's International League for Peace and Freedom. One of her close associate be Jane Addams , who serve the league a president while Miss Balch be it secretary-treasurer. Born in Jamaica Plain on Jan. 8 , 1867 , Miss Balch study social work at Bryn Mawr College , receive an A.B. degree with it first graduating class , in 1889. Her teach career be preface by field work in social service under Jacob Riis in New York , the study of political economy in Paris , a job a a settlement-house worker in Boston and more study at the University of Chicago and the University of Berlin. In 1896 , when she return from Germany , she become an assistant in economics at Wellesley College. By 1913 she be Professor of Economics and Political and Social Science there. Served In Military Hospitals Miss Balch be a delegate to the International Congress of Women at The Hague , the Netherlands , in 1915 , after her interest in world peace have already take firm hold. It be enhance during World War I , when , on leave from the college , she serve overseas in military hospitals. She be among the author of the peace proposal that come out of the 1915 meeting and the formation of a Women 's International Committee for Permanent Peace , which later become the Women 's International League for Peace and Freedom. In 1916 , Miss Balch serve in Stockholm , Sweden , on the Neutral Conference for Continuous Meditation establish by Henry Ford and she draw up a study of `` International Colonial Administration. '' When she return to the United States she work actively against United States entry into the war. During her anti-war activity Miss Balch try to relieve Wellesley of embarrassment by remain on leave of absence. When the war end in 1918 the trustee refuse to renew her appointment. Miss Balch then move full time into the peace movement. She become secretary-treasurer of the league and establish it headquarters at Geneva. She leave the post in 1922 because of ill health , but in 1934 , when it become involve in financial trouble , take up the job again for eighteen month without pay. Studied Haitian Conditions In 1930 , Miss Balch accompany a commission appoint by President Herbert Hoover to study condition in occupied Haiti. She write much of the final report , and her subsequent writing , lecture and other persuasion be say to have greatly influence the withdrawal of the United States Marine Corps from that country. Wellesley make it peace with Miss Balch on Armistice Day in 1935 , when she be invite to be the college 's official speaker. In 1946 , when she be nominate for the peace prize , which she share with the late Dr. John R. Mott , she be recommend for the honor by Mildred McAfee Horton , Wellesley 's president. Miss Balch donate her $ 17,000 share of the prize to the Women 's International League for Peace and Freedom. When World War II break out Miss Balch report she `` go through a long and painful mental struggle '' . Her pacifism do not prevent her from oppose Adolf Hitler , but her opposition take the form of help to sufferer from Nazi cruelty. Although in fail health in recent year , Miss Balch be still able to serve a honorary chairman of the Women 's International League and , in 1959 , a co-chairman of a committee of sixty notable to mark the 100th anniversary of Jane Addams ' birth. Miss Balch , who be bear into a Unitarian family , join the Society of Friends in 1921 and remain a Quaker the rest of her life .