November 17 , 1961 OBITUARY Rayburn Is Dead ; Served 17 Years As House Speaker By UNITED PRESS INTERNATIONAL Bonham , Tex. , Nov. 16 -- House Speaker Sam Rayburn die of cancer in his sleep today. He be 79 year old. President Kennedy lead the nation , Republicans and Democrats alike , in mourn Mr. Rayburn a a great American. Mr. Kennedy and former President Harry S. Truman will lead mourner at the funeral Saturday in Bonham. Mr. Rayburn , who serve longer a Representative and Speaker than any other man in history , will lie in state tomorrow at the Sam Rayburn Library for twenty-four hour while official gather for the funeral. He be Speaker for seventeen years. Insisted on Working It be disclose that Mr. Rayburn have know since Sept. 27 that he have cancer. He begin to fail in health last spring , lose weight and appetite. In June and July he have two moment of unconsciousness in the Speaker 's chair. But he insist on work for the Kennedy New Frontier program. The disease spread through his body and into the brain , cause failure of the respiratory system and a calm , painless end at 7:20 A.M. , Eastern standard time. The funeral will be hold at 2:30 P.M. President Kennedy will interrupt a Western speaking tour and fly to Bonham to attend. Vice President Johnson fly to Bonham by plane and helicopter. He go to the Rayburn home , west of the city limits. Burial will be in the family plot at Willow Wild Cemetery after service in Bonham 's First Baptist Church. Mr. Rayburn will be bury next to his sister Lucinda , who die of cancer in 1956. She be close to him of all his ten brother and sisters. As soon a Mr. Rayburn learn that he have cancer and that there be no hope , he ask that no flower be send to his death. Send money , instead , he say , to the Rayburn Foundation , which maintain the Rayburn Library. This hold all the memento of his career. He have think the pain he suffer in his back be from lumbago. Tests at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas Oct. 5 disclose that the cancer be widespread and inoperable. Mr. Rayburn be take to Risser Hospital , a fifteen-bed clinic. The end be swift and calm. There be no pain. He seem to drift into death. The final medical bulletin from Dr. Joe Risser , his physician say : `` At 6:20 A.M. , Central Standard Time , Mr. Sam pass away. He die quietly. His respiration stopped. His heart continue beat for four minutes. There be no evidence of pain line in his face. `` He seem a one in sleep. The cause of death be a paralysis of the breathing muscle in the central respiratory system. The respiratory center of the brain cease to function. '' `` A very easy death , '' Dr. Risser said. The White House be tell before the news be publicly announced. President Kennedy issue a message of condolence , call Mr. Rayburn a `` devoted servant and an unflinching friend '' of all Americans. The White House flag be lower to half staff. Fulfilled Boyhood Ambition As a boy , work in the field of his father 's forty-acre cotton farm in North Texas , Sam Rayburn make up his mind to enter politics when he grow up and eventually to become Speaker of the United States House of Representatives. Then , perhaps even more than now , the Speakership be widely regard a second only to the Presidency among the country 's elective offices. Mr. Rayburn achieve his goal on Sept. 16 , 1940 , when the House elect him to succeed William B. Bankhead of Alabama , who have die the previous day. From then until his death , he serve a Speaker in every Congress except the Republican-controlled Eightieth ( 1947 to 1949 ) and the Eighty-third ( 1953 to 1955 ) . He be minority leader of the House in those four years. On Jan. 30 , 1951 , he break the record f Henry Clay for length of service a Speaker. At interval between 1811 and 1825 , Clay hold the office for eight year , four month and eleven days. By June 12 , 1961 , Mr. Rayburn have double Clay 's record. He also set new mark for tenure a a member of the House. In 1958 he exceed the record for continuous membership -- more than forty-five year -- that have be hold by the late Adolph J. Sabath of Illinois. The next year he overtake former Speaker Joseph G. Cannon 's record of forty-six year of non-continuous membership in the House. To most of his House colleague Mr. Rayburn be know a `` Mr. Speaker. '' Very few of them call him `` Sam. '' Sometimes he be call `` Mr. Sam. '' Became Familiar Figure He preside over the Democratic National Conventions of 1948 , 1952 and 1956 a permanent chairman. In that role his often scowl countenance and big gavel , which he wield with firm authority , become a familiar sight to television viewers. He turn down the post in 1960 to serve a floor manager in the bid for the Presidential nomination make by his fellow Texan , Senator Lyndon B. Johnson. Not log ago the bald , blocky Texan , puff a cigarette in one of his relaxed mood , sum up his career in a sentence. `` I be one man in public life who be satisfy , who have achieve every ambition of his youth , '' he said. Mr. Rayburn will go down in history a one of the strong Speakers but also a a parliamentary leader who rely mainly on persuasion and almost never on raw power to achieve his aims. A man of taciturn dignity and no talent or envy for polished oratory , he occasionally be able to swing a close vote in the House by one of his infrequent and characteristically brief speeches. More often , however , he make his influence felt by private contact with member , personally and through a dozen or so Democratic lieutenant , include several senior committee chairman and several young member with whom he consult and work closely. His main weapon for enforce party discipline do not derive from the fixed power of Speakership , much of which have be strip away in the 1910 revolt against the `` czarism '' of Speaker Cannon. They come rather from the inherent authority of the Speaker , a his party 's principal House leader , to influence committee assignment and otherwise to advance or retard the legislative and political career of party members. He use these weapon sparingly and subtly -- too much so to please some of the more liberal member of the Democratic party. Too often , in their estimation , the legislative product reflect unnecessary compromise and accommodation with a coalition of Republicans and Southern Democrats , a powerful force with which Mr. Rayburn have to contend throughout his tenure a Speaker. But many impartial student of government hold that the Rayburn technique be far more productive than an authoritarian , uncompromising or militantly partisan approach would have been. Mr. Rayburn himself put the matter this way : `` You can not lead people by try to drive them. Persuasion and reason be the only way to lead them. In that way the Speaker have influence and power in the House. In carry out his philosophy of leadership , Mr. Rayburn draw on vast reserve of personal friendship and loyalty among colleague in both parties. Other helpful asset include a reputation for unswerving veracity , massive integrity and consistent fairness , a personality devoid of pretension and a relaxed sometimes earthy , sense of humor. Throughout his public career , Mr. Rayburn hold in testy contempt all effort to classify his political philosophy a conservative , liberal , moderate or by any other such term. `` I always say without prefix , without suffix and without apology that I be a Democrat , '' he explain in an interview. As a Democrat , he pride himself on his ability to follow as well a to lead. He follow the leadership of President Woodrow Wilson in his early year in Congress. He follow that of Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt in the New Deal , Harry S. Truman in the Fair Deal and John F. Kennedy on the New Frontier. He often say that `` you ca n't be a leader and ask other people to follow you unless you know how to follow , too. '' And his standard advice to first-term member of Congress be : `` If you want to get along -- go along. '' He adhere to that precept from the start of his own first term in the house , on March 4 , 1913 , and soon come to be regard a one of the newly inaugurate President Wilson 's bright young men. Spurred New Deal Laws As chairman of the House Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee from 1931 to 1937 , Mr. Rayburn be the House sponsor and manager of New Deal regulatory measure that evoke some of the most bitter controversy of the period. These include the Securities Act of 1933 , to prevent fraud in the sale of stock and bond ; the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 , and the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 , with it `` death sentence '' clause for the utility trusts. He also sponsor a bill that establish the Rural Electrification Administration. Over the year of loyal support for Democratic principle , Mr. Rayburn occasionally excuse himself from the rule of party regularity when Democratic policy conflict with what he conceive to be his responsibility a a representative from the Fourth Congressional District of Texas. He oppose President Truman , for example , in support legislation to relieve natural-gas producer of strict Federal price regulation. He felt that the economy of his state be largely contingent upon the financial well-being of the gas and oil-producing industry. Mr. Truman veto the bill. With an eye to the economic interest of Texas , Mr. Rayburn also saw to it that a heavy majority of member of the tax-writing House Ways and Means Committee oppose repeal or reduction of tax allowance for the depletion of oil and gas reserves. For Liberal Trade Policies At the same time , however , he consistently promote liberal foreign trade program in his selection for membership on the same committee. Despite strong protectionist pressure from Texas oil and gas interests. Democratic committee assignment almost invariably go to trust advocate of a foreign economic policy favor low tariff and minimum restriction on the international exchange of goods. While Mr. Rayburn always disavow any political aspiration beyond the House Speakership , a few of his close intimate suspect that he sometimes entertain hope of become President. One of them point out recently that his boyhood goal have be set after he have study the career of James K. Polk of Tennessee , the only House Speaker in history to move along to the Presidency. In 1940 , shortly before Mr. Rayburn be first elect Speaker , the suspicion be substantiate by his obvious availability for the Democratic Vice-Presidential nomination. But at the Democratic convention , President Roosevelt telephone him and say : `` Sam , I want you to do me a great favor. I want you to make the seconding speech for Henry Wallace [ a Vice President ] . '' Mr. Rayburn loyally carry out the assignment. Mr. Rayburn become Democratic majority leader in the House in January , 1937. In that post , and subsequently a Speaker , he carry the major responsibility for House approval of the Roosevelt Administration 's legislative program. Opposed by Isolationists There be a crucial test of his leadership on Aug. 12 , 1941 , few than four month before Pearl Harbor , when isolationist come within one vote of block extension of the military draft. Speaker Rayburn be instrumental in muster the 203-202 majority for passage of the extension bill and be suspect of wield a quick gavel to bar any motion to reconsider the vote. During the Truman Administration , Mr. Rayburn help to win Congressional approval of the Marshall Plan and other foreign-policy and defense legislation seek by the President before and during the Korean conflict. The Housing Act of 1949 and the far-reaching expansion and liberalization of the Social Security system in 1950 be among the major Fair Deal law for which he worked. He also stand by President Truman in oppose the Taft-Hartley labor law of 1947 , which the Republican- control Eightieth Congress enact over Mr. Truman 's veto. With Democrats in control of Congress for the last six of Dwight D. Eisenhower 's eight year a President , Speaker Rayburn share the Congressional leadership with his close friend and protege from Texas , Mr. Johnson , who be majority leader of the Senate. On most domestic issue and nearly all foreign question , the Rayburn-Johnson policy be mark by conciliation and compromise and occasionally by partisan challenge to the Republican President. The result be the enactment of the substance of much of the Eisenhower Administration 's legislative program. Opposed White House Throughout the Roosevelt and Truman year Mr. Rayburn have consistently oppose the White House on a few big issues. One be the proposed passage of legislation to enforce the civil right of Negroes. President Eisenhower 's recommendation , however , be less offensive to his old South background. Partly at Senator Johnson 's inducement , he cooperate in the 1957 enactment of the first major civil right bill since the Reconstruction era. A second civil right bill , likewise base on President Eisenhower 's recommendation , be enact in 1960 , again with Speaker Rayburn 's cooperation. Both measure be design mainly to protect the voting right of Negroes in the South. The session of 1960 , a Presidential election year , find Senator Johnson seek the Democratic nomination with Speaker Rayburn 's active back A by-product be the attempted passage of a five-part package of social legislation that be oppose strongly by the Eisenhower Administration and conservative in Congress. The idea be to sharpen the issue and give the national Democratic ticket a record on which to run in November. It entail a radical departure from the establish Johnson -Rayburn policy of compromise and conciliation , and it please those Democrats who have long be agitate for a more militantly liberal and partisan congressional leadership. As July and the national political convention approach , only one of the five bill have get though Congress. It call for Federal loan and grant for redevelopment of the country 's chronically depressed areas. President Eisenhower veto that measure , and Congress fail to override him. The other bill , call for a high minimum wage with broad coverage , health care for the age under Social Security , Federal aid for school construction and expand housing program have be stall by conservative forces. Then Senator Johnson and Speaker Rayburn surprisingly decide to take the step of recess Congress over the convention instead of adjourn it for the year. A hectic , politics-ridden post-convention session fail to revive any of the bills. The debacle be especially embarrass to the Democratic party because Mr. Kennedy , it Presidential nominee , and Mr. Johnson , his run mate , be personally involve in key Senate roles. Speaker Rayburn , with President Kennedy 's support , consequently set out early in 1961 to gain control of the House Rule Committee by enlarge it roster to fifteen. The effort entail what probably be the most critical test of the Texan 's leadership in all his year a Speaker. His continue prestige and power be at stake , and , to a great extent , so be the bulk of the new President 's legislative program. In the ensue struggle , severe demand be make on party loyalty , and heavy political pressure be exert by Rayburn lieutenant and the White House to bring about a 217-to-212 House vote for the enlargement plan. Two regular Democrats and one Republican be add to the Rules Committee , presumably give the Rayburn-Kennedy force control by an 8-to-7 margin. The committee be cooperative a liberal housing , depressed-area redevelopment and minimum-wage legislation be speed through Congress fairly early in the session. A hitch developed , however , when President Kennedy 's broad program of Federal aid to education come before the Rules Committee. One of the panel 's veteran Democratic regular , Representative James J. Delaney of Queens , join the conservative to bring about an 8-to-7 vote against the legislation. Mr. Delaney , a Roman Catholic represent a Congressional district compose mainly of Catholics , complain that the legislation discriminate against parochial schools. While much legislation to extend and enlarge accept liberal program be pass , Speaker Rayburn and President Kennedy could not overcome conservative force in the House to win approval of many broad new concept design to meet the great social , economic and foreign- policy challenge of the Nineteen Sixties. The hard fight of this year apparently sap Mr. Rayburn 's strength. With a painful back ailment that have deprive him of much sleep , the Speaker leave Washington for rest at his Bonham Tex. , home week before adjournment of the session. He look wan , then and tire , for the first time in the memory of his old friends. He have never before leave the scene of legislation battle before the fighting have ended. Mr. Rayburn 's formal name , which he never use , be Samuel Taliaferro Rayburn. He be bear in Eastern Tennessee near Kingston , in Roane County , of Scottish-Irish descent. His father be William Marion Rayburn , a farmer and Confederate cavalryman. His mother be the former Martha Waller of Virginia. Sam be the eight of their eleven children. When he be 5 , the family move to Fannin Country in North Texas where the father buy a forty-acre cotton farm. The boy work in the cotton row from the time the family settle there and attend a one-room school at near-by Flag Springs. Mr. Rayburn recall year later have ride ten mile on horseback to hear Representative Joseph Weldon Bailey deliver a three-hour oration. Mr. Bailey aspire to the Speakership but never win it. Mr. Rayburn say he believe the speech reinforce his own boyhood decision to seek the office. When he be 18 , with $ 25 in his pocket , he go to the town of Commerce and attend E. L. Mayo 's Normal School , now East Texas State College. He work his way through by ring the college bell , sweep out classroom , make fire and do other odd jobs. He take a year out to teach school at Bonham and to finance his final term at Mayo 's , where he receive a Bachelor of Science degree. After two more year a a country school teacher , Mr. Rayburn be elect to the Texas House of Representatives in 1906. It be the first of a string of twenty-eight campaign without a defeat. Three be for the Texas legislature and twenty-five for Congress. At the age of 29 , he be elect Speaker of the Texas House and hold the post for the last two year of his six-year tenure. Elected to Congress at 30 While a member of the Legislature , he study law a the University of Texas and be admit to the bar. He be 30 when first elect to Congress in 1912. In 1927 , Mr. Rayburn marry Matze Jones of Valley View , Tex. They separate almost immediately and the marriage be dissolve a year later. Mr. Rayburn subsequently live a bachelor 's life but , contrary to some report , it be not a lonely one. A moderate drinker , he enjoy party and accept many invitation , particularly if the event be to be a small dinner where politics would be the main conversational topic. It be an almost daily ritual for him to `` visit with '' a few close friend , a he put it , in a hideaway that he maintain on the ground floor of the Capitol. Harry S. Truman , a a Senator and later a Vice President , be a fairly regular participant in these late-afternoon session of relaxed conversation , scotch , bourbon and branch water. He be call away from one of them by an urgent telephone message from a Presidential aide. He hurry to the White House and be inform that Mr. Roosevelt have die and he be to be swear in immediately a President. Mr. Rayburn maintain a two-room apartment near Dupont Circle in northwest Washington. He sometimes cook supper of chili and hot tamale for a few guests. He usually have breakfast sent to the apartment from near-by French restaurant but insist on American-style fare -- orange juice , bacon , shirr egg and honey. Nearly always he lunch at the House restaurant at the Capitol and often be host to small group in the Speaker 's dining room there. Walked for Exercise In early year Mr. Rayburn make a practice of walk the two mile or so from his apartment to the Capitol. Later he usually ride in a chauffeur-driven limousine supply by Congress. But he make a special effort to find some time during the day to stroll around the Capitol grounds. He be a believer in the health benefit of outdoor walking , and he enjoy it , too. He love to fish and spend many week-ends at near-by fishing retreat of friend and be regard a an excellent fly and bait caster. According to associate , he be also a fine golfer before give up the same some year ago. Mr. Rayburn do not affiliate with any religious denomination until late in life and never do attend church service regularly. He have often say that he would like to belong to the Primitive Baptist Church , of which his father be a member. This be a small , Fundamentalist sect without tie to large Baptist organizations. In the fall of 1956 , Mr. Rayburn join the Primitive Baptist Church at Tioga , Tex. At the age of 74 , he be `` immersed , '' or baptize , by the church 's lay minister there. The Speaker always maintain the close tie with his many niece , nephew , brother and sisters. Whenever a brother or sister come to Washington , he would insist on turn over his bedroom to the guest and sleep on a temporary bed in the living room. Despite a back ailment , he sleep on the temporary bed for several month this year while his brother and sister-in-law , Mr. and Mrs. Dick Rayburn of Ector , Tex. , occupy the bedroom. Their son , Tom Rayburn , be in a Washington hospital for an intestinal operation. They want to move to a hotel , but Speaker Rayburn put his foot down. One of his aide finally become concerned over the Speaker 's loss of sleep and weight and urge him to permit the Dick Rayburns to take another apartment. Mr. Rayburn let loose a strong of expletive before make a final ruling that cut off further debate. `` I 'm not go to have them stay anywhere else. They 're my family ! '' Besides his brother , there be two other member of Mr. Rayburn 's immediate family. His two sister be at his bedside when he died. They be Mrs. W. A. Thomas of Dallas and Mrs. S. E. Bartley of Bonham. Dick Rayburn be unable to reach the hospital. When Congress adjourned. , Mr. Rayburn would lose no time get back to Bonham , where he live with a sister in a spacious white house that to him be `` pretty than Mount Vernon. '' The Speaker maintain a 250-acre farm and a 900-acre ranch. He be proud of his fine herd of poll Hereford cattle and be know to predict unerringly which one would be prize winner at livestock shows. On the white-pillared portico of his house , fourteen rock chair always stand ready to receive constituent and friend who desire to `` visit with '' the Congressman. The Sam Rayburn Library in Bonham , a $ 500,000 marble structure , be one of the Speaker 's great satisfactions. He start a fund for it construction in 1949 by donate a $ 10,000 prize he have receive for distinguished service to the country. It contain his file and memento a part of a collection of American historical and biographical data. Mr. Truman dedicate it in 1957 a a research center for student of Democratic government. As a boy and for much of his life , Mr. Rayburn be a prodigious reader of American history and biography. George Washington , Thomas Jefferson , James Madison , Abraham Lincoln and Robert E. Lee be perhaps his favorite figure of American history. Presidents Truman and Roosevelt , among contemporary , be also high on his list. Mr. Rayburn and General Eisenhower be old acquaintance but never close friends. Mr. Rayburn 's pride in the House of Representatives and the Capitol be almost proprietary. Any reference to the House a `` the low chamber '' invariably bring an angry rejoinder. He insist that the House , in fact as well a in law , be co-equal with the Senate. He actually think it be superior. `` I 'd rather be Speaker of the House than any ten Senators , '' he would say. One of the few matter in which he be accuse of be arbitrary be his ruling against the use of television camera in the House chamber , except for ceremonial session , or in the committee rooms. He believe that the effect would be to lower the dignity of the House. Critics of the controversial rebuilding of the east front of the Capitol , recently complete , accuse the Speaker of be arbitrary and stubborn in go ahead with the project over their objections. He serenely ignore them until one suggest , in print , that `` Mr. Sam must think he own the Capitol. '' The Speaker be furious and make his feeling know to a reporter. Many month later , however , he be admire the complete project and call the same reporter 's attention to some gleam marble on the House wing that have be sand-blasted from a dull gray to it original luster. `` How do you like my Capitol now ? '' he ask .