June 7 , 1961 OBITUARY Dr. Carl G. Jung Is Dead at 85 ; Pioneer in Analytic Psychology By The Associated Press ZURICH , Switzerland , June 6 -- Professor Carl Gustav Jung , one of the founder of analytic psychology , die today at his villa in Kuessnacht on Lake Lucerne. He be 85 year old. The famed psychologist be beset by heart and circulatory trouble and begin to fail several week ago. Adventurer in the Mind Dr. Jung be one of the great modern adventurer who seek to push back the dark frontier of man 's mind. Before the come of his great forerunner , Dr. Sigmund Freud , the world be little used to rummage through man 's subconscious to find the key to his peace and security. Before Freud and Jung , the Western world be incline to think of man 's conduct in term of original sin. Dr. Jung be one of those who give a tremendous impetus to twentieth-century thinking by declare flatly that this explanation be not good enough. In an attempt to bring some definition to the subconscious mind , Dr. Jung create special terms. These term be soon to spread beyond the mental clinic to become part of the language of the educated. The Jungian term such a extrovert and introvert become stock dinner-conversations cliches. After an early and thorough apprenticeship , Dr. Jung break with the psychological school establish by Freud. This be a harsh school. Freud hold that nearly all human mental trouble be the result of sexual conflict in infancy. The most powerful of these conflict be the infantile urge to parricide and incest -- the Oedipus and Electra complexes. While admit this urge , Dr. Jung say that man 's natural instinct toward religion be perhaps as strong a his sexual instinct , and that man ignore the religious instinct at his peril. Dr. Freud trace religion to the child 's helplessness before the outer world and the child 's need to cling to it parent in order to survive. Opposed Freudian 'Jungle' The Freudian world be a gloomy jungle in which wander man be forever stumble over repressed emotional experiences. Freud and those who form the hard core of his school believe that there be no cure for man 's dilemma except to locate and remove these stumbling-block emotional experiences. Dr. Jung hold , on the contrary , that man be not necessarily doom forever to be shove about by trauma over which he could exercise little control. The Jungians deride the Freudian theory that God be nothing more than man 's self-created vision of his father , and that good deed and a desire to advance in the world be only device to forget more primitive urge and disorders. Freud 's world be find by many to be grim and almost hopeless. Dr. Jung 's world be not exactly cozy either , but he believe that man 's unconquerable spirit could make it better. Man could do this , Dr. Jung teach , because , in addition to the experience of each individual , a register in his subconscious mind , each person have a second group of experiences. This group be the collective experience of the race record in his subconscious mind. This collective experience include man 's never-ceasing urge toward religion , Dr. Jung said. Freud , Dr. Jung and Dr. Alfred Adler be the three great figure in the age of psychology. They influence Western man 's thinking a it have not be influence since the publication of the `` Origin of Species '' in 1859. Adler , who likewise broke with the harsher theory of Freud , die in 1937 , and Freud die two year later. Son of a Minister Dr. Jung be bear on July 26 , 1875 , in Kesswil , Switzerland. He be a son of Paul Jung , an Evangelical minister , and Emille Freiswerk Jung. The family move to Basel , where the son obtain a medical degree at the university in 1900. He begin his psychiatric study at the University of Zurich. For a doctoral thesis in philosophy he select the case of a girl affect by somnambulism and professing to be a spiritualist medium. After additional study in Paris , Dr. Jung become a lecturer in psychiatry at the University of Zurich and with Dr. Eugen Bleuler , found the `` Zurich School '' of depth psychology. In time , this school come to be think of a oppose the `` Vienna School '' establish by Freud. Actually , Drs. Jung and Freud be in agreement a to many of the basic tenet of modern psychology. The method use by Dr. Jung in obtain the cooperation of the nonconscious factor in the mind be similar to those use by Freud , who acknowledge the value of the large number of control that Dr. Jung have obtained. In 1909 some of the best work in the United States in this field be be do at Clark University in Worcester , Mass. , under it president , Dr. G. Stanley Hall , and in 1909 Dr. Jung , Freud and a number of other world authority on psychiatry go to Clark for a series of lecture and conferences. Here Dr. Jung give his first extensive exposition of his `` association method , '' a hitherto untried method of probe the subconscious mind. Psychoanalytic Society In 1911 Dr. Jung and a number of other authority in his field found the International Psychoanalytic Society. Dr. Jung frequently use this society to further his view on new element that he believe he have find in dream and fantasies. Those who do not agree with all of Dr. Jung 's theory about the human mind criticize him for show too much interest in such unscientific matter a occultism and witchcraft. The Freudians hold that he be betray pure scientific research by digression into Buddhism and Christianity. At this period , Dr. Jung also explore yoga , alchemy , folklore and obscure tribal religious rite and taboos. All this be hold by his opponent to be a waste of time and a betrayal of scientific principles. Dr. Jung say that , on the contrary , since mankind have devote so much thought to such matter , they form part of man 's consciousness of the race. They be in man 's mind , and if you want to know about man 's mind , you have to know about them. During Hitler 's ascendency in Germany , Dr. Jung 's theory about the consciousness of the race be borrow by the Nazis. Dr. Jung hasten to say that the Nazi interpretation of his theory be , in the main , wrong. In all event , Dr. Jung say , his statement in this matter have be distort out of their true meaning by the follower of Hitler. In 1935 Dr. Jung become a full professor in the University of Zurich , after have conduct seminar at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology for several years. In 1937 , he become the Terry lecturer at Yale and speak on the relationship between psychology and religion. In these lecture he expand his theory that what he describe a `` a natural religious function '' exists in man. If he ignore this urge , man will lose his psychic health , Dr. Jung said. In 1945 Dr. Jung give up his professorship at the University of Basel to concentrate on his research and his writing. Until 1948 , there be no definite place where the theory of Dr. Jung be teach in a body. In that year , the C. G. Jung Institute be establish in Zurich to provide scholar with a place to do advance research in analytical psychology. Although Freud and Dr. Jung differ on many of the fundamental of applied psychology , they remain more or less friendly. They would meet from time to time to discuss their view , and on one occasion they talk for twelve hour without a stop. Each would tell the other his dream and they would give their interpretation of their findings. Differed in Methods The two great explorer of the mind differ in their method of obtain their material. Dr. Freud establish the now generally accept method of place his subject on a couch and withdraw himself to create the impression on the subject that he be not intruding. `` I could n't stand have myself star at for eight hour daily , '' Dr. Freud said. Dr. Jung usually place his subject in a chair opposite him and make him feel that he , Dr. Jung , be an active part in the examination and that he would share his subject 's experience with him. In 1944 Dr. Jung assume the Chair of Medical Psychology found for him at the University of Basel. He remain there for less than a year , however , and retire to devote his time to research. Dr. Jung make a long study of the report of so-called `` fly saucers. '' In Zurich in August , 1958 , he say he believe they represent a new `` savior myth. '' `` I have speak to many people who have 'seen ' fly saucer , '' he said. `` These report may be true or they may be lies. I be a scientist , I do not tell lies. So I can not say that fly saucer be a reality. '' The August interview on the question of unidentified fly object result from a report , give wide currency , that come from Alamogordo , N.M. , about two week earlier. In it Dr. Jung be quote by the bulletin of the Aerial Phenomena Research Organization a have say : `` I can only say for certain that the thing be not a mere rumor , something have be seen. A purely psychological explanation be rule out. '' However the Alamogordo report be later call `` a distortion of a 1954 interview '' with Dr. Jung. Charming Smile Dr. Jung be a tall , large-boned man who , in his late year , have a rather scraggly white mustache and thin white hair. He have a ruddy complexion and a crinkly and charm smile. Somebody remark that if you be look for someone to play the role of a wise old man , Dr. Jung would fill the bill , complete with his favorite old pipe in mouth , and mellow , deep-throated chuckles. At 85 Dr. Jung seem to have no trouble in live life to the full. His home at Kuessnacht be a handsome villa with yellow wall and a red roof. He maintain a private retreat far up Lake Lucerne near Bollingen. This retreat be an old stone tower , which provide him with a place to rest , meditate and write. In 1903 Dr. Jung marry Emma Rauschenbush of Schaffhausen , Switzerland , heiress to a Swiss watch fortune. When Mme. Jung become seriously ill she ask a family friend , Miss Ruth Bailey , an Englishwoman , to take care of her husband in the event of her death. Mme. Jung die in 1955 and Dr. Jung 's material need have be look after by Miss Bailey since then. Persons passing Dr. Jung 's villa on lake boat frequently saw him sit on the lawn , perhaps watch his great-grandchildren at play. Dr. Jung be survive by a son and four daughters. He have nineteen grandchild and nine great-grandchildren a of last year. Over the door of his Kuessnacht home be carve the Latin inscription : Vocatus atqua non vocatus deus aderit. ( Called or not call , God be present . )