August 6 , 1962 OBITUARY Brilliant Stardom and Personal Tragedy Punctuated the Life of Marilyn Monroe By THE NEW YORK TIMES The life of Marilyn Monroe , the golden girl of the movie , end a it begin , in misery and tragedy. Her death at the age of 36 close an incredibly glamorous career and cap a series of somber event that begin with her birth a an unwanted , illegitimate baby and go on and on , illuminate during the last dozen year by the lightning of fame. Her public life be in dazzle contrast to her private life. The first man to see her on the screen , the man who make her screen test , felt the almost universal reaction a he run the wordless scene. In it , she walk , sit down and light a cigarette. Recalled 'Lush Stars ' `` I get a cold chill , '' he said. `` This girl have something I have n't see since silent pictures. This be the first girl who look like one of those lush star of the silent era. Every frame of the test radiate sex. '' Billy Wilder , the director , call it `` flesh impact. '' `` Flesh impact be rare , '' he said. `` Three I remember who have it be Clara Bow , Jean Harlow and Rita Hayworth. Such girl have flesh which photograph like flesh. You feel you can reach out and touch it. '' Fans pay $ 200,000,000 to see her project this quality. No sex symbol of the era other than Brigitte Bardot could match her popularity. Toward the end , she also convince critic and the public that she could act. During the year of her great success , she saw two of her marriage end in divorce. She suffer at least two miscarriage and be never able to have a child. Her emotional insecurity deepen ; her many illness come upon her more frequently. Dismissed From Picture In 1961 , she be twice admit to hospital in New York for psychiatric observation and rest. She be dismiss in June by Twentieth Century-Fox after be absent all but five day during seven week of shoot `` Something 's Got to Give. '' `` It 's something that Marilyn no longer can control , '' one of her studio chief confided. `` Sure she 's sick. She believe she 's sick. She may even have a fever , but it 's a sickness of the mind. Only a psychiatrist can help her now. '' In her last interview , publish in the Aug. 3 issue of Life magazine , she tell Richard Meryman , an associate editor : `` I be never use to be happy , so that be n't something I ever take for granted. '' Considering her background , this be a statement of exquisite restraint. She be bear in Los Angeles on June 1 , 1926. The name on the birth record be Norma Jean Mortenson , the surname of the man who father her , then abandon her mother. She later take her mother 's last name , Baker. Family Tragedies Both her maternal grandparent and her mother be commit to mental institutions. Her uncle kill himself. Her father die in a motorcycle accident three year after her birth. Her childhood have be describe a `` Oliver Twist in girl 's clothing. '' During her mother 's stay in asylum , she be farm out to twelve set of foster parents. Two family be religious fanatic ; one give her empty whisky bottle to play with instead of dolls. At another stage , she live in a drought area with a family of seven. She spend two year in a Los Angeles orphanage , wear a uniform she detested. By the time she be 9 year old , Norma Jean have begin to stammer -- an affliction rare among females. Her dream since childhood have be to be a movie star , and she succeed beyond her wild imaginings. The conviction of her mother 's best friend be bear out ; she have tell the little girl , day after day : `` Do n't worry. You 're go to be a beautiful girl when you get big. You 're go to be a movie star. Oh , I feel it in my bones. '' Nunnally Johnson , the producer and writer , understood that Miss Monroe be something special. Marilyn , he say , be `` a phenomenon of nature , like Niagara Falls and the Grand Canyon. `` You ca n't talk to it. It ca n't talk to you. All you can do be stand back and be awe by it , '' he said. This figure in the mind of million be difficult to analyze statistically. Her dimension -- 37-23- 37 -- be voluptuous but not extraordinary. She stand 5 foot 5 1/2 inch tall. She have soft blonde hair , wide , dreamy , gray-blue eyes. She speak in a high baby voice that be little more than a breathless whisper. Heavy Fan Mail Fans write her 5,000 letter a week , at least a dozen of them propose marriage. The Communists denounce her a a capitalist trick to make the American people forget how miserable they were. In Turkey a young man take leave of his sens while watch `` How to Marry a Millionaire '' and slash his wrists. There be other symbol of success. She marry two American male idol -- one an athlete , one an intellectual. Her second husband be Joe DiMaggio , the baseball player. Her third and last be the Pulitzer- Prize win playwright , Arthur Miller. She be 16 when she marry for the first time. The bridegroom be James Dougherty , 21 , an aircraft worker. Mr. Dougherty say after their divorce four year later , in 1946 , that she have be a `` wonderful '' housekeeper. Her two successive divorce come in 1954 , when she split with Mr. DiMaggio after only nine month , and in 1960 , after a four-year marriage to Mr. Miller. She become famous with her first featured role of any prominence in `` The Asphalt Jungle , '' issue in 1950. Her appearance be brief but unforgettable. From the instant she move onto the screen with that extraordinary walk of hers , people ask themselves : `` Who 's that blonde ? '' In 1952 it be reveal that Miss Monroe have be the subject of a widely distribute nude calendar photograph shot while she be a notably unsuccessful starlet. Revealed Her Wit It create a scandal , but it be her reaction to the scandal that be remembered. She tell interviewer that she be not ashamed and have need the money to pay her rent. She also reveal her sense of humor. When ask by a woman journalist , `` You mean you do n't have anything on ? '' she reply breathlessly : `` Oh yes , I have the radio on. '' One of her most exasperating quirk be her tardiness. She be , during the year of her fame , anywhere from one to twenty-four hour late for appointments. Until lately , she manage to get away with it. Her dilatory nature and sicknesses add nearly $ 1,000,000 to the budget of `` Let 's Make Love. '' The late Jerry Wald , head of her studio , simply comment : `` True , she 's not punctual. She ca n't help it , but I 'm not sad about it , '' he say , `` I can get a dozen beautiful blonde who will show up promptly in make-up at 4 A.M. each morning , but they be not Marilyn Monroe. '' The tardiness , the lack of responsibility and the fear begin to show more and more through the glamorous patina a Miss Monroe 's career waxed. Speaking of her career and her fame in the Life interview , she say , wistfully : `` It might be kind of a relief to be finished. It 's sort of like I do n't know what kind of a yard dash you 're run , but then you 're at the finish line and you sort of sigh -- you 've make it ! But you never have -- you have to start all over again . ''