November 8 , 1962 OBITUARY Mrs. Roosevelt , First Lady 12 Years , Often Called 'World 's Most Admired Woman' By THE NEW YORK TIMES Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt be more involve in the mind and heart and aspiration of people than any other First Lady in history. By the end of her life she be one of the most esteemed woman in the world. During her 12 year in the White House she be sometimes laugh at and sometimes bitterly resented. But during her last year she become the object of almost universal respect. Again and again , she be vote `` the world 's most admired woman '' in international polls. When she enter the hall of the United Nations , representative from all country rise to honor her. She have become not only the wife and widow of a towering President but a noble personality in herself. In the White House and for some time thereafter , no First Lady could touch Mrs. Roosevelt for cause espouse , opinion express , distance span , people speak to , word print , precedent shatter , honor confer , degree garnered. She be as indigenous to America a palm to a Florida coastline , and a the nation 's most peripatetic woman , she bring her warmth , sincerity , zeal and patience to every corner of the land and to much of the world. Her seemingly ceaseless activity and energy provoke both a kind of dazzled admiration and numberless `` Eleanor '' joke , particularly in the nineteen-thirties and forties. The derision fell away at the end ; the admiration deepened. Held in High Esteem After her husband 's death and a career a mistress of the White House that shatter precedent with a regularity never approach by Abigail Adams and Dolley Madison , President Harry S. Truman appoint Mrs. Roosevelt in 1945 a delegate to the General Assembly. The esteem in which Mrs. Roosevelt be hold in this country be immense , despite intense criticism that some observer hold stem from person who differ politically and ideologically with her husband. She be accuse of stimulate racial prejudice , of meddle in politics , talk too much , travel too much , be too informal and espousing cause critic felt a mistress of the White House should have be leave alone. She even become what she call a `` phony issue '' in her husband 's campaign for re- election. On the other hand , she be hail by countless number a their personal champion in a world first depression-ridden , then war-torn and finally maladjusted in the postwar years. She be a symbol of the new role woman be to play in the world. As a result of her work in the United Nations , particularly in behalf of the little people of the world , this esteem soon transcended national barrier to become virtually worldwide. Although she be no long First Lady , her influence have diminish but little. A typical example of the kind of enthusiasm she could arouse abroad , one among many example , occur during Mrs. Roosevelt 's visit to Luxembourg in 1950. Perle Mesta be then American Minister to that country. One of Mrs. Roosevelt 's first act be to call upon the Grand Duchess in her palace -- a long call. To catch just a glimpse of her , thousand of Luxembourgers stand outside for hour in an unrelenting rain , call again and again : `` Mees-ees Roose-velt ! Mees-ees Roose-velt ! '' Thousands more turn out later throughout the tiny country in village gay with banner and flower and smile faces. In her distinctive warbling falsetto , she thank as many a she could. Mrs. Roosevelt be an enthusiastic airplane traveler. She go down to the mines. She wander throughout the world with little ostentation. She maintain a prodigious correspondence. Her Influence Questioned The more important chronicler of Mr. Roosevelt 's day in the White House have note few instance in which it could be establish that her counsel be of first importance in change the tide of affairs. Nor do President Roosevelt always confide in his wife where matter of state be concerned. For example , he do not tell her that he be go to Newfoundland to confer with Prime Minister Winston Churchill of Britain on matter concern the war. He merely tell her that he be `` go on a trip through the Cape Cod Canal. '' There be , however , many know incident in which Mrs. Roosevelt be able to direct the President 's attention to such matter a injustice do to racial or religious minority in the armed service or elsewhere in the Government. With characteristic feminine candor , Mrs. Roosevelt always insist that she have to do what she felt be right. As a result , injustice and inequality , whether manifest by such diverse agency a the State Department or the Russians , evoke a strong reaction. Mrs. Roosevelt get along well with the State department until the Palestine issue arose. In February and March of 1948 she publicly oppose American policy , which maintain an arm embargo on shipment of arm to Israelis. She also come out in favor of partition Palestine into Jewish and Arab states. While often critical of Soviet tactic , Mrs. Roosevelt consistently urge the United States to continue effort to end the cold war by negotiation. She also advocate the abandonment of nuclear weapon test and call for United States recognition of Red China. Some of the most serious criticism level at Mrs. Roosevelt follow her support and sponsorship of a number of group in which Communists and `` fellow-travelers '' be active. She often point out that she recognize a person 's right to be a Communist , provide he do not deny this affiliation. Later , however , she point out that experience have teach her that it be impossible to work with Communist-dominated groups. Took Stand in Column Her break with group she once staunchly defend come a the war approach and a she find that several of them be oppose to national defense , lend-lease and the national draft. In August , 1942 , after the United States have become an ally of Russia in the war , she make her position even clear by formally repudiate the left wing of the American Labor party and by support the right wing in a primary fight. In 1949 Mrs. Roosevelt become embroil in a bitter controversy with Cardinal Spellman , Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York. It follow some remark she have make against use of Federal fund for parochial schools. In discuss a measure for aid to education then before Congress , Mrs. Roosevelt write in her `` My Day '' column that `` those of u who believe in the right of any human be to belong to whatever church he see fit , and to worship God in his own way , can not be accuse of prejudice when we do not want to see public education connect with religious control of the school , which be pay for by taxpayer ' money. '' The Cardinal accuse Mrs. Roosevelt of ignorance and prejudice and call her column `` document of discrimination unworthy of an American mother. '' The dispute be ultimately resolve amicably , but not before it be wag by lead member of the clergy and become an issue in the 1949 campaign a political figure align themselves for and against Mrs. Roosevelt. It end in August of that year when Cardinal Spellman call on Mrs. Roosevelt at her Hyde Park home and both issued statement clarify what they say have be a `` misunderstanding. '' Her service a a delegate to the United Nations begin under President Truman in 1947 and end , temporarily , in 1952. In 1961 , President Kennedy appoint her a one of five member of the United States delegation to the 15th session of the General Assembly. In the intervening year , Mrs. Roosevelt devote herself to her syndicate newspaper column and to the American Association for the United Nations. When lead Democrats form the National Issues Committee in an effort to restore Democratic control of the Federal Government , she accept it national chairmanship. Mrs. Roosevelt never lose interest in the Democratic party. She address it national convention in 1952 and 1956 , and both year campaign for Adlai E. Stevenson. At the 1960 convention in Los Angeles , she press for a Stevenson-Kennedy ticket and second Mr. Stevenson 's nomination. Throughout her year of association with the party , Mrs. Roosevelt have be identify with it liberal wing. In 1959 , speak at a dinner in honor of her 75th birthday , she take sharp issue with former President Truman , who also address the dinner. Mr. Truman lash out at `` hot-house liberal '' whom he accuse of hurt the cause of liberalism and invite the way for reaction. Mrs. Roosevelt reply , say : `` I know we need a united party. But it can not be a united party that give up it principles. '' The same year she join with former Senator Herbert H. Lehman in a drive to consolidate the Democratic reform movement in New York City to oust Carmine G. De Sapio , leader of Tammany Hall. The next year she again align herself with the reform group and stump for Senator John F. Kennedy. Her most recent political activity be a a leader , with Mr. Lehman , of the reform faction during the 1961 mayorality race in New York and during the 1962 primaries. Her candidate in 1961 , Mayor Wagner , win re-election by more than 400,000 votes. Theodore Roosevelt 's Niece Anna Eleanor Roosevelt be bear to Elliott and Anna Hall Roosevelt in New York on Oct. 11 , 1884. Theodore Roosevelt , the 25th President , be her uncle. The family of both her parent be prominent socially , the Roosevelts a wealthy family of Dutch descent and the Halls of the same family a Philip Livingston , the English-descended signer of the Declaration of Independence. Mrs. Roosevelt 's father be know a a sportsman and big-game hunter , and her mother be a noted beauty of the day. When Eleanor be 8 her mother die , and the young girl go to life with her maternal grandmother , Mrs. Valentine G. Hall , at Tivoli , N. Y. , not far from Poughkeepsie. Her father die a year and a half later. She be teach at home by tutor for the most part , and she recall later in her autobiography , `` This Is My Story , '' that her real education do not begin , until she go abroad at the age of 15. As a child she worry because her mother and other member of her family be somewhat disappointed in young Eleanor 's appearance. When she be 15 the family decide that it would be good to supplement her social chance by a finishing trip abroad. In 1900 she be take to England and place in Allenswood , a school conduct by a Miss Souvestre , whom her grandmother remember a a stimulating and culture lady who have instruct her in her own youth. She remain abroad for three year , study language , literature and history under Miss Souvestre , perfect her French and Italian , and spend her vacation travel on the Continent and absorb European culture. She be drill in the French system of acquire and repeat precise judgment on everything. At the age of 18 she be bring back to New York for her debut. `` It be simply awful , '' she say in a public discussion once. `` It be a beautiful party , of course , but I be so unhappy , because a girl who come out be so utterly miserable if she do not know all the young people. Of course I have be so long abroad that I have lose touch with all the girl I use to know in New York. I be miserable through all that. '' She be relieve of her misery within two year by meet Franklin Delano Roosevelt , who have graduate from Harvard in 1904 and have come to New York to attend the Columbia Law School. He be serious-minded and intent on a career. He find Miss Roosevelt good company. Besides , the two Roosevelts be distant cousin ; they have meet first when he be 4 year old and she 2 ; and they get along easily together. Their relative approve so highly that the marriage follow naturally. President Roosevelt come from the White House to New York on March 17 , 1905 , to give the bride in marriage. After the wedding , a brilliant social event in new York , Mrs. Roosevelt pass into domesticity and maternity for a score of years. The couple 's first child , Anna , be bear in 1906. Eighteen month later a son , James be born. A second son , name Franklin D. Jr. , die three month after birth. Three more son , Elliott , another Franklin D. Jr. and John Aspinwall , be bear during the first 11 year of marriage. Mrs. Roosevelt have her first brush with politics and government in 1911 after Mr. Roosevelt have be elect a State Senator and the family move to Albany. In 1913 the Roosevelts go to Washington when the future President be appoint Assistant Secretary of the Navy in the Wilson Administration. In 1920 she saw more of the political scene when her husband be a candidate for the Vice Presidency on the democratic ticket with James M. Cox , who run for President against Warren G. Harding. The next year poliomyelitis strike her husband , and Mrs. Roosevelt attend him and encourage him for three year until it be evident that any further recovery would come slowly through the remainder of his life. It be at this point that Mrs. Roosevelt emerge seriously in search of a career. Friends of the family and Mr. Roosevelt 's physician urge Mrs. Roosevelt to work with her husband in an effort to rekindle his interests. Some observer felt that shortly thereafter her determined introduction of activity after activity into her own life and his be a deliberate maneuver to rescue him from his invalidism , and force him to resume his former interest in affair of the outside world. Began Political Activity She take part in political discussion with other woman after several year of suffrage , and point out in those early year , prophetically perhaps , that `` woman be not utilize their opportunity to elevate politics. '' She join the board of the League of Women Voters , take part in work of the Women 's Trade Union League , and begin in 1924 take an active role in the state and national committee of the Democratic party. Mrs. Roosevelt continue to increase her activity with lecture , party and speech in the interest of popular political enlightenment , education and welfare. In 1926 , with Marion Dickerman , she found the Valkill Shop , a nonprofit furniture factory near the Roosevelt home in Hyde Park , to give employment to disable men in the manufacture of early American furniture. A year later , with Miss Dickerman and Nancy Cook , she buy the Todhunter School , a New York private school for girl , and Mrs. Roosevelt become director and teacher of class in modern history and current events. She withdraw from politics with the election of her husband a Governor of New York in 1928 , but despite this withdrawal she enlarge her interests. She be busy than ever acquire idea and spread them. She become a director of the Foreign Policy Association and of the City Housing Corporation. In addition , she become a syndicate newspaper columnist , edit a magazine and judge contests. On March 4 , 1933 , her husband be inaugurate a the 32d President , and Eleanor Roosevelt begin her 12 year a the First Lady. At the White House she establish a weekly conference with the press , the first of it kind ever hold by a First Lady , and attend only by woman journalists. The White House become a somewhat different place under the influence of Mrs. Roosevelt. Except for the formal occasion and official event , there be a gay informality about it , with grandchild and an odd assortment of dog scamper through it halls. Visitors be frequent and , Mrs. Roosevelt once laughingly remark , `` We call it a hotel. '' Broadened Her Writings In 1939 the nation note a change in Mrs. Roosevelt 's newspaper writings. Until then she have devote the bulk of her space to women. In 1939 her column begin discuss the Works Progress Administration , United States neutrality and other current topic , with the result that political observer note that what she have to say either anticipated or supplement the President 's statements. Concomitantly , she find herself more and more in the field of controversy. The same year Mrs. Roosevelt announce in her column her resignation from the Daughters of the American Revolution because the society have refuse the use of Constitution Hall in Washington for a concert by Marian Anderson , the Negro contralto. As the war come she saw her four son go into the service. She be an active interventionist even before Pearl Harbor. In 1941 she take her first `` government job , '' a assistant director of civilian defense , with the late Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia of New York a director. It be not a happy experience. In it early stage , the civilian defense effort be chaotic and whether the responsibility lay with the director be never established. Mrs. Roosevelt resign in February , 1942 , after a storm arose over her appointment of Mayris Chaney , a dancer and protegee of hers , to a post with the Office of Civil Defense. Flew to Visit England Mrs. Roosevelt fly to England in October , 1942 , become the first First Lady who have ever go abroad alone and also the first First Lady to fly the Atlantic. On her English visit she tour train camp of American troop and be greet with shout of `` Hi , Eleanor. '' She saw several of the many orphan child she adopt for the duration of the war , be a guest at Buckingham Palace and visit widely. Mrs. Roosevelt be the author of numerous child 's book and records. She also publish `` India and the Awakening East , '' `` You Learn by Living '' and two volume of autobiography , `` This I Remember '' and `` On My Own. '' She have just pass her 78th birthday -- and have just leave the hospital -- when her last book be published. Entitled `` Eleanor Roosevelt 's Book of Common Sense Etiquette , '' it hold that true good manner consist of sincere goodwill and of be oneself. Mrs. Roosevelt hold honorary degree from Russell Sage College , the John Marshall College of Law and Oxford University. She be an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa. She also receive many award , include the 1939 award from the Humanitarians , the 1939 Churchman 's Award , the first annual Nation Award in 1940 and the first annual Franklin Delano Roosevelt Brotherhood Award in 1946. Others be the Award of Merit of the New York City Federation of Women 's Clubs in 1948 , the Four Freedoms Award in 1950 , the Prince Carl Medal ( Sweden ) in 1950 and the Irving Geist Foundation Award in 1950. As U.N. Delegate She Inspired Draft of Human Rights Covenant Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt 's work with the United Nations keep her name before the public for a number of year after the death of her husband in 1945. President Harry S. Truman , successor to President Roosevelt , name Mrs. Roosevelt a delegate to the general Assembly when the organization come into be in 1945. The next year , Mrs. Roosevelt be elect chairman of the Commission on Human Rights of the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization. Mrs. Roosevelt bring a rare combination of toughness , practicality and idealism to the hall of the United Nations. The fact that her lofty objective be view by `` realist '' a be impossible of attainment do not deter her from fight for them. In her first appearance at the United Nations at the London meeting in 1948 , Mrs. Roosevelt be successful in overcome a certain reserve that many delegate have toward the presence of woman in the world body 's deliberations. Her energy and ability soon win her the respect and cooperation of the late Senator Arthur Vandenberg , Michigan Republican , and the late John Foster Dulles , both of whom be veteran in diplomacy. Also , both be influential member of the United States representation before the United Nations. Mrs. Roosevelt play an important part in draft the Covenant on Human Rights , design to establish basic civil right of people throughout the world. She fight long and hard for the acceptance of this covenant by the United Nations. The propose covenant run into difficulties. Semantics intervene and it be impossible to reach a community of understand on basic terms. France and other power with colonial or similar problem oppose the agreement. Senator John W. Bricker , Ohio Republican , organize Senate opposition to it and it never gain complete acceptance. Mrs. Roosevelt resign the chairmanship of the Commission on Human Rights in April , 1951. When the Republican Administration of President Dwight D. Eisenhower take office , Mrs. Roosevelt tender her resignation from the United States delegation. President Eisenhower accept it in a letter in which he thank Mrs. Roosevelt for her `` sincere concern for the less fortunate '' as well a her `` skill in the discharge of unique and important duties. '' Mrs. Roosevelt be succeed at the United Nations post by Mrs. Oswald B. Lord of New York .