July 7 , 1962 OBITUARY Faulkner 's Home , Family and Heritage Were Genesis of Yoknapatawpha County By THE NEW YORK TIMES The storm of literary controversy that beat about William Faulkner be not likely to diminish with his death. Many of the most firmly establish critic of literature be deeply impress by the stark and somber power of his writing. Yet many commentator be repel by his theme and his prose style. To the sympathetic critic Mr. Faulkner deal with the dark journey and the final doom of man in term that recall the Greek tragedians. They find symbolism in the frequently unrelieved brutality of the yokel of Yoknapatawpha County , the imaginary Deep South region from which Mr. Faulkner draw the person and scene of his most characteristic novel and short stories. Actually Yoknapatawpha be Lafayette County and Jefferson town be the Oxford on the red-hill section of northern Mississippi where William Faulkner be rear and where his family have be deeply root for generations. The author once tell a class at the University of Virginia that it be pronounce Yok-na-pa-TAW-pha and that it be a Chickasaw Indian term that mean `` water pass slowly through flatlands. '' While admit that Faulkner 's prose sometimes lurch and sprawl , his admirer could point out an undeniable golden sharpness of characterization and description. 'In the Image of the Land' Of Mr. Faulkner 's power to create living and deeply move character , Malcolm Crowley write : `` And Faulkner love these people create in the image of the land. After a second reading of his novel , you continue to be impress by his villain , Popeye and Jason and Joe Christmas and Flem Snopes ; but this time you find more place in your memory for other figure stand a little in the background yet present by the author with quiet affection : old lady like Miss Jenny DuPre , with their sharp-tongued benevolence ; shrewd but kindly bargainer like Ratliff , the sewing machine agent , and Will Varner , with his cotton gin and general store. . . . '' Mr. Faulkner be an acknowledged master of the vivid descriptive phrase. Popeye have eye that `` look like rubber knobs. '' He have a face that `` just go away , like the face of a wax doll set too near the fire and forgotten. '' The apt phrase that Mr. Faulkner find for the weather and the change season be cite by his admirers. There be the `` hot pine-winery silence of the August afternoon. '' Or `` the moonless September dust , the tree not rise soar a tree should but squat like huge fowl. '' Also , `` those windless Mississippi December day which be a sort of Indian summer 's Indian summer. '' Some Saw Little Merit Many critic contend that Mr. Faulkner serve up raw slab of pseudorealism that have relatively little merit a serious writing. They say that Mr. Faulkner 's writing show an obsession with murder , rape , incest , suicide , greed and general depravity that do not exist anywhere but in the author 's mind in anything like the proportion that these subject assume in his novel and short stories. A favorite device of the detractor of Mr. Faulkner 's writing be to produce a condensed and completely deadpan description of his plots. The result be often a horrendous compilation of wickedness and jibbering. As for Mr. Faulkner , he seldom argue about his work. For most of his literary life he detest talk about literature. He say that when one of his book be about to be publish he have to remind himself that stranger be go to read it. Mr. Faulkner be the fourth American to receive the Nobel Prize for Literature. The previous winner be Sinclair Lewis ( 1930 ) , Eugene O'Neill ( 1936 ) and Pearl S. Buck ( 1938 ) . Ernest Hemingway become the fifth American in 1954. The 1954 Pulitzer Prize for fiction be award to Mr. Faulkner for his novel `` A Fable. '' William Faulkner be bear in New Albany , Miss. , on Sept. 25 , 1897. In the sharply stratified society that preoccupy Mr. Faulkner in his writing it could be say that he come from an upper middle-class family -- one not quite of the old feudal cotton aristocracy. The first Falkners -- the `` u '' be a recent restoration by William Faulkner -- come to Mississippi in the Eighteen Forties. The family be replete with colonel , one of whom be assassinate on the street by a business rival. William Faulkner be the old child of Murray Falkner and Maude Butler Falkner. Murray Falkner at one time run a livery stable in Oxford and later become business manager of the University of Mississippi at Oxford. In William Faulkner 's fiction the Sartoris clan be the Falkner family. The Sartorises be force to make humiliating compromise with the member of the grasping and upstart Snopes family. `` General Johnston or General Forrest would n't have take a Snopes into his army at all , '' a character says. William Faulkner play quarterback on the Oxford High School football team and suffer a broken nose. He fail to graduate. Later he write : `` Quit school to work in grandfather 's bank. Learned medicinal value of his liquor. Grandfather think it be the janitor. Hard on the janitor. . . . '' Oxford , where Mr. Faulkner grow up , be a typical Deep-South town. It have the traditional courthouse square flank with statue of Confederate soldier , and a quiet main street line by one-story building and stores. It be in Lafayette County in the northern part of Mississippi , about sixty mile southeast of Memphis. It be the seat of the University of Mississippi. The 1949 motion picture `` Intruder in the Dust , '' base on Mr. Faulkner 's novel of that name , be film by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in Oxford. It be direct by Clarence Brown and it cast include Juano Hernandez , Claude Jarman Jr. and Elizabeth Patterson. The film depict racial intolerance and bigotry in a small Southern community but have a `` happy end '' in which an elderly , proud Negro accuse of murder -- play by Mr. Hernandez -- be save from lynch by a white Southern lawyer with the help of a white boy and an elderly white woman. The movie be call `` great '' by Bosley Crowther , The New York Times ' critic. It make the Times ' list of the year 's ten best film , but it do not make money. In an interview in 1958 , Mr. Faulkner be ask for his reaction to the movie version of `` Intruder in the Dust. '' He say : `` I 'm not much of a moviegoer , but I do see that one. I think it be a fine job. That Juano Hernandez be a fine actor -- and man , too. '' He also say he have write about a dozen movie script for Hollywood after his popular novel `` Sanctuary '' be published. He say that most of the script be do for Howard Hawks , his friend , and add : `` He send for me later to help adapt what Ernest Hemingway say be the bad book he ever write , 'To Have and Have Not. ' Then I do another one , from that book by Raymond Chandler , 'The Big Sleep. ' I also do a war picture , one I like do , 'The Road to Glory , ' with Fredric March and Lionel Barrymore. I make me some money and I have me some fun. '' Private flying and World War I service a a Royal Canadian Air Force pilot give Mr. Faulkner material for such tale a `` Pylon , '' a story of daredevil barnstorming pilots. Back home , he be a special student at the University of Mississippi for a few month and become postmaster at the hamlet of University near Oxford. He be dismiss for reading and play bridge when he should have be distribute mail. One who know Mr. Faulkner a a student at the University of Mississippi be George W. Healy Jr. , editor of The New Orleans Times-Picayune. In a telephone interview yesterday , Mr. Healy say that most Mississippians who know Mr. Faulkner well love him , but that the author be not an easy man to know. `` I first know Bill when he be postmaster at the University of Mississippi post office in 1922 , '' Mr. Healy said. `` He be fresh back from World War I after have serve a a pilot in the Canadian Air Force and after have do a little private flying. His father , whose first name be Murray , be business manager of the university and Bill go there to study law. `` But Bill get fire a postmaster because he use the post office a a kind of men 's club. One day a post office inspector come in while a bridge game be in progress and a little while late Bill tell u he be leaving. '' Preferred Cartoons Mr. Healy relate that when he be editor of the university 's humor magazine , The Scream , Mr. Faulkner approach him with some poetry he have written. `` Bill also have some cartoon that he have draw and I like the cartoon good than the poetry , '' Mr. Healy said. The editor recall that Mr. Faulkner later do some house-painting job in Oxford and then go to New Orleans where he `` hole up while write his first novel , 'Soldier 's Pay. ' '' This be the story of a disfigured flier 's return after World War I. It be publish in 1926 by Liveright. A reviewer in The Times say it show a `` deft hand. '' Mr. Healy note that while he be write the novel , Mr. Faulkner also write for The Times-Picayune `` Mirrors of Chartres Street , '' a column of street scene and vignettes. Mr. Faulkner 's period of literary apprenticeship include a foray into New York literary circle that end in a brief and unhappy interlude a a clerk in the book department of Lord & Taylor. He be briefly a newspaper reporter in New Orleans where he saw something of Sherwood Anderson , who give him valuable counsel. 'Marble Faun ' in 1924 `` The Marble Faun , '' a book of poem by Mr. Faulkner , appear in 1924. Reviewers find the poem somewhat derivative. With the publication of `` The Sound and the Fury '' in 1929 , Mr. Faulkner give strong indication of be a major writer. The critic find in it something of the word- intoxication of James Joyce and the long , lasso-like sentence of Henry James. `` Sanctuary , '' publish in 1931 , be Mr. Faulkner 's most popular and best-selling novel. His friend do not believe him when he say that he have write in only for money. It be a novel about the harrowing experience of a sensitive Southern girl , Temple Drake , who , like many of Faulkner 's character , reappears in another book -- in this case `` Requiem for a Nun. '' One of Mr. Faulkner 's most memorable character , Popeye , be create for `` Sanctuary. '' Among Mr. Faulkner 's other notable book be `` The Sound and the Fury '' and `` As I Lay Dying. '' The former , describe by one critic a `` one of the new original effort at experimental writing in America , '' be tell partly through the mind of an idiot name Benjy. Mr. Faulkner live and do most of his writing in Oxford in a beautiful old colonial house that he buy in 1930. He be a slightly build man who carry himself somewhat tensely and when he be bother or bore he could exhibit quick anger. He have thick iron-gray hair and a dark mustache and aquiline nose. When he felt like it he could be charm and his manner be impeccable. His accent be the easy drawl of the Deep South. One observer find in his manner `` something old-fashioned , even archaic. '' In his Southern mansion he usually want to be leave alone and there be explosive incident when person seek to intrude upon him. When the Nobel Prize for literature for 1949 be award to Mr. Faulkner it be with considerable difficulty that member of his family persuade him to go to Stockholm , Sweden , to receive the award. He wear white tie and tail for the first time. The cash prize amount to $ 30,000 , which Mr. Faulkner set up a a fund for good work in his home town. The clash of opinion over the question of desegregation in the public school draw Mr. Faulkner somewhat out of his general aloofness to public problems. In 1956 he be interview and write on the problem of the Negro in the South. His write on the subject show a somewhat agonized attempt to understand several point of view on the question. On June 20 , 1929 , Mr. Faulkner marry Mrs. Estelle Oldham Franklin , who have two child by a previous marriage. One daughter , Jill , be bear to the marriage of Mr. Faulkner and Mrs. Franklin. William Faulkner be not the only novelist in his immediate family. A young brother , John Faulkner , write several novel , include `` Men Working , '' ( 1941 ) , a story of Southern farmer who discover a modern miracle the call the `` WP & A , '' and `` Chooky , '' ( 1950 ) , a tale of a Southern boy who lead two Negro playmate through a series of adventures. William Faulkner be among the Nobel Prize laureate invite by President Kennedy to a White House dinner this year. At the time the novelist be with the University of Virginia and be live at Charlottesville. He decline , say : `` Why that 's a hundred mile away. That 's a long way to go just to eat. '' In 1957 , when Mr. Faulkner first arrive at the University of Virginia , he be quote a say : `` I like Virginians because Virginians be all snob and I like snobs. A snob have to spend so much time be a snob that he have little time leave to meddle with you. '' On another occasion , Bennett Cerf , head of Random House , Mr. Faulkner 's publisher , have take the bourbon-sipping author to task for not answer his mail. Mr. Faulkner be say to have reply : `` Mr. Cerf , when I get a letter from you , I open it and shake it and if a check do n't fall out I tend to forget it. '' Mr. Faulkner accept an invitation in April to the United States Military Academy to hold informal discussion with the cadet on literary topics. Thirty young woman from Vassar College also attend the seminar. Mr. Faulkner hold the cadet rapt a he discuss the destiny of man in a `` ramshackle world. '' The Nobel Prize-winning author say a writer should `` cut his throat and quit '' whenever he felt satisfied with a book he have written. He also tell the cadet that `` The Sound and the Fury '' be the book closest to his heart because it have cause him the most anguish. He say that it be to him what a crippled child be to it mother. Mr. Faulkner also discuss his late novel , `` The Reivers , '' with the cadets. `` The Reivers '' be publish by Random House on June 4 and be widely acclaim by critics. For example , Orville Prescott in his review of the novel in The New York Times write : `` The good news about `` The Reivers '' be that it be one of the best novel Mr. Faulkner have write and much the most direct , simple and readily comprehensible. All his familiar mannerism be present , but so muted and restrain that they cause no difficulty. `` In the past , Mr. Faulkner 's humor have tend to be cruel or even grotesque. In 'The Reivers ' it be not exactly hilarious , but it be gay , engage and kindly . ''