A postwar poet unafraid to confront her own despair. By ANEMONA HARTOCOLLIS She make sure to spare the child , leave milk and bread for the two toddler to find when they wake up. She stuff the crack of the door and window with cloth and tea towels. Then she turn on the gas. On the morning of Feb. 11 , 1963 , a Monday , a nurse find the poet Sylvia Plath in her flat on Fitzroy Road in London , an address where W.B. Yeats have once lived. She be “lying on the floor of the kitchen with her head rest on the oven , ” accord to a local paper , the St. Pancras Chronicle. Plath have kill herself. She be 30. Because the death be a suicide , Plath’s family do not much advertise it , say Peter K. Steinberg , an editor , with Karen Kukil , of “The Letters of Sylvia Plath , ” the second volume of which be to be publish this year. And although she be a publish poet who have receive good review , and have determinedly make her way in a literary world dominate by men , the press do not pay much attention. There be eight-line death notice in tiny print in The Boston Globe and The Boston Herald. To find them , a sharp-eyed reader have to look under “H , ” for Plath’s marry name , Hughes. The notice be almost as terse a a headstone : of London , England , formerly of Wellesley , Mass. , wife of Ted Hughes , mother of Frieda and Nicolas ( her son’s give name mysteriously miss it “h” ) , daughter of Aurelia , old sister of Warren. Plath’s hometown paper , The Townsman of Wellesley , falsely report that she have die of “virus pneumonia.” It nod toward her literary career , “as poet and author.” But it do not name her poetry collection , “The Colossus , ” first publish in 1960 to positive review in the British press , or say that her poem have be print in prestigious magazine like The New Yorker. In it Fleet Street sensationalism , the St. Pancras Chronicle’s report be more satisfying , and more truthful. “Tragic Death of Young Authoress , ” the headline blare , before subordinate her reputation to that of her husband. “Found with her head in the gas oven in the kitchen of their home in Fitzroy-road , N.W. 1 , last week be 30-year-old authoress Mrs. Sylvia Plath Hughes , wife of one of Britain’s best-known modern poet , Ted Hughes , ” the article said. It go on to say that her doctor have arrange for her to see a psychiatrist , “but the letter be deliver to the wrong address.” It end with the coroner’s verdict that Plath have die of carbon monoxide poisoning and , to leave no doubt in the matter , “that she kill herself.” At that moment in time , it be easy to see why she might have want to. She be estrange from Hughes after discover that he be have an affair with another woman , Assia Wevill. On Dec. 28 , 1962 , just week before her death , Alfred A. Knopf , which have publish her poetry , have reject her novel “The Bell Jar.” Judith B. Jones , the editor who send Plath the rejection notice , do not try to soft-pedal it. “To be quite honest with you , we didn’t feel that you have manage to use your material successfully in a novelistic way , ” write Jones , who have be credit with rescue the diary of Anne Frank from the reject pile and with discover Julia Child. Jones say she have find the attitude express in the first half of “The Bell Jar , ” about the young heroine’s adventure a a magazine intern in New York , “perfectly normal , ” and have like it well enough. As for the second half , Jones write , “I be not at all prepare a a reader to accept the extent of her illness and the suicide attempt.” An editor at Harper & Row concur with Jones’s assessment. In a letter address to “Mrs. Ted Hughes , ” this editor write , a little more charitably , that the first part of the novel be “arresting , a fresh and bright recreation of a girl’s encounter with the big city — universal and individual.” But she add , “With her breakdown , however , the story for u cease to be a novel and become more a case history.” As she grapple with the rejection of editor and her husband , Plath spend her last month write the poem that would secure her literary reputation. Six day after she die , her friend , the literary critic A. Alvarez , predict in The Observer that those poem , many of which be later publish in her best-known collection , “Ariel , ” would establish her a “the most gifted woman poet of our time.” Thus it be in death that Plath find her literary due. A handwritten version of one of Plath’s poem , “Blackberries” ( later publish a “Blackberrying” ) , with a portion of her hair , at the Lilly Library at Indiana University. Frank Espich/Indianapolis Star , via Associated Press The public fascination with her death have hover over her family. One of Warren Plath’s two daughter , Susan Plath Winston , recall the surprise that she and her sister would feel when their aunt’s name appear , for instance , in a snippet of “The Simpsons.” Worse be when Plath’s son , Nicholas , a fishery biologist in Alaska , hang himself in 2009 , at 47. Because of who his mother be , his death receive front-page treatment. “Your family pain be literary/celebrity news be a bizarre place to be , ” say Winston , a lawyer in Oklahoma City who represent victim of domestic violence. Sylvia Plath be bear in Boston on Oct. 27 , 1932. Her father , Otto Emil Plath , a German-born professor at Boston University , die when she be 8 , and her mother , the former Aurelia Schober , make end meet teach in a university secretarial program. Biographers have link Plath’s bout of depression to the childhood trauma of lose her father , as well a to her own perfectionism and her mother’s smother nature. As a student at Smith College , Plath win a “guest editorship” at Mademoiselle magazine in New York in 1953 , an experience that become the basis of “The Bell Jar.” Later that summer , she have a breakdown after be reject from a write course at Harvard. She receive shock treatment , and then swallow most of a bottle of sleep pills. She meet Hughes , a future British poet laureate , at a party in 1956 while study at Cambridge University on a Fulbright grant. ( In describe the encounter in her journal , she write of bite his cheek so hard she draw blood ; he pocket her earrings. ) They marry within four month , a romantic union that be also a literary partnership. It be after their separation in fall 1962 that Plath — jealous , feverish , addict to sleep pill and write at dawn while her child slept — produce poem like “Lady Lazarus” and “Daddy” that help make “Ariel” an exemplar of confessional poetry. “The Bell Jar” be not publish in the United States until 1971. ( It have be publish in England a month before Plath die , under the pseudonym Victoria Lucas , for fear , Kukil say , that it resemblance to real life would attract libel suits. ) In 1982 , she be award a posthumous Pulitzer Prize. “Lady Lazarus” have be quote so often it have become a kind of epitaph for Plath. Dying Is an art , like everything else. I do it exceptionally well. I do it so it feel like hell. Gloria Steinem , who be a year behind Plath at Smith College , publish Plath’s BBC radio play , “Three Women , ” in an early edition of Ms. magazine — “probably one of the reason she be take up by second-wave feminism , ” say Kukil , the associate curator of special collection at Smith. “The Bell Jar” have rise from the ash of rejection to become a perennial favorite of high school and college students. It spend 24 week on the New York Times best-seller list in 1971 , and have sell nearly three million paperback copy by the 25th anniversary of it publication in 1996. “I like to think she somehow help to open up and legitimate female anger , ” say Gail Crowther , author of “The Haunted Reader and Sylvia Plath , ” among other book about the writer. Plath make the object of much of that anger clear elsewhere in “Lady Lazarus.” Out of the ash I rise with my red hair And I eat men like air. Anemona Hartocollis be a national correspondent for The Times , cover high education. Her paperback copy of The Bell Jar be so old and brittle she have to tape it back together while write this obit. Susan Beachy , Doris Burke and Alain Delaquérière contribute research .