November 23 , 1963 OBITUARY : JOHN FITZGERALD KENNEDY : PART I OF V Kennedy Concentrated on Domestic Issues After Showdown Over Cuba in '62 By THE NEW YORK TIMES The Administration of John F. Kennedy be mark by a breathless series of major event -- the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion , the Berlin Wall , riot at the University of Mississippi and other place in the battle for civil right , and the Cuban showdown. But from the moment Premier Khrushchev announce the dismantling of the missile base and withdrawal of the missile from Cuba in October , 1962 , a period of comparative relaxation in cold war tension begin , a tranquil time internationally that be only mildly disturb by incident such a the recent arrest and release of Prof. Frederick C. Barghoorn. For 13 month the nation have be live without fear of imminent war. In this period the President be able to turn his main attention to domestic issue such a civil right and the lagging economy , issue he have make part of his program from the beginning. Tone Set at Inaugural Mr. Kennedy 's inaugural address be only 1,355 word long -- one of the short introductory message of recent American Presidents. `` Now the trumpet summons u again , '' he declare , `` not a a call to bear arm , though arm we need -- not a a call to battle , though embattle we be -- but a call to bear the burden of a long twilight struggle year in and year out , 'rejoicing in hope , patient in tribulation ' -- a struggle against the common enemy of man : tyranny , poverty , disease and war itself. '' And in what probably become his most celebrated passage , he implore : `` And so , my fellow Americans : ask not what America will do for you -- ask what you can do for your country. '' Polls show that his popularity decline somewhat a a result of Administration support for militant civil-rights leaders. President Kennedy himself say he expect a close race in 1964. Yet his Administration receive a heartening vote of confidence in the Congressional election of 1962. Normally , the Congressional force of the party in power be cut sharply in the mid-term elections. But in 1962 the Democrats break the jinx , add four Senate seats. They lose four seat in the House but this be only a fraction of the usual off-year loss. And among the new Democrats in the House be many liberals. The President 's handling of the Cuban crisis be a major factor in the upset victory. Republicans groan : `` We be Cubanized. '' Races for Governor Lost But not all the news be good. A jarring disappointment be the defeat of Democratic candidate for Governor in four big state : New York , Pennsylvania , Ohio and Michigan. Nelson Rockefeller easily win re-election in New York ; Representative William W. Scranton be elect Governor in Pennsylvania ; George Romney win in Michigan and James A. Rhodes win in Ohio. This lineup contain three prospect for the Republican Presidential nomination : Governors Rockefeller , Scranton and Romney. So far only Governor Rockefeller have declare his candidacy. The President 's popularity accord to the Gallup poll , reach a crest in 1961 , follow the attempt to invade Cuba , when his approval rating be 83 per cent , and sink to 57 per cent in October of this year. Two week ago the poll indicate a slight rise : 59 per cent approve of the job Mr. Kennedy be do a President. The November poll show that the President enjoy his great popularity among Roman Catholics , Negroes and Jews and with young adults. There be strong anti- Kennedy sentiment in the South. The President 's legislative program be have an exceptionally difficult time in Congress , and the lack of result on major item reduce his popular support. He have begin the year with a sweeping and ambitious program. But at his last White House news conference , a week ago , he publicly accept what have become a foregone conclusion : the legislative achievement of this session of Congress would be among the most meager ever. Congress , bogged down on routine appropriation matter , have not yet take up the civil right bill. Other item on the President 's program that be still languish be education , mental health and health insurance for the age under Social Security. The Administration 's tax bill , promise low tax a a stimulus to economic recovery , pass the House Sept. 25 but stall in the Senate Finance Committee. There be little hope that controversial issue such a civil right and tax would come to a final test before next summer , on the eve of the national convention , and their impact on the Presidential campaign be expect to be heavy. The President be especially exasperate at the slashing of his foreign aid bill. At his news conference , the President describe the Senate 's treatment of the bill a `` the bad attack on foreign aid. . .since the beginning of the Marshall Plan. '' On Nov. 15 , the Senate pass a $ 3.7 billion aid bill , an amount $ 800 million less than the President have requested. House More Hostile The House be even more hostile , and cut the President 's program by $ 1 billion. There seem little possibility that a money bill for much more than $ 3 billion would emerge from conference. Critics assail the President , say that more vigorous leadership be necessary to persuade Congress that the cut would be catastrophic. President Kennedy have promise to reinvigorate the domestic economy , to `` get the country move again. '' Today the nation be at a peak of affluence. Yet unemployment remain above 5.5 per cent. The President worry over region that lag behind the rest of the nation. In April he appoint an Appalachian Regional Commission , which be now draw up a massive program of Federal aid for a ten-state swath of chronic poverty run from the Pocono Mountains of Pennsylvania to northern Alabama. His relation with the business community have improve considerably since the spring of 1962 , when he raise hackle by force the steel company to hold the price line. At that time he make a withering attack on United States Steel and other lead corporation , which have increase steel price $ 6 a ton. The President call the price rise `` a wholly unjustifiable and irresponsible defiance of the public interest. '' Privately , he call the industry leader `` son of bitches. '' Big Steel back down. Last spring , when business be good and profit at record level , steel announce modest price increase on select items. This time the industry draw White House praise for `` restraint. '' Crisis in Mississippi What be to be his last attempt to woo business be Monday in a speech to the Florida chamber of Commerce in Tampa. He seek support for the tax-cut by assure business leader he be not anti-business. He remind businessmen that corporate profit be at an `` all-time high , '' and deny that Democrats seek to `` soak the rich. '' The civil right front become grim suddenly in the late month of 1962. In October , a Negro name James Meredith , grandson of a slave and a nine-year veteran of the Air Force , seek to register at the University of Mississippi. The university town of Oxford be tear by rioting. A mob , harangue by former Maj. Gen. Edwin A. Walker , who have fly from Dallas , attack United States marshal who be guard Mr. Meredith. Gov. Ross Barnett plead with the President by telephone : `` Get Meredith off the campus. . .I ca n't protect him. '' `` Listen , Governor , '' the President shout , `` we 're not move anybody anywhere until order be restored. . . . You be not discharge your responsibility , Governor. . . . There be no sense in talk any more until you do your duty. . . . There be life in jeopardy. . . . I 'm not in a position to do anything , to make any deal , to discuss anything until law and order be restore and the life of the people be protected. Good-by. '' President Kennedy slam down the phone. He order Federal troop into Oxford. Governor Barnett be charge with contempt. But the White House fear that the arrest of Governor Barnett might trigger violence throughout the South. So the Governor be consider to have purge himself of contempt by allow Mr. Meredith on the campus. Bombings in Birmingham The victory for integration at Oxford cost one life , that of a reporter. Disorders in Birmingham followed. Birmingham have be plague by bombing , all with racial overtone , since World War II. On Sunday morning , Sept. 15 , 1963 , a dynamite explosion shake the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham 's downtown Negro section. When the smoke clear , rescuer find the body of four girl beneath a pile of debris. Their teacher have just dismiss them after a lesson on `` The Love That Forgives. '' President Kennedy call the affair a consequence of the `` public disparagement of law and order. '' He appear to mean Alabama 's Governor , George C. Wallace , a segregationist who have try to bloc integration at the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa. The President name a two man committee , Kenneth C. Royall , former Secretary of the Army , and Earl H. Blaik , a former West Point football coach , to try to reconcile the white and Negro community of Birmingham. The President have promise a broad civil right program. But he be force to appeal for a softening of a bill draft by a bipartisan group of Northern liberal in the House. He felt the bill range so widely a to risk defeat. This action irritate civil right groups. But the watered-down bill , a draft by the House Judiciary Committee in late October , be still consider the broad civil right program ever recommend to Congress. NEXT PAGE