January 30 , 1963 OBITUARY Robert Frost Dies at 88 ; Kennedy Leads in Tribute Special to The New York Times NEW YORK. A private funeral service , to be attend by member of the family , will be hold for Mr. Frost tomorrow. Burial will be in the family plot in Old Bennington , Vt. On Sunday , Feb. 17 , at 2 P.M. a public memorial service will be hold at Amherst College , Amherst , Mass. The Frost family suggest that instead of flower contribution may be make to a Robert Frost fund to establish special chair for high school teachers. A number of such chair have already be create in the poet 's name , and the project be one in which he be deeply interested. Contributions should be send to Mr. Frost 's publisher , A. C. Edwards of Holt , Rinehart & Winston , 383 Madison Avenue , New York 17 , N.Y. Remarkable In Many Ways Robert Frost be beyond doubt the only American poet to play a touching personal role at a Presidential inauguration ; to report a casual remark of a Soviet dictator that stung official in Washington , and to twit the Russians about the barrier to Berlin by read to them , on their own ground , his celebrate poem about another kind of wall. But it would be much more to the point to say he be also without question the only poet to win four Pulitzer Prizes and , in his ninth decade , to symbolize the rough-hewn individuality of the American creative spirit more than any other man. Finally , it might have be even more appropriate to link his uniqueness to his breathtaking sense of exactitude in the use of metaphor base on direct observations. `` I do n't like to write anything I do n't see , '' he tell an interviewer in Cambridge , Mass. , two day before his 88th birthday. Thus he record timelessly ( by match the sharp observation with the most exact word ) how the swimming buck push the `` crumpled '' water ; how the wagon 's wheel `` freshly slice '' the April mire ; how the ice crystal from the frozen birch snap off and go `` avalanche '' on the snowy crust. And to show that this phase of his gift do not blur with age , there be in his last book , publish in 1962 by Holt , Rinehart & Winston , a piece call `` Pod of the Milkweed. '' It tell of the butterfly cluster on the blossom so avidly that `` They knock the dyestuff off each others ' wings. '' He have see the particular butterfly , most of them Monarchs , just outside his `` boating '' home at Ripton , Vt. , a few year before. Inauguration Incident The incident of Jan. 20 , 1961 -- when John F. Kennedy take the oath a President -- be perhaps the most dramatic of Mr. Frost 's `` public '' life. Invited to write a poem for the occasion , he rise to read it. But the blur of the sun and the edge of the wind hamper him ; his brief plight be so move that a photograph of former President Dwight D. Eisenhower , Mrs. Kennedy and Mrs. Lyndon Johnson watch him win a prize because of the deep apprehension in their faces. But Frost be not daunted. Aware of the problem , he simply put aside the new poem and recite from memory an old favorite , `` The Gift Outright , '' date to the nineteen-thirties. It fit the circumstance as snugly a a glove. Later he take the unread `` new '' poem , which have be call `` The Preface , '' expand it from 42 to 77 line , retitled it `` For John F. Kennedy : His Inaugural '' -- and present it to the President in March , 1962. Later that year , Mr. Frost accompany Stewart L. Udall , Secretary of the Interior , on a visit to Moscow. A first encounter with Soviet child , study English , do not encourage the poet. He recognize the problem pose by the language ; it be painfully ironic , because he have say year before that poetry be what be `` lose in translation. '' And in Moscow , his first hearer clearly do not understand well in English. But a few day later , he read `` Mending Wall '' at a Moscow literary evening. `` Something there be that do n't love a wall , '' the poem begins. The Russians may not have get the subsequent nuances. But the idea quickly spread that the choice of the poem be not unrelated to the wall partition Berlin. On Sept. 7 , the poet have a long talk with Premier Khrushchev. He describe the Soviet leader a `` no fathead '' ; a smart , big and `` not a coward. '' `` He 's not afraid of u and we 're not afraid of him , '' he added. Subsequently , Frost report that Mr. Khrushchev have say the United States be `` too liberal to fight. '' It be this remark that cause a considerable stir in Washington. Thus in the late year of his life , Frost move among the mighty. He be a public personage to thousand of person who have never read his works. But to countless others , loyal and loving to the point of idolatry , he remain not only a poet but the poet of his day. During the first year of the Kennedy Administration , Frost be unquestionably a kind of celebrity- poet around Washington. His face be see smile in the background -- and frequently the foreground -- of news photograph from the Capitol , and quite often he appear in public with Democratic politicians. President Kennedy , when ask why he have request that Frost speak at the inauguration , praise the `` courage , the towering skill and dare '' of his fellow New Englander. Among the many thing that both share be the high esteem of a poet 's place in American society. `` There be a story that some year ago an interested mother write to a principal of a school , 'Do n't teach my boy poetry , he 's go to run for Congress , ' '' President Kennedy said. `` I 've never take the view that the world of politics and the world of poetry be so far apart. I think politician and poet share at least one thing , and that be their greatness depend upon the courage with which they face the challenge of life. '' Echoes the Poet 's Cry He be echo a cry that Frost have long make -- the high role of the poet in business society. In fact , in 1960 , Mr. Frost have urge Congress to declare poet the equal of big business , and receive a stand ovation from spectator when he support a bill to create a National Academy of Culture. `` I have long thought of something like this , '' Mr. Frost tell a Senate education subcommittee. `` Everyone come down to Washington to get equal with someone else. I want our poet to be declare equal to -- what shall I say ? -- the scientists. No , to big business. '' Many year before , but several year after he have achieve recognition for his work , Frost have slouch characteristically before an audience of young writer gather under Bread Loaf Mountains at Middlebury , Vt. He say : `` Every artist must have two fear -- the fear of God and the fear of man -- fear of God that his creation will ultimately be find unworthy and the fear of man that he will be misunderstand by his fellows. '' These two fear be ever present in Robert Frost , with the result that his publish verse be of the high order and completely understood by thousand of Americans in whom they strike a ready response. To countless person who have never see New Hampshire birch in the snow or caress a perfect ax he exemplify a great American tradition with his superb , almost angular verse write out of the New England scene. Not since Whittier in `` Snowbound '' have capture the penetrating chill of New England 's brief December day have any American poet more exactly catch the atmosphere north of Boston or the thin philosophy of it fence-mending inhabitants. His picture of an abandon cord of wood warm `` the frozen swamp a best it could with the slow smokeless burning of decay '' or of how `` two road diverge in a wood , and I take the one less travel by , and that have make all the difference , '' with their Yankee economy of word , move his reader nostalgically and fill the back pasture of their mind with memory of a shrewd and quiet way of life. 20 Years of Rejection Strangely enough , Frost spend 20 year write his verse on stone wall and brown earth , blue butterfly and tall , slim tree without win any recognition in America. When he send them to The Atlantic Monthly they be return with this note : `` We regret that The Atlantic have no place for your vigorous verse. '' It be not until `` A Boy 's Will '' be publish in England and Ezra Pound publicize it that Robert Frost be recognize a the indigenous American poet that he was. After that , the way be not so hard , and in the year that follow he be to win the Pulitzer Prize four time , be honor by many institution of high learning and find it possible for a poet , who would write of thing that be `` common in experience , uncommon in writing , '' to earn enough money so that he would not have to teach or farm or make shoe or write for newspaper -- all thing he have do in his early days. Raymond Holden , poet and critic , point out in a `` profile '' in The New Yorker magazine that there be more than the ordinary amount of paradox in the personality and career of Frost. Essentially a New England poet in a day when there be few poet in that region , he be bear in San Francisco ; fundamentally a Yankee , he be the son of an ardent Democrat whose belief in the Confederacy lead him to name his son Robert Lee ; a farmer in New Hampshire , he prefer to sit on a fence and watch others work ; a teacher , he despise the rigor of the educational process a practice in the institution where he taught. Like many another Yankee individualist , Robert Frost be a rebel. So be his father , William Frost , who have run away from Amherst , Mass. , to go West. His mother , bear in Edinburgh , Scotland , emigrate to Philadelphia when she be a girl. His father die when Robert , who be bear March 26 , 1874 , be about 11. The boy and his mother , the former Isabelle Moody , go to live at Lawrence , Mass. , with William Prescott Frost , Robert 's grandfather , who give the boy a good schooling. Influenced by the poem of Edgar Allan Poe , Robert want to be a poet before he go to Dartmouth College , where he stay only through the year 1892. In the next several year he work a a bobbin boy in the Lawrence mill , be a shoemaker and for a short while a reporter for The Lawrence Sentinel. He attend Harvard in 1897-98 , then become a farmer at Derry , N.H. , and teach there. In 1905 he marry Elinor White , also a teacher , by whom he have five children. In 1912 Mr. Frost sell the farm and the family go to England. He come home to find the editor of The Atlantic Monthly ask for poems. He send along the very one that have previously be reject , and they be published. The Frosts go to Franconia , N.H. , to live in a farm house Mr. Frost have buy for $ 1,000. His poetry bring him some money , and in 1916 he again become a teacher. He be a professor of English , then `` poet in residence '' for more than 20 year at Amherst College and he spend two year in a similar capacity at the University of Michigan. Later Frost lecture and teach at The New School in New York. In 1938 he retire temporarily a a teacher. Mrs. Frost die that year in Florida. Afterward , he teach intermittently at Harvard , Amherst and Dartmouth. Won Many Honors In 1916 Frost , who have then be a poet for 20 year , be make a member of the National Institute of Arts and Letters ; in 1930 , of the American Academy. His book , `` New Hampshire : A Poem With Notes And Gracenotes , '' win him the Pulitzer Prize in 1924. When his `` Corrected Poems '' be publish in 1931 , he again win that prize. The Pulitzer committee honor him a third time in 1937 for his book , `` A Further Range , '' and again in 1943 for `` A Witness Tree. '' Frost win many honorary degree , from master of art at Amherst in 1917 to doctor of humane letter at the University of Vermont in 1923 , and others follow from Harvard , Yale and other institutions. The issuing in 1949 of `` The Complete Poems of Robert Frost , '' a 642-page volume , be the signal for another series of broad critical appraisal stud with phrase like `` lasting significance. '' The Limited Editions Club award Frost it Gold Medal , and in the following October poet , scholar and editor gather to do him honor at the Kenyon College Conference. In Washington the Senate adopt a resolution to send him greeting on his 75th birthday. On that occasion he say that 20 acre of land for every man `` would be the answer to all the world 's problem '' note that life on the farm would show men `` their burden as well a their privileges. '' The only exist copy of Frost 's first book , `` Twilight and Other Poems , '' be auction here that December for $ 3,000 , a price thought to be the high paid for a work by a contemporary American author. `` It have no success and deserve none , '' the poet commented. In late year , Frost , who once write : I bid you to a one-man revolution. -- The only revolution that be come , become interested in politics , and some of his late verse be on this theme. His lecture , at Harvard , where he be Charles Eliot Norton lecturer in 1936 and 1939 , and elsewhere , be less about poetry and more about the moral value of life. But it be less to these than to his early work that reader turn for satisfaction ; to such line a these on the `` Hired Man '' : Nothing to look backward to with pride Nothing to look forward to with hope . . . While critic heap belated praise on his earthy , Yankee , birchbark-clear poem , there be also finely fashioned lyric in which the man of the soil flash fire with intellect. Such a poem be `` Reluctance '' with it nostalgic end : Ah , when to the heart of man be it ever less than treason To go with the drift of thing , to yield with a grace to reason , And bow and accept the end of a love or a season ? Or : Some say the world will end in fire , Some say in ice. From what I 've taste of desire I hold with those who favor fire. But if I have to perish twice , I think I know enough of hate To say that for destruction ice Is also great And would suffice. Even critic who find a harshness sometimes in his work credit Mr. Frost with be a great poet. They appreciate his philosophy of simplicity , perhaps more in later year than during the `` renaissance '' of American poetry in the nineteen-twenties. For they know it be a part of Robert Frost , whose innate philosophy of unchangeableness he once express when he write : They would not find me change from him they know Only more sure of all I think be true . . . . At an annual joint ceremonial in May 1950 , of the American Academy and the National Institute , he read a poem entitle `` How Hard It Is to Keep From Being King , When It 's in You and in the Situation. '' Asked about his method of write a poem , Frost say : `` I have worry quite a number of them into existence , but any sneaking preference [ I have have ] remain for the one I have carry through like the stroke of a racquet , club or headsman 's ax. '' In an interview with Harvey Breit of The New York Times Book Review , he observe : `` If poetry be n't understand all , the whole word , then it be n't worth anything. Young poet forget that poetry must include the mind as well a the emotions. Too many poet delude themselves by think the mind be dangerous and must be leave out. Well , the mind be dangerous and must be leave in . ''