August 28 , 1963 OBITUARY W. E. B. DuBois Dies in Ghana ; Negro Leader and Author , 95 Special to The New York Times ACCRA , Ghana , Wednesday , Aug. 28 -- W. E. B. DuBois , the American Negro philosopher and writer , who settle in Ghana a few year ago , die last night , the Government announced. He be 95 year old. Dr. DuBois , who have come here a a special guest of President Kwame Nkrumah , be director of the Encyclopedia Africana , which be sponsor by the Government. He become a citizen of Ghana this year. Leader of Negro Thought For more than half a century , William Edward Burghardt DuBois be a monumental and often controversial , leader of Negro thought. As a sociologist , educator and writer , he frequently disagree not only with white but with member of his own race. Early in his career , he challenge the philosophy of Booker T. Washington. Dr. DuBois be one of the founder of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , but later break with the organization under condition of bitterness. During his late year , he be active in many left-wing and Communist activities. In the fall of 1961 -- at the age of 93 -- he join the Communist party. At about the same time , he go to Ghana a head of the secretariat plan the new Negro encyclopedia. Dr. DuBois be bear in Great Barrington , Mass. , on Feb. 23 , 1868 , five year after the Emancipation Proclamation. He be bear , a he phrase it in his autobiography , `` Dusk at Dawn , '' `` with a flood of Negro blood , a strain of French , a bit of Dutch , but , thank God , no 'Anglo-Saxon. ' '' In Great Barrington , a tolerant , provincial town , Dr. DuBois grow up a one of about 50 Negroes among 5,000 inhabitants. His mother 's family , among whom he be raise , have live in a relatively humble situation in a community where social status be determine by income and ancestry and not by color. Because of this economic leveling , Dr. DuBois be not face with racial discrimination until he have leave New England to attend college in the South. At Fisk and Harvard After receive a Bachelor of Arts degree from Fisk University in 1888 , he attend Harvard and receive the same degree there in 1890 , a Master of Arts in 1891 and a Doctor of Philosophy degree in 1895. His doctoral thesis , `` The Suppression of the African Slave Trade to the United States , '' be the first volume publish in the Harvard Historical Studies. He teach successively at Wilberforce University , the University of Pennsylvania and Atlanta University , resign from Atlanta in 1909 to become founder of the N.A.A.C.P. and the editor of it publication , The Crisis. Dr. DuBois disagree with the doctrine of Booker T. Washington that the Negro should raise himself by his own bootstrap and strive for an education basically vocational. Dr. DuBois envision the education of a `` talented 10th '' that would lead a self-sufficient Negro society. He remain editor of The Crisis until 1934 , when he break with the N.A.A.C.P. on question of policy. For the next 10 year , he teach at Atlanta once more , only to resign again in 1944 to return to the N.A.A.C.P. a director of research. Four year later , after another disagreement , he leave the N.A.A.C.P. for good. Dr. DuBois then serve successively a consultant to the United Nations upon it formation in San Francisco in 1945 , a head of the Council of African Affairs , and , in 1949 , a chairman of the Peace Information Center in New York. The center be the sponsor in this country for the so-called Stockholm Peace Petition , a movement characterize by the Secretary of State , Dean Acheson , a Communist-inspired. Dr. DuBois and other officer of the center be indict by a Federal grand jury on a charge of failure to register a foreign agents. They be acquit after a trial in which the chief defense counsel be the late Representative Vito Marcantonio of Manhattan. Won Peace Council Prize In 1950 , Dr. DuBois run unsuccessfully for United States Senator on the American Labor party ticket. In 1952 , he receive a Grand International Prize value at $ 7,000 from the World Peace Council , head by the French scientist Frederic Joliot-Curie. Among Dr. DuBois ' major writing be `` Souls of Black Folk , '' publish in 1903 ; `` Darkwater '' 1920 ; `` Dark Princess '' 1924 ; `` The Encyclopedia of the Negro , '' 1931-1946 ; `` The Gift of the Black Folk , '' and `` In Battle for Peace '' 1952. Henry James in `` The American Scene '' publish in 1907 , write : `` How can everything have so go that the only Southern book of any distinction publish for many a year be 'The Souls of Black Folk. ' '' In his application to join the Communist party , Dr. DuBois write that he have be `` long and slow '' in decide to apply for membership , `` but at last my mind be settled. '' He say that he have join the Socialist party in 1911 , but have resign to support Woodrow Wilson. For the next 20 year , he say , he attack the Democrats , Republicans and Socialists. He say that he have `` praise the attitude of the Communists but oppose their tactic in the case of the Scottsboro boy and their advocacy of a Negro state. '' In recent year , Dr. DuBois travel extensively in Communist China and the Soviet Union. On his 91st birthday , he be honor in Peking by a celebration attend by Premier Chou En-lai. Honored By Soviet In 1959 , Dr. DuBois receive the Soviet Lenin Peace Prize `` for strengthen world peace. '' Dr. DuBois be the first Negro to be elect to the National Institute of Arts and Letters. He be also a life member and fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In manner , Dr. DuBois be reserve and somewhat formal , although his few intimate friend find him warm and companionable. He be distinguish by a mustache and goatee , pince-nez glass , and he invariably carry a cane. His dress be immaculate. His first wife , Mrs. Nina Gomer DuBois , whom he marry in 1896 , die in 1950 , and a year later , he marry Shirley Graham , a writer. Surviving be his widow and a daughter , Mrs. Yolanda Williams of Baltimore. Dr. DuBois ' home in this country be at 31 Grace Court , Brooklyn .