October 21 , 1964 OBITUARY Herbert Hoover Is Dead ; Ex-President , 90 , Served Country in Varied Fields By McCANDLISH PHILLIPS Herbert Clark Hoover , former President of the United States , die here yesterday at the age of 90. Death come at 11:35 A.M. in his suite on the 31st floor of the Waldorf Towers , follow massive internal bleeding that begin Saturday. His two son be with him a he slip into a deep coma that keep his final hour free of pain. Physicians and nurse have work ceaselessly since he be stricken to prolong his final days. They arrest the bleeding in the upper intestinal tract and give him frequent transfusions. But toxin poison his weakened system and , when bleed recur early yesterday , his heart could no longer take the strain. By 8 A.M. , it be apparent that his illness be terminal , a a medical bulletin put it. Credo of Individualism Mr. Hoover , bear in an Iowa village , the son of a Quaker blacksmith , be an exponent of a credo of personal initiative that he sum up a `` rugged individualism , '' and his life exemplify it. His parent be poor and he be orphan at 9 , but he amass a fortune a a mine engineer and owner. With the start of World War I , he direct the evacuation of 200,000 Americans from Europe. It be the first of a series of massive economic , evacuation and food relief activity that span half a century. He be Secretary of Commerce in the Administrations of Harding and Coolidge and be elect President on the Republican ticket in 1928. Seen a Victim The crash of the stock market on Oct. 29 , 1929 , plunge the nation into it bad economic crisis in history. His policy be attack a insufficient to spur economic revival. He be vote out of office in 1932 under the cloud of the Great Depression , call the `` Hoover Depression '' by his opponents. Some late judgment , however , have suggest that he be the victim of event that coincide with his tenure. And 30 year of public service , include task for two Presidents after he leave the White House , restore him in the affection of millions. At news of Mr. Hoover 's death , President Johnson proclaim a 30-day mourning period and order the flag lower to half-staff at the White House and on all Federal building and ground in the nation , on Navy vessel at sea and at embassy and military station abroad. At noon Sunday 21-gun salute will be fire at military installations. When the flag be lower at Retreat on Sunday , 50-gun rifle salute will be fired. Mayor Wagner order flag lower on all public building in the city for 30 days. Today and tomorrow from 9 A.M. to 3 P.M. the public will be admit to the vast marble sanctuary of St. Bartholomew 's Episcopal Church to file past Mr. Hoover 's closed coffin. The church be on Park Avenue at 50th Street , across from the Waldorf 's north entrance. To Lie in State Friday morning , the coffin will be move to Washington in a railroad car. It will be carry by military escort to the Capital Rotunda , where the body will lie in state until Sunday morning. There the nation will pay it final honor to Mr. Hoover. The rotunda be the ceremonial center of state funerals. Abraham Lincoln be the first to lie there , in April , 1865. President Kennedy and Gen. Douglas MacArthur be the most recent. The only former President to rest there before Mr. Hoover be William Howard Taft. A memorial service , which President Johnson be schedule to attend , will be conduct in St. Bartholomew 's at 4:30 P.M. tomorrow by the Rev. Terance J. Finlay , the rector. It will not be open to the public. Mr. Finlay sometimes visit the former President in his suite. When Mrs. Hoover die , a similar , brief service be hold for her in St. Bartholomew's. Mr. Hoover will be bury Sunday in West Branch , Iowa , the village where he be born. There will be a brief , simple ceremony call a Memorial Meeting for Worship , at the West Branch Conservative Meeting of the Society of Friends ( Quakers ) , of which he be a lifetime member. His body will rest in a grave , the site of which he choose himself , on a grassy knoll overlook the two-room cottage in which he be bear on Aug. 10 , 1874. Quakers do not hold religious `` service , '' a such , but `` meeting '' mark by an absence of ritual. Therefore there will be only a brief graveside observance before the coffin be lower into the earth. Mr. Hoover 's wife , Lou Henry Hoover , who die in 1944 at the age of 70 , be bury at Stanford University in California , which both attend and which be the site of the Hoover Institution on War , Revolution and Peace -- but her body will be move to the Iowa burial plot beside her husband 's on the ground of the Hoover 's Library. Mr. Hoover be the 31st President of the United States by most reckoning , though some hold him to be the 30th. Grover Cleveland , who serve two nonconsecutive term , be both the 22d and 24th President in the accounting that list Mr. Hoover a the 31st occupant of the office. Mr. Hoover 's death leave the nation with two live former Presidents : Harry S. Truman , a Democrat , and Dwight D. Eisenhower , a Republican. Only one other President live to be 90 -- John Adams , the second President , a Federalist , who be 90 year and 247 day old when he die on July 4 , 1826 ( the same day that Thomas Jefferson , the third President , die ) . Mr. Hoover be 90 year and 71 day old at death. Mr. Hoover 's value be root in uncomplicated Quaker value of thrift , hard work and self- dependence , and he deplore a departure from those value in which he disparagingly term `` the century of the common man. '' Need for 'Uncommon ' Men He say the nation imperatively require `` the leadership of the uncommon man or woman. '' And he cite his own life a proof of the validity of the American dream of achievement by effort , not grant. The first word of Mr. Hoover 's death come in a terse , handwritten note on Waldorf stationery from his personal physician , Dr. Michael J. Lepore. It give only name , date and time. Its text : `` President Hoover. Oct. 20 , 1964. Time : 11:35 A.M. '' Neil MacNeil , an old friend and associate of Mr. Hoover , immediately call a press conference on the fourth floor of the hotel. He ask for a glass of water before face newsman and camera , and comment , `` I 'm undergo a little shock today. '' Then , in a write statement , he declare : `` A great American have end a brilliant career of service to his fellow men. Above all , he be a humanitarian. He feed more people and save more life than any other man in history. '' A medical bulletin have be issue at 8:30 A.M. , signal the end. Noting that Mr. Hoover have lapse into a coma , the bulletin say : `` Early this morning , bleed from the upper gastrointestinal tract recur , place an unbearable burden upon his already strain vascular system. His heart , which have bear up magnificently throughout the illness , have begin to fail and it rhythm have become totally irregular. `` Renal [ kidney ] function be inadequate for the demand of his system and toxic product be accumulate in his blood stream. The emphasis in this terminal phase of his illness be upon keep him comfortable and free of pain. '' Mr. Hoover 's two son , Allan Henry and Herbert Jr. , have join him Sunday , and both be in his suite at the time of death. Mr. Hoover also have six grandchildren. Mr. Hoover have suffer four serious illness in the last 26 month , and have be long confine to his suite , in which he keep six secretary busy answer mail and compile data for his many book , among other tasks. In 1960 , he write 55,952 letter with his staff. He have become very hard of hear lately , and aide and interviewer sometimes have to stand close and shout. `` I 'm used to be holler at , '' he assure one visitor. His mind remain alert , and he maintain a steady interest in world affair and sport until his final illness. He like to reminisce about the old day , to watch football on color television and to read the newspaper or have them read to him. Mr. Hoover be 54 year old when he take the oath of office from Chief Justice William Howard Taft on March 4 , 1929 , with Calvin Coolidge , his immediate predecessor , at his side. Defeated Smith He run against Alfred E. Smith , the New York Governor who be call the Happy Warrior , and be elect with 21 million popular vote to Governor Smith 's 15 million , and an electoral margin of 444 to 87. But four year later , with the nation in the grip of the Depression , with million out of work and hundred of thousand suffer cold and hunger and sometimes live in shantytown call `` Hoovervilles , '' Mr. Hoover run against another New York Governor , Franklin D. Roosevelt , and be overwhelm by a blizzard of 22.8 million vote for the Democrat. Mr. Hoover get 15.7 million vote and receive 59 electoral vote to Mr. Roosevelt 's 472. After his 1932 defeat , Mr. Hoover resume his role a trustee of educational and scientific institution , writer of book and article and chairman of the Boys ' Clubs of America. Under President Truman and President Eisenhower , he head the Hoover Commission on the Organization of the Executive Branch of Government .