April 6 , 1964 OBITUARY Commander of Armies That Turned Back Japan Led a Brigade in World War I By THE NEW YORK TIMES General of the Army Douglas MacArthur serve his country a a soldier for more than 60 years. He achieve the high acclaim for his exploit a a grand strategist in World War II and in Korea and then hold the center stage in one of the bitter civil versus military controversy in the history of the nation. Virtually every military honor be bestow upon him , yet his active career end in bitterness and recrimination when he be relieve of his command in the midst of a war by his Commander in Chief. His life be mark by no struggle against poverty or lack of privilege. His rise to prominence be unmarred by temporary setback or misfortune. Even the final , discordant note of his career -- his removal from command -- leave him serenely confident in his judgment , outwardly unmoved by the event that swirl about him. Believed in Destiny General MacArthur 's evaluation of his role in history be probably most succinctly and characteristically voice by him in 1950 in a protracted conversation with a newspaper correspondent who have know him for many years. Asked if he could explain his success , he puff slowly at his corncob pipe , look out the window of his Tokyo office across a moat at the Imperial Palace ground and say : `` I believe it be destiny. '' Douglas MacArthur be bear Jan. 26 , 1880 , in a sestion of the armory building at Fort Dodge , Little Rock , Ark. , that have be set aside a the post hospital. He be the third of three son bear to Capt. Arthur MacArthur and his Virginia-born wife , the former Mary Pinkney Hardy. His eldest brother be Arthur , bear in 1876 , who graduate from the United States Naval Academy in 1896 , have a distinguish naval career in the Spanish-American War , the Boxer Rebellion in China and a commander of the light cruiser U.S.S. Chattanooga in World War I. Arthur die of a ruptured appendix in 1923. The second brother be Malcolm , born 1878 , who die at the age of 5. Of the old brother 's death , General MacArthur write 40 year later , `` His premature death leave a gap in my life which have never be filled. '' General MacArthur 's father be the son of Arthur MacArthur , a descendant of the MacArtair branch of the Clan Campbell. The MacArtairs have their seat near Glasgow , Scotland. General MacArthur 's grandfather , with his widowed mother , come to this country in 1825 and settle in Chicopee Falls , Mass. He become a lawyer. Recollections of Grandfather General MacArthur 's recollection of his grandfather remain , he say , vivid in his memory. In his memoir to be publish next fall by McGraw-Hill , he tell the story of a court case preside over by his grandfather. One of the contending lawyer appear to have overstate his case and lose the suit. He recount the episode to his grandson Douglas. `` My grandfather , '' he write , `` thus illustrate a lesson , which , unhappily , I have not always keep in mind : Never talk more than be necessary. '' General MacArthur 's father be destine for West Point , but in August , 1862 , a little more than a year after the outbreak of the Civil War , he join the 24th Wisconsin Volunteer Infantry. He rise through the rank , win the Medal of Honor in the Battle of Missionary Ridge in November , 1863 , and be know a `` the boy colonel. '' The war over , he leave the Army to study law , be recall to the rank and fight against the Indians in the West. While he be on duty at fort Dodge , his third son be born. In 1898 , the elder MacArthur be order to the Philippines where , follow the capitulation of Spain , he fight against Emilio Aguinaldo 's revolutionary , include Manuel Quezon. The elder MacArthur rise to major general command the Army of the Philippines , and retire a a lieutenant general. During these year Douglas MacArthur and his mother remain in the United States , while he prepare for entry into West Point. The MacArthurs have establish their home in Milwaukee. It be there in 1898 that he take the competitive examination for the United States Military Academy. `` Always before me , '' he write many year after , `` be the vision of West Point , that great military institution in the world. To join the Long Gray Line have be the lodestar of all my hope since the sound of bugle have usher me into the world. '' He pass the examination with high mark and enter West Point in June , 1899. Much have be write of his West Point military and academic record. In the four undergraduate year he attain a scholastic record not equal in the previous 25 years. He recall that there be others in his class smarter than he , but say that his achievement result , perhaps , from have `` a somewhat clear perspective of event -- a good realization that first thing come first. Or , perhaps , it be just luck. '' If his military , scholastic and athletic record be outstanding a a cadet , his tutelage be among the strange ever note on the Plains of West Point. Mother Lived Near Academy His mother establish a residence just off the West Point reservation. Her son visit her every day of his cadet life. Recalling a crisis in his cadet career when he be summon to a hearing on the question of haze at the academy and face the challenge of be order to disclose the name of culprit involve , General MacArthur tell of his mother 's stanch support of his decision to remain silent on pain of dismissal. He write that his mother `` sense the struggle raging in my soul , '' and compose an inspirational poem urge him to stand fast. `` I know then what to do , '' he wrote. He remain in the academy and graduate first in his class with many honor in 1903. He choose the Corps of Engineers , he recall , because chance of promotion be good in that branch. Much of General MacArthur 's success a a cadet have be credit , by him and associate of the period , to his mother , the indomitable `` Pinky '' MacArthur. With his father serving in the Army 10,000 mile away in that critical period of his life , the young cadet draw from the aristocratic , forceful woman the inspiration and strength that sometimes come from both parents. To her , throughout his life , General MacArthur attribute his sense of rectitude and `` destiny '' that be to move his admirer to boundless praise and annoy those who think him an egocentric. As a newly commission second lieutenant he be post to the Philippines and be involve in survey the island where , although the insurrection have be put down , skirmish with Moro dissident be not uncommon and survey party be ambush from time to time. There , for the first time , he hear shot fire in anger. And , a a prelude to many escape in many other battlefield , he once have his hat shot off. In the year before World War I , General MacArthur saw service in Mexico , once disguise himself a a drifter to lead a raid party , an early evidence of his proclivity for independent action. As a captain , he serve in the expeditionary force at Veracruz. The ascendance of his military star begin with the outbreak of World War I. He help to organize the 42d ( Rainbow ) Division and go to France a commander of one of it brigades. Exhibiting daring and dash -- frequently to the annoyance of his superior -- he savor the excitement of war and the danger of combat. Moreover , he display the detached self- confidence that mark his career through nearly a half-century a an active soldier. Competition for Sedan As a brigade commander with the temporary rank of brigadier general , he direct action that sometimes ran counter to grand strategy. On one occasion , with the capture of the French city of Sedan assign to the French Army , he enter into competition with the French to be first in the town. The prize be of particular significance to the French because it be the site of the surrender of the French to the Germans in 1870. Orders for the operation have be draw up by Col. George C. Marshall , an operation officer at the headquarters of the American Expeditionary Force. General MacArthur act on his own interpretation of the orders. History record conflict account of which force first enter Sedan , but the French be list officially a the first. Thirty-three year later George C. Marshall , then Secretary of Defense , draw up another set of order to which there be no opportunity for General MacArthur to apply a dissent interpretation. They be the order in 1951 , relieve General MacArthur of his Far East command during the Korean conflict. Having once say to General MacArthur , `` Young man , I do not like your attitude , '' Gen. John J. Pershing , command the American Expeditionary Force in France , nevertheless , pin the Distinguished Service Cross and the Distinguished Service Medal on the bold young officer. In 1919 , General MacArthur return to the United States and be appoint Superintendent of the United States Military Academy. He be credit with broaden the curriculum and raise the status of the Army 's `` trade school '' to academic level equal to those of nonmilitary college and universities. Encouraged Athletics A former varsity football and baseball player , General MacArthur encourage intramural athletics and write the motto that now stand in bronze on the inner wall of West Point 's new gymnasium : `` Upon the field of friendly strife be sow the seed that , upon other field , on other day , will bear the fruit of victory. '' Sinking into peacetime doldrums and sag appropriation from Congress and public unconcern with military might in a world that have just win democracy 's `` ultimate '' triumph over tyranny , the Army offer only routine duty at routine station for it professionals. General MacArthur fill a number of these assignment at home and in the Philippines. He become involved routinely in a lively controversy a a member of the court in the court-martial of Brig. Gen. William B. Mitchell in 1926. Billy Mitchell be an enthusiastic champion of the airplane a an instrument of war. After have publicly charge the Government with have fail to recognize the validity of this position , he be court-martialed. The court rule the charge against him `` prove '' and he resign from the Army. For decade rumor , neither confirm nor deny by General MacArthur , say that General MacArthur have cast a dissenting vote. The actual vote be never disclosed. General MacArthur achieve his fourth star in 1930 , when he be name Chief of Staff of the Army by President Herbert Hoover. It be in this post , during the Depression , that he come into sharp contact with the reality of the disarray in the nation 's economic life. In the summer of 1932 , several thousand unemployed men , many of them veteran of World War I , gather in Washington to demand immediate payment of war bonuses. They camp in squalor on Washington 's Anacostia Flats amid widespread sympathy for their plight , but to the vast embarrassment of the Hoover Administration. Eisenhower an Aide On July 29 , President Hoover issue write order to Chief of Staff MacArthur to clear and destroy the camp. The task be accomplished. With Maj. Dwight D. Eisenhower , an assistant executive officer to the Assistant Secretary of War , at his side , General MacArthur direct the operation of the scene. In some newspaper General MacArthur be picture a a beribboned military dandy direct his troop to shoot down hungry former soldiers. When President Franklin D. Roosevelt succeed Mr. Hoover , General MacArthur be re- appointed Chief of Staff of the Army. He hold the post until 1935 , long than any predecessor. There have be charge by General MacArthur 's critic that with the war in Europe only four year away , he be no more aware , despite his position a Chief of Staff , of the stride Germany and Japan be make toward wag a modern war than other top officer in the United States military establishment. He be credit , however , in the face of penurious appropriation , with have effect a minor modernization of the Army. In his friendly biography of General MacArthur , `` The Untold Story of Douglas MacArthur , '' Frazier Hunt discuss at length the general 's dispute with President Roosevelt over the President 's attempt to reduce military appropriations. Mr. Hunt write that General MacArthur have threaten to resign and take his case to the people unless the President drop plan for certain drastic reduction in military budgets. It be not the first , nor be it to be the last , time General MacArthur show himself to be recalcitrant to high authority. It be note by observer of the proud and stiff professional soldier a another of those curious stance he take that appear to belie the very essence of his training and profession -- discipline and compliance with order from above. The man who demand and get complete obedience to his order on the part of subordinate do not always apply the military golden rule to himself. In such moment he explain himself a be `` animate by the sole desire to help restore. preserve and advance those great American principle and ideal of which we have be beneficiary ourselves and be not trustee for future generations. '' Used Words As Weapons Throughout his career he use word a weapon , often soar to height of grandiloquence in search of a phrase , inspirational in content , sonorous in tone and evocative of his call to `` destiny. '' No rapport ever develop between President Roosevelt and General MacArthur. Each have his `` style. '' As in his relation with all Commanders in Chief during his active military service , General MacArthur appear unable to acknowledge that a civilian whose trade be politics could be the repository of ultimate wisdom. Among his statement and writing , reference to a President a the `` Commander in Chief '' be sparse. President Roosevelt relieve General MacArthur a Chief of Staff on Oct. 3 , 1935 , and name Gen. Malin Craig a his successor. Resuming his permanent rank of major general , General MacArthur be send to the Philippines a military adviser to the commonwealth. For two year he work at build a military force in the Philippines that might ultimately be capable of defend the island with American help. On Aug. 6 , 1937 , he be notify that he would be return shortly for duty in the United States. Stating that his task in the Philippines be not yet complete , he abruptly terminate 34 year of uninterrupted service by apply for retirement from the Army. In a message address him a `` Dear Douglas , '' President Roosevelt notify him that his retirement have be granted. The President write : `` Your record in war a in peace be a brilliant chapter of American history. '' Manuel Quezon , the Philippines Commonwealth President , then appoint him Field Marshal of the Philippines. He be the only American to hold such a rank. It be then , exercise the privilege of that exalt rank , that General MacArthur design the gold leaf-encrusted garrison cap that , along with sunglass and a corncob pipe , be to become his trademark. The Philippines Government pay the commander a salary of $ 25,000 a year and provide him with a penthouse atop the Manila Hotel. Other emolument be provide , make it possible for him to live , a he do later in Tokyo and in the Waldorf Towers , a simple life amid luxurious surroundings. It be note during his service to the Philippines Government that General MacArthur be the high paid military officer in recent history. His considerable investment , both in the Philippines and in this country , be the basis of frequent conjecture , but their extent and nature be never disclosed. His mode of living after achieve top rank be such that he seldom open a door , drive an automobile or have to perform the myriad personal task of ordinary persons. Spare and just short of 6 foot tall , General MacArthur maintain a deceptively jaunty air that the unsuspecting thought invite familiarity , which be swiftly and coolly spurned. Save for his battered , braid-encrusted campaign cap , his military dress be simplicity itself. Almost ostentatiously , he wear no ribbon , insignia or braid other than the tiny circlet of five star on his right collar tabs. As the possibility of war grow , the Philippine Army be merge with the United States Army under the command of General MacArthur , who be restore to duty with the American force a a lieutenant general on July 27 , 1941. In December he be make a full general 11 day after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. That attack be follow on the same day by a Japanese attack on military installation in the Philippines where General MacArthur 's force be catch completely by surprise. His air arm be virtually destroyed. His air command later explain that it be catch at Clark Field simple because there be no other airfield capable of receive it. Now begin the great fight retreat of General MacArthur 's life. A harden , well-equipped Japanese force land on Luzon and strike toward the fortified United States military base on Bataan Peninsula into which MacArthur have draw his forces. With the opening of the battle on Dec. 10 , General MacArthur command 12,000 Philippine scout and 19,000 United States troops. Added to this force be about 100,000 partly equip Filipinos. The Japanese roll the American force into the Bataan Peninsula where it be hop they could hold our for 14 months. Roosevelt Reported Incensed General MacArthur assure his troop that this aid would be forthcoming , although he have be give no assurance by Washington that reinforcement would come. His assurance to his troop reach President Roosevelt , and , it be report , the President be incense by General MacArthur 's statements. An entry into the diary of William Hassett , a White House aide , publish in 1953 , disclose that the President have say it have be `` criminal for General MacArthur to raise false hope among his men. '' Meanwhile , the highly trained Japanese force tighten the noose around Bataan , force the American and Filipino troop toward the tip of the peninsula , set the stage for the final battle for Corregidor. As General MacArthur direct the defense from the labyrinthine , underground fortification of Corregidor , order come to him on Feb. 22 to leave his command in the hand of Lieut. Gen. Jonathan ( Skinny ) Wainwright and proceed to Australia to take command of the newly create Southwest Pacific Area. Bidding farewell to his men and their Filipino comrade , General MacArthur utter a phrase that be to be add to his trademarks. `` I shall return , '' he said. With his wife and their 4-year-old-son , Arthur , and a Chinese amah , or nursemaid , General MacArthur be take off Corregidor by a PT boat in a dramatic dash. Learned of Allies ' Plight Arriving in Melbourne , the general learn in full detail the plight of the retreat Allies from the Philippines to Southeast Asia. He begin agitate Washington with demand for more men and equipment , seem not to comprehend or not to want to understand that the war in Europe hold first priority for the time being. In addition , he express bitter disappointment that the area of his command have be limited. He dream of relieve Corregidor up to the very moment of it capitulation to the Japanese on May 5 , 1942. Until this time , United States strategy in the Pacific be wholly defensive. But with the increase in Allied strength , the initiative pass from the Japanese , and on Aug. 7 , 1942 , Marines land at Guadalcanal. A prolonged struggle take place , and it be not until early in February , 1943 , that the Japanese be force to evacuate Guadalcanal. It be General MacArthur 's belief , and that of the Navy , that the Bismarcks Barrier have to be broken. The MacArthur-Navy agreement on this point , however , do not extend to the over-all strategy of defeat Japan. In fact , the view of the general and those of Admiral Chester W. Nimitz , United States commander in the Pacific , be to be oppose until the middle of 1944. General MacArthur favor move up on Japan through the Solomons and Bismarcks by what he call the New Guinea-Mindanao Axis. He want to have the entire fleet and amphibious force under his command to liberate the Philippines before advance on Japan itself. The Navy plan , which the general oppose a too long a route , be for an advance through the Pacific , take key point in the Gilbert , Marshall and Caroline Islands on the way , then to the Marianas , to Taiwan and finally to the coast of China to establish a base for the assault on Japan. The plan that be adopt in May , 1943 , be a combination of the two , but point toward China a the invasion base for Japan , a move later abandon in deference to General MacArthur. In June , General MacArthur 's force , support by the Navy , begin the slow , grind process of leapfrog their way through the Japanese-held islands. By the end of February , 1944 , the Gilbert and Marshall Islands have be secure and the Bismarcks Barrier have be broken. From then on , General MacArthur 's force advance steadily , take the Admiralties at the same time a Admiral Nimitz 's force drive into the Marianas , Tinian and Guam. Philippines in Question During the month that follow , it be leave open whether the general would try to liberate all or part of the Philippines or go straight from Mindanao and the Marianas into Taiwan. The Navy want to go directly into Taiwan from Saipan and Mindanao , bypass the other Philippine islands. General MacArthur be still intent on liberate all of the Philippines and use Luzon a the springboard to Japan. He make a strong emotional appeal , back up by strategic argument , that the United States be honor-bound to liberate the Philippines. At a conference in Pearl Harbor in July , 1944 , he convince both president Roosevelt and Admiral Nimitz to liberate the Philippines first. On Oct. 30 , 1944 , two and a half year after he have vow to return to the Philippines , General MacArthur wad ashore at Leyte and proclaim : `` I have returned. By the grace of Almighty God , our force stand again on Philippine soil. '' On Dec. 18 , 1944 , he be promote to the newly create rank of General of the Army. His force go on to Manila , which fell Feb. 25 , 1945. By this time , Okinawa have be choose a a substitute for Taiwan or China a the last stop before Japan. Okinawa fell in July. The next month , the doom of Japan be seal with the dropping of the first atomic bomb use in warfare , on Nagasaki and Hiroshima. The long-expected bloody assault on the Japanese home island be a nightmare that never happened. The destroyed empire be reduce to a shatter , char and bewilder collection of island that have never know a conqueror 's boot. Unconditional Surrender In a career stud with military triumph , the great of these for General MacArthur come on Sept. 2 , 1945 , when Japanese representative board the battleship U.S.S. Missouri in Tokyo Bay to sign the unconditional surrender document under his gaze. Representing Emperor Hirohito , Mamoru Shigemitsu , attire in morning coat and top hat , clump to the document table on his one sound and one artificial leg. It appear that the Japanese representative intend to read the surrender document before sign it. `` Show him where to sign , Sutherland , '' the General order Lieut. Gen. Richard K. Sutherland , his Chief of Staff. Without further hesitation the Foreign Minister sign his name. The Japanese Empire be ended. A few year later General MacArthur assay his role a Supreme Commander of the Occupation of Japan a follow : `` If the historian of the future should deem my service worthy of some slight reference , it would be my hope that he mention me not a a commander engage in campaign and battle , even though victorious to American arm , but rather a that one whose sacred duty it become , once the gun be silence , to carry to the land of our vanquished foe the solace and hope and faith of Christian morals. `` Could I have but a line a century hence credit a contribution to the advance of peace , I would yield every honor which have be accord by war. '' The occupation of a proud nation , prostrate , bewilder and hat , be to prove a phenomenon in the history of defeat and conquest. The remnant of it military establishment be dismantled. Its military leader be imprison , try and punish a war criminals. Its vast industrial complex be in ruin and it people be fearful and uncertain of the future. In swift stroke , the occupation strip the Emperor of his divinity , dismantle the Zaibatsu ( an informal but all-powerful industrial hierarchy base on family tie ) and instituted reform that shake the root of an ancient class society. Sitting remotely and serenely atop the occupation be the architect of the defeat of the Japanese , the symbol of their conquest , whose power over them exceed that of the now powerless Emperor. Rightly or wrongly , this be the Japanese view of General MacArthur in September , 1945. With the beginning of the occupation of Japan , the extent to which the Soviet Union would share it have not be decide on the high levels. Taking advantage of this , General MacArthur rode roughshod over Soviet effort to get a foot in the door. It quickly become a stand joke in Tokyo that the ranking representative of the Soviet Union in Japan , Lieut. Gen. Kuzma Nikolayevich Derevyanko , spend more time in General MacArthur 's outer office await audience that never take place than anyone else in the country. General Derevyanko , who have sign the surrender for his country aboard the Missouri , seek General MacArthur 's ear for a discussion of the Soviet role in the occupation , but the Russians never obtain one. General Derevyanko go home in the first week of October , 1945 , and the occupation remain an American affair. The occupation move along through five year during which General MacArthur , remote but omnipresent , move between his office in the downtown Dai Ichi Building and his residence in the sprawling , white stone-and-concrete United States Embassy. Traditionalists Were Appalled Thousands of Japanese line the street and sidewalk to watch him pass in a long , black car four time a day. All precedent be shatter and Japanese traditionalist be appal when , early in the occupation , the Emperor call on him at his home. The Tenno ( Emperor ) , believe by Japanese to be a descendant of the Sun Goddess , go , a do many others of high station from many nation , to pay his respect to the American general. Two slightly irreverent American newspaper correspondent publish a book , `` The Star- Spangled Mikado , '' which , translate into Japanese , have a wide circulation. Of the occupation , General MacArthur make this observation : `` The page of history in record America 's 20th-century contribution may , perchance , pas over lightly the war we have fought. But , I believe they will not fail to record the influence for good upon Asia which will inevitably follow the spiritual regeneration of Japan. '' The serenity of Asia be shatter at dawn on the morning of June 25 , 1950 , when North Korean troop who have be train and equip by Russians swept southward across the 38th parallel in a lightning effort to overwhelm the inadequate South Korean force , who be be train under the direction of a United States military advisory team of few than 1,000 men and officers. Technically , General MacArthur be not responsible for the protection of South Korea , but the fate of the military advisory group , their family and several thousand other Americans in the country be in doubt. Step-by-Step Decisions President Truman order General MacArthur to take whatever step he think necessary to evacuate the Americans from South Korea. The civilian be evacuate by sea and air. The advisory troop remain with the Korean units. Then General MacArthur inform Gen. Lawton Collins , Chief of Staff , that the South Koreans , in all probability could not defend themselves successfully. In Washington decision be be make hourly a a result of which the United States become , step by step , involve in the struggle. The Fifth Air Force , initially assign to protest the evacuation , begin to try to support the rapidly retreat South Korean forces. President Truman decide to act on General MacArthur 's recommendation to send United States troop in Japan and Okinawa into the struggle to stem the Communist tide. The unequal struggle between the highly trained North Korean Communist Army of 500,000 and the ill-prepared South Korean Army of slightly more than 100,000 men soon involve scattered unit of American troop , sweep up hastily from scatter base in the Far East and throw into the conflict. If equal in spirit to the challenge , the young , postwar G.I. 's have little training and less ability to stem the Communist tide , sweep under Soviet-prepared battle plan down the mountain valley and into the rice bowl of South Korea. U.N. Joined Struggle The United States appeal to the United Nations to join the struggle against arm aggression. Since the Soviet Union be at that moment boycott the Security Council for other reason and be not present to use it veto , the United Nations decide to join force with the South Koreans and the United States in the struggle. Meanwhile , one of General MacArthur 's most trusted and competent officer , Lieut. Gen. Walton H. Walker , command the United States Eighth Army , be give the task of halt the aggressor. Several factor be in General Walker 's favor a he seek to build up his force while fight bitter rear-guard action against the invader. The North Korean air arm be negligible , it naval force be nonexistent ; General Walker 's Fifth Air Force support be on constant increase , his sea borne supply line be unhampered. He take his stand on the Naktong perimeter in August , protect the vital supply port of Pusan and grind down the enemy by repulse , with costly casualty , it assault on the defenses. On Sept. 12 , 1950 , General MacArthur execute a daring and massive strike from the sea on the North Korean rear and flank with an amphibious landing at the western port of Inchon. North Korea 's defense break and the remnant of it army flee in disorder across the 38th parallel. General MacArthur announce that for all practical purpose the war have end , except for the need to pursue the enemy to the Yalu River , the border between Communist China and North Korea. Near the end of September , mopping-up operation of North Korean Communist force south of the 38th parallel continue while some United Nations unit , their area clear of the enemy , mark time. The taste of victory send the enthusiasm of United Nations force soaring. Unit commander be in favor of pursue the enemy northward without delay. However , order be hold in abeyance a word come that there be grave consternation at United Nations headquarters a to whether the intent of the combined effort have be to repel the invader or rid the entire peninsula of Communist military forces. Seated in his Tokyo office-command post in the Dai Ichi Building , General MacArthur marshal his argument in support of the pursuit plan. For more than three month he have direct the affair of Japan with one hand , and conduct the grand strategy of the war with the other. Deep within his all-but-impenetrable office , surround by a staff that guard his time and presence with zeal , he read the daily and sometimes hourly battlefront reports. On few than a dozen occasion he motor to Haneda or Tachikawa Airports outside Tokyo , board his luxuriously appoint four-engine personal transport plane , the Bataan , for a visit to Korea and talk with his field commanders. Except for frequent teletype and telephone conversation with his field commander , General MacArthur 's routine of five year be not visibly affected. He come and go between office and residence with the same clockwork regularity while Japanese and G.I. 's alike gawk at the detached splendor of his passings. On Oct. 10 , President Truman fly to Wake Island for a meeting with General MacArthur. The President appear to be concern with the General 's propensity for independent action. At Wake Island , General MacArthur be understand to have express great optimism about the Korean situation. He tell the President there be `` very little '' chance that the Chinese Communists or the Soviet Union would react to a venture into North Korea. General MacArthur return to Tokyo and begin to `` close out '' the Korean War. Near the end of October a regimental airborne combat unit be employ in the war 's only paratroop operation. United States paratrooper be drop at two point just north of the North Korean capital of Pyongyang to cut off flee and disorganized Communist units. At the same time United Nations ground troop slash across the 38th parallel in a dash to the Yalu River , Korea 's northern boundary with China. But element identify a Chinese Communist troop be find south of the 38th parallel in the central and east coast sector at about the same time -- the end of October. They have cross the Yalu about Oct. 16. General MacArthur 's intelligence officer , however , apparently fail to attach any significance to the report of their presence. Second Phase of War First Cavalry Division unit reach the river , but within hour the Chinese Communist Army struck across the border and the second phase of the Korean struggle be under way. By the second week in November full-scale warfare have begin and the United Nations force be give ground at a speed that , in many instance , amount to a rout. Once again , at the 38th parallel , the United Nations force regroup and stand their ground for a time. Later , however , Seoul , the South Korean capital , fell to the Communists for the second time. What General MacArthur have call `` a new war '' go on through the winter and into the spring. He become restive and want to strike at Chinese depot and supply line within Chinese territory. He let it be know that he be displease with high decision to refrain from attack outside Korea l the war spread. In a message to the American Legion , he reiterate his vies and , in a reply to a request from Representative Joseph W. Martin Jr. , the Massachusetts Republican , he set down a position that Washington do not believe consonant with it views. In the message , he say : `` There be no substitute for victory. '' In April , 1951 , he be relieve of his command in the Far East by President Truman. In his book , `` MacArthur , His Rendezvous with History , '' the General 's long time friend and senior aide , Maj. Gen. Courtney Whitney , recall the moment General MacArthur receive the fateful order : `` MacArthur 's face froze. Not a flicker of emotion cross it. For a moment , while his luncheon guest puzzle on what be happen , he be stonily silent. Then he look up at his wife , who still stand with her hand on his shoulder. In a gentle voice , audible to all present , he say : 'Jeannie , we 're go home at last. ' '' In the message that accompany his order relieve General MacArthur , President Truman say : `` Full and vigorous debate on matter of national policy be a vital element in the constitutional system of our free democracy. It be fundamental , however , that military commander must be govern by the policy and directive issue to them in the manner prescribe by our law and Constitution. In time of crisis this consideration be particularly compelling. `` General MacArthur 's place in history a one of our great commander be fully established. The nation owe him a debt of gratitude for the distinguish and exceptional service which he have render his country in post of great responsibility. For that reason I repeat my regret at the necessity for the action I feel compel to take in this case. '' On April 17 , the general , his wife and son arrive in San Francisco. His return be that of a conquer hero a city after city fete him with parades. Beginning May 3 he testify for three day before the Armed Services and Foreign Relations Committees of the Senate , insist he could have win the Korean conflict if he have be give a free hand. He address the joint house of Congress on April 19 , create a deep impression by the moderation of his speech and the dignity of it presentation. He end with a quotation from an old army song -- '' Old soldier never die -- they just fade away. '' He do not fade away , however. He continue to make speech and pronouncements. His name be bring up before the 1952 Republican National Convention a a possible Presidential nominee. He be the keynote speaker , but the nomination go to General Eisenhower. Of the United Nations he once say : `` It represent perhaps the noble effort man have yet make to evolve a universal code base upon the high of moral precepts. It become the keystone to an arch of universal hope. '' General MacArthur and his wife settle in a 37th floor suite of the Waldorf Towers , high above Park Avenue. On Aug. 1 , 1952 , he be name chairman of the board of Remington Rand Inc. ( now Sperry-Rand ) , manufacturer of electrical equipment and business machines. General Whitney remain his inseparable companion and confidant. With the death in 1959 of Gen. George C. Marshall , General MacArthur become the senior officer of the United States Army in the rank of General of the Army. He remain on active duty without assignment , entitle to a small staff and pay and allowance amount to $ 20,543 a year. In July , 1961 , General MacArthur , accompany by his wife , make a sentimental journey to the Philippines , his only trip abroad follow his return to the United States in 1951. Additional honor be bestow upon him by the Government there. Yearly , on Jan. 26 , his birthday , he join old comrade at a private dinner in the Waldorf to reminisce about the campaign they have be through. Delegations of West Point cadet call each year to serenade him. His only previous serious illness strike him in January , 1960 , when he undergo surgery for a prostate condition. He recover from the ordeal despite his 80 years. General MacArthur be marry twice. His first marriage be to Mrs. Henrietta Louise Cromwell Brooks , the divorced wife of Walter Brooks , Jr. , and stepdaughter of Edward T. Stotesbury , a wealthy Philadelphia banker. She obtain a divorce from him in 1929 on the ground that he have fail to support her. He be marry to Jean Marie Faircloth , of Murfreesboro , Tenn. , April 30 , 1937. Their only child , Arthur , be bear in Manila on Feb. 21 , 1938. Arthur graduate from Columbia University in 1961 .