September 19 , 1964 OBITUARY Sean O'Casey , Irish Playwright , Is Dead at 84 Special to The New York Times LONDON , Sept. 18 -- Sean O'Casey , the Irish playwright , die tonight of a heart attack in Torquay. He be 84 year old. He have live in the resort town on the southwest coast of England for many years. The dramatist , long an exile from his native Ireland , die at about 7 P.M. , shortly after he be take to a nursing home. His body will be cremate and detail of funeral arrangement will be announce tomorrow. From the bitterness of poverty and from the love of humanity Sean O'Casey create work of drama and prose-poetry that sang of freedom 's exuberance and revile spiritual penury. From early day in the drab street and two-story brick box of Dublin slum until his age year of self-driven British exile amid the red earth and salt air of Torquay , this gaunt fiery writer never abandon his faith in the dignity of man. For his cause , he spurn neither fight or embrace. But like the tumultuous , passionate sentence that swirl and plunge through his play , essay , letter and autobiographical work , he be more concerned with poetry than logic ; more with shoulder-heaving laughter than with back-bending research. Even in his 80 's , look very much the poor country vicar with his worn tweed jacket , pipe , white hair , ascetic face and steel-rimmed glass , Mr. O'Casey continue to call out as hotly a ever to young writer not to be `` afraid of life 's full-throated shouting , afraid of it venom , suspicious of it gentleness , it valor , it pain and it rowdiness. '' By then , the man whose play have touch off riot , whose diatribe have nettle churchman and atheist , be nearly blind. Still he seek out the restless vigor of the young and enjoy the laughter and row of pub and street. `` The artist 's life , '' he advise , `` be to be where life be , active life , find in neither ivory tower nor concrete shelter ; he must be out listen to everything , look at everything , and think it all out afterward. '' There be many , even among his most ardent admirer , who consistently question the infallibility of the O'Casey gift for reason. They would chide him , for instance , for his continued support of the Soviet Union , point out that his passion for personal liberty be irreconcilable with the tyranny of the Kremlin. Stubbornly , though , he cling to his belief , dismiss derogatory information a propaganda. Actually , he be quite hazy about political ideologies. Once , for example , in the early 1950 's , he tell an American visitor that there be `` many million of Communists in the United States. '' He explain that President Franklin Delano Roosevelt and all who vote for him be Communists. A Communist , say the writer , `` be anyone who try to help humanity. '' Sharp Characterization But even those who quarrel with what Mr. O'Casey write do not doubt the beauty of his prose. Thus , though his internationally famous play -- '' The Shadow of a Gunman , '' `` The Plough and the Stars , '' `` Juno and the Paycock '' and `` Within the Gates '' -- stir up storm among spectator and critic , they be read long afterward by many thousand throughout the English-speaking world for their magnificent line , their sharp characterization and their robust humor. Critics sometimes quibble about the form of Mr. O'Casey 's work , particularly the symbolism of such play a `` Within the Gates , '' `` Cock-a-Doodle Dandy '' and `` Purple Dust. '' But they be overwhelm by the eloquence , imagery and fire of Mr. O'Casey 's writing , particularly in his six autobiographical book that emerge from 1939 to 1955 under the title of `` I Knock at the Door , '' `` Pictures in the Hallway , '' `` Drums Under the Window , '' `` Inishfallen Fare Thee Well , '' `` Rose and Crown '' and `` Sunset and Evening Star. '' One critic call the O'Casey style `` a great and lovely tide of rhetoric. '' Mr. O'Casey say his work and argument have make him `` tattered and torn , like a man toss by the cow with the crumpled horn , but still spar for defense and a forward blow. '' Some who have never felt the sear insult of Mr. O'Casey 's anger talk warmly of his gentleness , of the soft , lyric brogue that make him , on Broadway or the West End , always a part of Dublin 's O'Connell Street. His friend roar a he would recall the prank of childhood or describe a weekend at Lady Astor 's , `` feed off solid silver and sleeping in a room like a stadium. '' But for those Mr. O'Casey dislike , he show another side. Of one man , for instance , he write : `` He be a pathetic figure , when he talk to one , speckle one 's cheek with spittle , a pry index finger every moment prod behind a collar a size too large for his neck , seek something disturb the upper part of his back ; forever add a spate of useless word to his monstrous diary , give at last to the National Library , when it should have be give to the fire. '' Attacked Catholic Church Mr. O'Casey not only take on individual but also group in his verbal brawls. He call atheist `` those who , try to get rid of God , plant Him more firmly on His throne. '' And evangelist , he say , be `` those preacher who daub the glory of God with mockeries. '' Though he be fairly general in his resentment of organize religion , he single out the Roman Catholic Church for special attacks. The importance of his target be just another challenge. He accuse George Russell ( `` A.E. '' ) , one of the most influential Irish journalist , of `` hopabout , runaway intellectual agitation ; a congested mass of nonsense be your nut. '' Though he almost lose his life in the struggle for Irish freedom , Mr. O'Casey say of the first Irish President , Eamon de Valera : `` There seem to be no sound of Irish wind , water , folkchant or birdsong in the dry , dull voice. '' He be particularly savage in assault literary idea he find offensive. Thus , in the early 1930 's , when realistic approach to drama found general favor , he write : `` The beauty , fire and poetry of drama have perish in a storm of fake realisms. Let real bird fly through the air ; real animal roam through the jungle , real fish swim in the sea , but let u have art in the theater. There be a deep life than the life we see and hear with the open ear and the open eye and this be the life important and the life everlasting. So to hell with so-called realism , for it lead nowhere. '' Mr. O'Casey 's hard path begin almost at his birth in Dublin on March 30 , 1880. When he be a child , his father died. His eye be bad and his teacher , by his account , have a strong sense of sadism. His brother and sister die when still young. At the age of 14 , he go to work a a laborer. Humiliated by poverty , a Protestant rebel in a Catholic city , his great solace be literature. He would steal books. His love for Shakespeare be one of the force that drive him to write for the theater. Between 12-hour day at manual labor and night of plot Irish rebellion , Mr. O'Casey sample a good deal of the hunger , anguish and ferocity of the poor of Dublin. At one point , when a charity patient in a hospital , his most vivid memory be that the food be so much good than his usual repasts. After some strong taste of amateur theatrical the young man decide that writing be the way to express what he have see , heard and thought of the world. The Abbey Theater , after turn down a few play , accept `` The Shadow of a Gunman '' in 1925. There be some resentment in the audience toward the play , even more toward `` Juno and the Paycock. '' And when `` The Plough and the Stars '' open there in 1926 a riot break out. But , amid demonstration and uproar , the play , though interrupted , be finish with what one correspondent describe a the `` great ovation '' at that theater. Driven From Ireland By that time , however , the O'Casey penchant for argument have drive him not only from the Abbey Theater but also from Ireland. The board of the theater have refuse to do his `` The Silver Tassle. '' In his fury the author berate even W. B. Yeats , a member of the board and a man he greatly respected. Mr. O'Casey never return to Ireland , though he often become homesick. London , however , lionize the playwright and even tolerate his foibles. He refuse , for example , to wear a dinner jacket , prefer his turtle-neck sweater. A dinner jacket , he say , be fit only for the coffin. He wear the sweater even for his church wedding in London in 1927 to Eileen Reynolds. She be an Irish actress who use the name Carey. They have two son and a daughter. Mr. O'Casey , despite his enormous reputation , earn very little money either from his play or his books. An O'Casey Revival In 1956 something of an O'Casey revival begin in New York. Paul Shyre , a young actor and writer , write and produce adaptation of the O'Casey autobiography and lesser-known plays. His `` I Knock at the Door , '' do in reading on a bare stage , be a hit both on and off Broadway in 1956 and 1957. He achieve a similar success with `` Pictures in the Hallway '' in 1956. `` Purple Dust '' ran for 480 performance during 1957 at the Cherry Lane Theater in Greenwich Village. `` Red Roses for Me '' in January , 1956 , be a sell-out. A musical version of `` Juno and the Paycock , '' write by Marc Blitzstein , be prepare during 1958. Mr. O'Casey 's `` Drums of Father Ned '' be one of the play select by the Dublin Theater Festival for the summer of 1958 , but it be withdraw in May. So be a dramatization of James Joyce 's `` Ulysses , '' as well a a play by Samuel Beckett. The Roman Catholic archbishopric in Dublin disapprove of all these , and some other selections. Mr. O'Casey 's reaction be typical of him. He ban all his play from production in any part of the Irish Republic. The ban be in effect the rest of his life , though he do lift it on occasion. Mr. O'Casey explain his feeling behind the ban in an article in The New York Times last Jan. 5. He write : `` I have live a troublesome life in Ireland , in my youth hard time in the body , and in my manhood year , a hard time in the spirit. Hardship in my young day teach me how to fight hard , for if that characteristic be n't develop then , it mean that one become either a slave or a lick-spittle. `` So I learn how to resist all aggressive attempt to make me a docile one , and could hit back as hard a he who could hit hardest. This gift ( for an earned gift it be ) kept within me when I reach the world of thought a it have be in the world of hard labor -- at time , I fear , fight what I think to be aggression where none be meant. `` Indeed , have I be Adam , I think I should have resist the angel with his sword of flame fire that drive him and his Eve from the Garden of Eden. '' Extended the Ban Last month , Mr. O'Casey extend the ban to the Irish Pavilion at the World 's Fair , which have request his permission to play record excerpt from his works. Despite fail eyesight , Mr. O'Casey continue to write until his death. Essays pour out of his portable typewriter from his third-floor flat in Torquay. `` The bad of it , '' he say in an interview last month , `` be that I ca n't see the mistake I type. '' To ward off draft in his late year , Mr. O'Casey take to wear color skull caps. They become as much a part of his costume a the familiar turtleneck sweater. The title of his last book of essay , publish in 1963 , be `` Under a Colored Cap. '' Mr. O'Casey die while Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer be film `` Young Cassidy , '' a movie base on his autobiography. In a sense he write his own epitaph in the last of his autobiographical book which he write in the third person. `` Here , '' he write , `` with whitened hair , desire fail , strength ebb out of him , with the sun go down , and with only the serenity and calm warning of the evening star leave to him , he drink to Life , to all it have be , to what it be , to what it would be. Hurrah ! ''