April 15 , 1964 OBITUARY Rachel Carson Dies of Cancer ; 'Silent Spring ' Author Was 56 By THE NEW YORK TIMES Rachel Carson , the biologist and writer on nature and science , whose book `` Silent Spring '' touch off a major controversy on the effect of pesticide , die yesterday in her home in Silver Spring , Md. She be 56 year old. Her death be report in New York by Marie Rodell , her literary agent. Miss Rodell say that Miss Carson have have cancer `` for some year , '' and that she have be aware of her illness. With the publication of `` Silent Spring '' in 1962 , Rachel Louise Carson , the essence of gentle scholarship , set off a nationally publicize struggle between the proponent and opponent of the widespread use of poisonous chemical to kill insects. Miss Carson be an opponent. Some of Miss Carson 's critic , admiringly and some not so admiringly , compare her to Carrie Nation , the hatchet-wielding temperance advocate. This comparison be reject quietly by Miss Carson , who in her very mild but firm manner refuse to accept the identification of an emotional crusader. Miss Carson 's position , a a biologist , be simply that she be a natural scientist in search of truth and that the indiscriminate use of poisonous chemical spray call for public awareness of what be go on. She emphasize that she be not oppose to the use of poisonous chemical spray -- only their `` indiscriminate use , '' and , at a time when their potential be not truly known. Quoting Jean Rostand , the French writer and biologist , she say : `` The obligation to endure give u the right to know. '' On April 3 , 1963 , the Columbia Broadcasting System 's television series `` C.B.S. Reports '' present the program `` The Silent Spring of Rachel Carson. '' In it , Miss Carson say : `` It be the public that be be ask to assume the risk that the insect controller calculate. The public must decide whether it wish to continue on the present road , and it can do so only when in full possession of the facts. `` We still talk in term of conquest. We still have n't become mature enough to think of ourselves a only a tiny part of a vast and incredible universe. Man 's attitude toward nature be today critically important simply because we have now acquire a fateful power to alter and destroy nature. `` But man be a part of nature , and his war against nature be inevitably a war against himself. The rain have become an instrument to bring down from the atmosphere the deadly product of atomic explosions. Water , which be probably our most important natural resource , be now use and re-used with incredible recklessness. `` Now , I truly believe , that we in this generation , must come to term with nature , and I think we 're challenge a mankind have never be challenge before to prove our maturity and our mastery , not of nature , but of ourselves. '' 3 Earlier Works Miss Carson , thanks to her remarkable knack for take dull scientific fact and translate them into poetical and lyrical prose that enchant the lay public , have a substantial public image before she rock the American public and much of the world with `` Silent Spring. '' This be establish by three book , `` Under the Sea Wind , '' `` The Sea Around Us , '' and `` The Edge of the Sea. '' `` The Sea Around Us '' move quickly into the national best-seller list , where it remain for 86 week , 39 of them in first place. By 1962 it have be publish in 30 languages. `` Silent Spring , '' four-and-a-half year in preparation and publish in September of 1962 , hit the affluent chemical industry and the general public with the devastate effect of a Biblical plague of locusts. The title come from an apocalyptic opening chapter , which picture how an entire area could be destroy by indiscriminate spraying. Legislative body range from New England town meeting to the Congress join in the discussion. President Kennedy , ask about the pesticide problem during a press conference , announce that Federal agency be take a close look at the problem because of the public 's concern. The essence of the debate be : Are pesticides publicly dangerous or be n't they ? They Should Be Called Biocide Miss Carson 's position have be summarize this way : `` Chemicals be the sinister and little-recognized partner of radiation in change the very nature of the world -- the very nature of life. `` Since the mid-nineteen forty , over 200 basic chemical have be create for use in kill insect , weed , rodent and other organism describe in the modern vernacular a pest , and they be sell under several thousand different brand names. `` The spray , dust and aerosol be now apply almost universally to farm , garden , forest and home -- non-selective chemical that have the power to kill every insect , the good and the bad , to still the song of bird and the leaping of fish in the stream -- to coat the leaf with a deadly film and to linger on in soil -- all this , though the intended target may be only a few weed or insects. `` Can anyone believe it be possible to lay down such a barrage of poison on the surface of the earth without make it unfit for all life ? They should not be call 'insecticides ' but 'biocides'. '' The chemical industry be quick to dispute this. Dr. Robert White-Stevens , a spokesman for the industry , say : `` The major claim of Miss Rachel Carson 's book , 'Silent Spring , ' be gross distortion of the actual fact , completely unsupported by scientific , experimental evidence , and general practical experience in the field. Her suggestion that pesticide be in fact biocides destroy all life be obviously absurd in the light of the fact that without selective biologicals these compound would be completely useless. `` The real threat , then , to the survival of man be not chemical but biological , in the shape of horde of insect that can denude our forest , sweep over our crop land , ravage our food supply and leave in their wake a train of destitution and hunger , convey to an undernourished population the major disease scourge of mankind. '' The Monsanto Company , one of the nation 's large chemical concern , use parody a a weapon in the counterattack against Miss Carson. Without mention her book , the company adopt her poetic style in an article label `` The Desolate Year , '' which begin : `` Quietly , then , the desolate year begin . . . '' and weave it own apocalyptic word picture -- but one that show insect strip the countryside and winning. As the chemical industry continue to make her a target for criticism , Miss Carson remain calm. `` We must have insect control , '' she reiterated. `` I do not favor turn nature over to insects. I favor the sparing , selective and intelligent use of chemicals. It be the indiscriminate , blanket spray that I oppose. '' Actually , chemical pest control have be practice to some extent for centuries. However , it be not until 1942 that DDT , a synthetic compound , be introduce in the wake of experiment that include those with poison gas. Its long-term poisonous potency be augment by it ability to kill some insect upon contact and without be ingested. This open a new era in pest control and lead to the development of additional new synthetic poison far more effective even than DDT. As the pesticide controversy grow into a national quarrel , support be quick in go to the side of Miss Carson. Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas , an ardent naturalist , declare , `` We need a Bill of Rights against the 20th century poisoner of the human race. '' Earlier , an editorial in The New York Times have say : `` If her series [ then run in part in The New Yorker publication of the book ] help arouse public concern to immunize Government agency against the blandishment of the huckster and enforces adequate control , the author will be a deserving of the Nobel Prize a be the inventor of DDT. '' Presidential Report In May 1963 , after a long study , President Kennedy 's Science Advisory Committee , issue it pesticide report. It stress that pesticide must be use to maintain the quality of the nation 's food and health , but it warn against their indiscriminate use. It call for more research into potential health hazard in the interim , urge more judicious care in the use of pesticide in home and in the field. The committee chairman , Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner , say the uncontrolled use of poisonous chemical , include pesticide , be `` potentially a much great hazard '' than radioactive fallout. Miss Carson appear before the Senate Committee on Commerce , which be hear testimony on the Chemical Pesticides Coordination Act , and a bill that would require label to tell how to avert damage to fish and wildlife. `` I suggest , '' she say , `` that the report by the President 's Science Advisors have create a climate in which creation of a Pesticide Commission within the Executive Department might be considered. '' One of the spark that cause Miss Carson to undertake the task of write the book ( whose documentation alone fill a list of 55 page of source ) , be a letter she have receive from old friend , Stuart and Olga Huckins. It tell of the destruction of aerial spraying have cause to their two-acre private sanctuary at Powder Point in Duxbury , Mass. Miss Carson , convince that she must write about the situation and particularly about the effect of spray on ecological factor , find an interested listener in Paul Brooks , editor in chief of the Houghton-Mifflin Company , the Boston publishing house that have bring out `` The Edge of the Sea. '' As to her own writing habit , Miss Carson once write for 20th Century Authors : `` I write slowly , often in longhand , with frequent revision. Being sensitive to interruption , I write most freely at night. `` As a writer , my interest be divide between the presentation of fact and the interpretation of their significance , with emphasis , I think toward the latter. '' `` Silent Spring '' become a best seller even before it publication date because it release date be broken. It also become a best seller in England after it publication there in March , 1963. One of Miss Carson 's great fan , accord to her agent , Marie Rodell , be her mother. Miss Rodell recall that the mother , who die of pneumonia and a heart ailment in 1960 , have sit in the family car in 1952 write letter while Miss Carson and Miss Rodell explore the sea 's edge near Boothbay Harbor. To passers-by the mother would say , point , `` That 's my daughter , Rachel Carson. She write 'The Sea Around Us. ' '' People remember Miss Carson for her shyness and reserve as well a for her writing and scholarship. And so when she receive a telephone call after the publication of `` The Sea Around Us , '' ask her to speak in the Astor Hotel at a luncheon , she ask Miss Rodell what she should do. The agent counsel her to concentrate on writing. Miss Carson nod in agreement , go to the phone , and shortly come back and say somewhat helplessly : `` I say I 'd do it. '' There be 1,500 person at the luncheon , Miss Carson be `` scared to death , '' but she plunge into the talk and acquitted herself. As part of her program she play a recording of the sound of underseas , include the clicking of shrimp and the squeeks of dolphin and whales. With the ice break a a public speaker , Miss Carson continue with others sporadically. Did Research by Herself Miss Carson have some preliminary help in research `` Silent Spring '' but soon find that she could go faster by do the work herself because she could skim past so much that she already knew. Miss Carson have few materialistic leanings. When she find `` The Sea Around Us '' be a great financial success , her first extravagance be the purchase of a very fine binocular- microscope , which she have always wanted. Her second luxury be the summer cottage on the Maine coast. Her agent say that Miss Carson 's work be her hobby but that she be very fond of her flower garden at Silver Spring , Md. , where she also love to watch the bird that come to visit. Miss Carson have two favorite bird , a member of the thrush family call the veery , and the tern , a small , black-capped gull-like bird with swallowlike fork tails. She once tell an interviewer that she be enchant by the `` haunting , mystical call '' of the veery , which be find in moist wood and bottomland from Newfoundland to southern Manitoba , and in mountain to northern Georgia. In manner , Miss Carson be a small , solemn-looking woman with the steady forthright gaze of a type that be sometimes common to thoughtful child who prefer to listen rather than to talk. She be politely friendly but reserve and be not give to quick smile or to encourage conversation even with her fans. The most recent flare-up in the continue pesticide controversy occur early this month when the Public Health Service announce that the periodic huge-scale death of fish on the low Mississippi River have be trace over the last four year to toxic ingredient in three kind of pesticides. Some person believe that the pesticide drain into the river from neighbor farm lands. A hearing by the Agriculture Department of the Public Health Service 's charge end a week ago with a spokesman for one of the pesticide manufacturer say that any judgment should be delay until more information be obtained. Miss Carson be bear May 27 , 1907 , in Springdale , Pa. , the daughter of Robert Warden Carson and the former Maria McLean. She be bring up in Springdale and in nearby Parnassus. She owe her love of nature in large measure to her mother , who once write in The Saturday Review of Literature , that she have teach her daughter `` a a tiny child joy in the out-of-doors and the lore of bird , insect , and resident of stream and ponds. '' She be a rather solitary child. She never married. After be graduate from Parnassus High School , she enrol in the Pennsylvania College for Women at Pittsburgh with the intention of make a career of writing. First she specialize in English composition. Later biology fascinate her and she switch to that field , go on to graduate work at Johns Hopkins University. She then teach for seven consecutive session at the Johns Hopkins Summer School. In 1931 she become a member of the zoology staff of the University of Maryland. She remain five years. Her Master of Arts degree be confer by Johns Hopkins in 1932. Meanwhile , a childhood curiosity about the sea stay with her. She absorb all that she could read about the biology of the sea and she undertake post-graduate work at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole , Mass. , at Cape Cod. In 1936 she be offer a position a aquatic biologist with the Bureau of Fisheries in Washington. She continue with the bureau and it successor , the Fish and Wildlife Service. In 1937 , an article , `` Undersea , '' in Atlantic lead to her first book , `` Under the Sea Wind , '' in 1941 , and this be follow by her appointment a editor in chief of the Fish and Wildlife Service -- blend her two world : biology and writing. `` The Sea Around Us , '' publish in 1951 , make her world famous , and she receive numerous honors. They include the Gold Medal of the New York Zoological Society , the John Burroughs Medal , the Gold Medal of the Geographical Society of Philadelphia and the National Book Award. Meanwhile , in 1952 , she resign from her government post to continue her writing. She be no armchair naturalist. To gain experience the hard way , she once sail in a fishing trawler to the rugged Georges Banks off the Massachusetts coast. `` The Edge of the Sea '' be publish in 1955 , and before long she be at work research material for `` Silent Spring. '' Miss Carson leave a brother , Robert M. Carson , and an adopted son , Roger Christie , who be her grandnephew. Funeral plan be incomplete last night .