A Harlem Renaissance-era writer whose heritage inform her modernist take on the topic of race. By BONNIE WERTHEIM When Nella Larsen die , in 1964 , she leave little behind : a ground-floor apartment , two publish novel , some short story , a few letters. She be childless , divorce and estrange from her half sister , who , in some account , upon learn she be to inherit $ 35,000 of Larsen’s saving , deny know the writer existed. It be a fitting end for a woman whose entire life have be a story of swift erasure. Larsen’s immigrant parent — Mary Hanson , from Denmark , and Peter Walker , from the Danish West Indies — have settle in a mostly white , working-class neighborhood in Chicago , a city that be rapidly grow and segregate by the time Larsen be bear on April 13 , 1891. Two year later , Walker disappear , leave Hanson alone with the couple’s young daughter. In his absence , Hanson marry a fellow Dane , Peter Larsen , with whom she have another daughter , Anna. By all appearance , the family be white. But Nella Larsen be different , something that would come to inspire her fiction — celebrate during the Harlem Renaissance , forget by midcentury and rediscover to be read today in American literature and black study courses. The public school that Larsen attend in Chicago draw student from mostly German and Scandinavian backgrounds. So it wasn’t until she leave Chicago for Nashville in 1907 to attend the Fisk Normal School , a teacher-training program affiliate with the historically black Fisk University , that she be surround by face that weren’t white. Larsen later enrol at the Lincoln School for Nurses in the Bronx , which be found to recruit black woman into the field. After graduate with the equivalent of a registered nurse’s degree in 1915 , she be hire a a superintendent of nurse at the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. The next year , she move back to New York to join the staff at Lincoln. She meet Elmer Imes , the second African-American to receive a Ph.D. in physic , whom she marry in 1919. As the Harlem Renaissance begin to take shape in the 1920s , Larsen and Imes take up with a circle of black intellectual that include W.E.B. Du Bois and Langston Hughes. Larsen first express a professional interest in literature and art a a volunteer help to prepare the New York Public Library’s first exhibition of African-American artists. She later enrol in the library’s teaching program , eventually become it first black female graduate. Her initial placement be on the Lower East Side of Manhattan , but she transfer to the library’s 135th Street location to be close to home and to the heart of the Harlem Renaissance. Today the branch be the Countee Cullen Library ( name for a poet who contribute to Harlem’s artistic prosperity ) and be near the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture , where the archive include two of Larsen’s letters. In one of the letter , from 1928 , in a looping scrawl , Larsen address Edward Wasserman , a wealthy bohemian whose social circle include the novelist Zora Neale Hurston and the publishing matron Blanche Knopf. After year in which she have write story under a pseudonym , her first novel , “Quicksand , ” have just be publish by Alfred A. Knopf , and she be eager to get Wasserman’s opinion : I do want to see your review. Will you have a copy ? I’m too poor to subscribe to a clip bureau. Besides , what’s the use ? It seem that your review will be the only notice I’ll have. But that be not the case. Thadious M. Davis , one of Larsen’s biographer and a professor of English at the University of Pennsylvania , say that “Quicksand” be widely and positively review , include in The New York Times , The Times Literary Supplement and The Nation. The novel follow Helga Crane , a teacher at Naxos , a black boarding school in the South where excellence be measure by it proximity to whiteness. Helga , whose mixed-race background mirror Larsen’s , be unsettle by Naxos’s rigid and racially fraught standards. So she leave in search of financial stability and her own identity. When she connect with her mother’s white relative , they treat her with a mix of contempt ( in Chicago , her remarried uncle’s wife reject her ) and fascination ( her aunt , in Copenhagen , parade her around the predominantly white city a an exotic ) . Larsen , second from leave , receive an award at the Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church in Harlem in 1929. Bettmann According to Davis , Larsen be remarkable in approach the subject of race a a modernist , rather than draw on Southern trope or vernacular to convey her characters’ blackness. Larsen follow “Quicksand” the next year with “Passing , ” which tell the story of Irene Redfield and Clare Kendry , two mixed-race woman who grow up together and reunite at a Chicago hotel after year of separation. Clare , Irene discovers , have be live a a white woman marry to a racist who be none the wiser about his wife’s background. The relationship between the two woman flirt with the sensual a each becomes obsess with the other’s choose path. In it review of “Passing , ” The New York Times note that “Larsen be quite adroit at trace the involved process of a mind that be divide against itself , that fight between the dictate of reason and desire.” When “Passing” be reissue in 2001 , the Times’s book critic Richard Bernstein write that “reading it and know that it author write very little after it impart a sense of loss , give a it do a glimpse of an original and hugely insightful writer whose literary talent develop no further.” In 1930 , one of Larsen’s short story become the subject of plagiarism accusations. She have riff on a story by a British contemporary , Sheila Kaye-Smith , infuse it arc with racial tension. “I think she be much too smart an individual to boldface plagiarize that story , ” Davis said. Despite the controversy , that same year she become the first African-American woman to receive a Guggenheim Fellowship. She use the grant , worth roughly $ 2,500 at the time , to pay for a period a an artistic expatriate in Europe. When Larsen return to New York , she be force to confront the reality of her marriage. She know that Imes , who have move to Nashville for a post at Fisk University , be have an affair , and it lead to their divorce in 1933. Supported by alimony , she continue a a fiction writer produce at least one novel and a number of short story that be not published. After Imes die in 1942 , she move downtown from West 135th Street to Second Avenue and return to nursing to support herself. Having cut her tie to Harlem’s circle of artist and intellectual , and with no connection to her last living relative , Larsen have , wittingly or not , create the condition necessary to disappear quietly. She die of a heart attack in her apartment on March 30 , 1964. She be 72. Bonnie Wertheim be an editor in the Styles section .