July 15 , 1965 OBITUARY Adlai Ewing Stevenson : An Urbane , Witty , Articulate Politician and Diplomat By THE NEW YORK TIMES Adlai Ewing Stevenson be a rarity in American public life , a cultivate , urbane , witty , articulate politician whose popularity be untarnished by defeat and whose stature grow in diplomacy. He grace the Presidential campaign of 1952 and 1956 , and his eloquence and his wit win him the devote admiration of million of Americans. In more than four year a the nation 's chief spokesman at the United Nations , he gain the same sort of admiration from the world statesman for his ready tongue , his sharp mind and his patience in deal with the grave issue that confront the world organization. As chief United States delegate , with the rank of Ambassador , Mr. Stevenson be in the thick of debate and negotiation during the Bay of Pigs and Cuban missile crisis , disarmament talk , upheaval in the Congo , the war in South Vietnam and the revolt in Santa Domingo. One of Mr. Stevenson 's great satisfaction be the signing in 1963 of the treaty ban all but underground testing of nuclear devices. He be a member of the United States delegation that travel to Moscow to sign the document. When he run for the Presidency in 1956 , Mr. Stevenson suggest a world agreement to ban the testing of hydrogen bombs. It be attack by the Republicans at the time a visionary , and it may have hurt his campaign. TV Would Show Him Intent During Council Sessions During television coverage of Security Council debate , Mr. Stevenson 's tan , freckle and bald head be a familiar sight a he sit at the Council 's horseshoe-shaped table. He look intent a he crouch over the table to listen to the remark of another delegate. But he relax when it come his turn to speak. His word flow easily and steadily in a voice that , for it precision and diction , remind some of Ronald Colman , the movie actor. His logic and his word could be coruscate , a when he be dispute Soviet spokesman or they could take wing of idealism , a when he be expound the importance of the United Nations a the keeper of the world 's peace. However much Mr. Stevenson might berate the Soviet Union at the council table , he refrain from banal personalities. The result be that he be on good social term with the Soviet diplomat , a he be with those of other country whose view he find more congenial. Mr. Stevenson be appoint to his United Nations post in 1961 by President Kennedy and reconfirm in the job by President Johnson. The appointment come in response not only to Mr. Stevenson 's deep knowledge of foreign affair but also to the pressure from influential Democrats who have back Mr. Stevenson for the Presidential nomination in 1960. Mr. Stevenson hold Cabinet rank , but there be indication that his role a a policy-maker be limited. In the Bay of Pigs crisis in 1961 he suffer grave embarrassment in Security Council debate because the White House have not brief him truthfully on the United States involvement in the invasion of Cuba by Cuban exiles. It be a measure of his popularity in the diplomatic community that he recover from that incident with little loss of prestige. He Said U.N. Assignment Was a 'Terrible Drill' There be some hint that Mr. Stevenson be less than ecstatic about his United Nations responsibilities. `` This job have be a terrible drill , '' he tell Martin Mayer in an interview earlier this year for an article in The New York Times Magazine. `` In my own life I 've be accustom to make policy , '' he continued. `` I 've sometimes be a little restless in this role of execute and articulate the policy of others. `` There be a disadvantage in be anywhere other than the seat of power. And every issue that come to the U. N. have it antecedent before it get here. The State Department have be involve in the negotiation , and now the situation have become insoluable , so it get dump onto us. '' Mr. Stevenson also express the belief that he have become `` an old and familiar face '' at the United Nations headquarters building in New York. `` You take on the coloration of your country , your country 's face , and you become predictable , '' he say add : `` You lose some of the rosy glow you bring with you. Apart from my taste for creative aspect , the time come when you should bring in a fresh face and a new outlook. '' Despite these reservation , Mr. Stevenson , with his Hamlet-like ability to state another proposition , say that `` it 's easy to reconcile a sense of duty with this job. '' He concede that his decision have `` always come about more by circumstance and event than by conscious calculation. '' As a diplomat , Mr. Stevenson put in punish hours. Most day he be on the go from an appointment at 8:15 A.M. to well after midnight. After an official working day , he would go on the cocktail-party-and-dinner circuit for the rest of the evening -- social duty that his post require of him. In these he have a truly awesome stamen , for he be a eruditely charm late at night a he have be at breakfast. A good part of Mr. Stevenson 's charm rest in his ability to discuss himself without pomposity. Although he be badly beat for the Presidency by Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1952 and 1956 , he be not bitter. Talking to a group of volunteer after his defeat in 1956 , he say : `` To you who be disappointed tonight , let me confess that I be too. . . . Be of good cheer and remember , my dear friend , that a wise man say : 'A merry heart doeth good like a medicine but a broken spirit dryeth the bones. ' '' Mr. Stevenson , although he dress well , be not happy a a fashion plate. As Governor of Illinois he prefer to work in his office in a brown tweed sport jacket , odd trouser and a striped shirt. His favorite footgear then be a pair of old golf shoe with the spike removed. His predilection for informal attire be not only a matter of personal comfort , but also an expression of the fact that , although he be well-to-do , he be not a conspicuous spender. During his gubernatorial term , which begin in 1949 , he purchase only one new suit. A hole in his shoe , which be a trademark of his White House campaign in 1952 , be another example of his frugality. After his defeat in 1956 Mr. Stevenson practice law and travel extensively on business , visit more than 30 countries. On one trip he spend three week in the Soviet Union and have a long conversation with the then Premier , Nikita S. Khrushchev. Although Mr. Stevenson have chide General Eisenhower in 1956 a `` a part-time President '' and have be critical of the Eisenhower foreign policy , the President appoint him consultant to the Secretary of State in preparation for a meeting of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 's council in Paris. Eggheads ' Idol in 1960 As in 1952 and 1956 In 1960 many liberal and intellectual in the Democratic party urge him to seek the Presidential nomination. He be then , a he have be in 1952 and 1956 , the idol of the egghead , men and woman who be not ashamed to confess to a college education and to ideas more profound than those ordinarily pass at the bridge table. Professional politician , however , be less enthusiastic , because he seem reluctant to work with them and because they though he talk over the head of his audiences. Mr. Stevenson vacillate , and it be not until the last minute that he agree to let his name be place before the convention. By then , it be too late. He get the applause of the gallery while Mr. Kennedy reap the delegate ' votes. Some of Mr. Stevenson 's ambivalence toward politics spring from a feeling that glad-handing be a specie of hokum. He express this sentiment to an old friend after one hard day of handshaking in the 1952 campaign in these word : `` Perhaps the sad part of all this be that a candidate must reach into a sea of hand , grasp one , not know whose it be , and say , 'I 'm glad to meet you , ' realize that he have n't and probably never will meet that man. '' When he go into the 1952 campaign , Mr. Stevenson be virtually unknown nationally , but in the election he poll more than 27 million vote , a surprising figure. However , this win him only 89 electoral vote a General Eisenhower swamp him with nearly 34 million popular vote and 442 in the Electoral College. The Democratic candidate emerge from the campaign with the grudge respect of many Republicans for the quality of his speech -- he write most of them himself -- and for his good manners. For all his politeness and his patrician birth and education , Mr. Stevenson become , after 1952 , one of the hardest-hitting adversary of the late Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , Republican of Wisconsin , a notable exponent of jugular-vein politics. Moreover , Mr. Stevenson turn into an articulate spokesman for internationalism and an active titular leader of his party. To the shallowness of practical politics , he add a philosophy of liberalism that be almost Jeffersonian in it literate defense of the right of the individual , it educated revulsion against mob-inflaming demagoguery. `` When demagoguery and deceit become a national political movement , '' he assert , `` we Americans be in trouble ; not just Democrats , but all of us. '' Genial , with a touch of shyness , this product of Princeton , Harvard and Northwestern University seem so out of place in practical politics that a more seasoned politician tutor him for active campaigning recall , `` Godawmighty , we almost have to tear off the starched dickey and the Homburg hat he use to wear. '' Trained to the law and diplomacy , he be a realist at deal with essential political compromise. But when move deeply by principle he risk political sabotage and personal obloquy for his convictions. Thus , during 1952 , when he be ask why , in 1949 , he have sign an affidavit speak well of the reputation of Alger Hiss , later convict of perjury , Mr. Stevenson reply : `` I be a lawyer , I think that one of the most fundamental responsibility , not only of every citizen , but particularly of lawyer , be to give testimony in a court of law , to give it honestly and willingly , and it will be a very unhappy day for Anglo-Saxon justice when a man , even a man in public life , be too timid to state what he know and what he have hear about a defendant in a criminal trial for fear that defendant might be convicted. That would to me be the ultimate timidity. '' On July 25 , 1952 , what be describe a the first `` open '' Democratic National Convention in 20 year nominate Mr. Stevenson a it Presidential candidate and Senator John J. Sparkman of Alabama a his run mate. They oppose General Eisenhower and the then Senator Richard M. Nixon of California. Mr. Stevenson , then Governor of Illinois , have insist repeatedly that he would `` rather not '' be President. He be quote a have say that he be not fit mentally , temperamentally or physically for the office. The Stevenson boom begin in the spring of 1952 , after he have visit President Truman in Washington. But keep outwardly aloof from the scramble for convention delegate , he refuse to identify himself a a candidate down to the moment the voting began. In his acceptance speech to the convention the candidate tell the cheering delegate : `` Sacrifice , patience , understand and implacable purpose may be our lot for year to come. Let 's face it. Let 's talk sense to the American people. '' His candor cost him many votes. On the question of who should receive the benefit of royalty from offshore oil deposit , he take his stand with President Truman that the Federal Government have `` paramount right '' in the deposits. This cost him much support in Texas Florida and Virginia. He refuse to take a stand in favor of continue discrimination against Negro citizen , which antagonize `` white supremacy '' element in the Democratic party in the South. At the same time his firm belief in state ' right and responsibility cost him some Negro votes. Among other issue that influence the vote substantially be corruption in Washington , Communist infiltration , the Korean war , high tax and the high cost of living , fear of inflation and the growth of Federal centralism. These be press by Republican campaigners. But the great obstacle to Mr. Stevenson 's success be the popularity of his opponent. Analyses of the vote indicate that although labor have go solidly for Mr. Stevenson and although he have retain much of the farm vote , he have lose the support of woman voter and particularly the so-called independent voter of both sexes. But the strength of Mr. Stevenson 's candidacy be show in the fact that under circumstance that should have produce an overwhelming Republican landslide -- a popular candidate , popular issue and an incumbent Administration whose party have be in power for 20 year -- the Democratic candidate roll up 3,000,000 more vote than be receive by President Truman in 1948 in his victory over Thomas E. Dewey. With the 1952 election over , Mr. Stevenson take the role of Opposition leader , although he admit that he envy one man -- the Governor of Illinois. His first speech and a four-day visit to Washington rally nearly all Democrats to his side. He receive such an admire welcome from the jubilant Republicans at the capital that political opponent jest that he could not have be fete more if his candidacy have be successful. Part of the tribute arose because he take immediate step to heal the wound of the bitter phase of the campaign and do what he could to rally his fellow Democrats behind the incoming President. During the visit , Mr. Stevenson meet with Democratic leader and map plan to unite the party in opposition. He also confer with leader of the Republican Administration about his plan for a nonpolitical world tour , cover particularly the Far East. On the five-month tour he talk with leading figure and studied condition in Korea , Malay , Burma , India and the then Indochina , as well a in various European countries. He say the real purpose of his tour have be self-education. Mr. Stevenson undergo a kidney stone operation in Chicago in April , 1954. A month later it be report that he have completely recovered. Taking a vigorous part in the bitter Congressional election campaign of 1954 , he hammer in his speech at the three principal issue of foreign policy , domestic economy and internal security. This confirm him a his party 's chief national spokesman. The Democratic victory in the election make him the lead contender for the 1956 Presidential nomination. He Said Republican Party Was 'Half McCarthy' His attack on the Republicans concentrate on the influence of Senator McCarthy. The Republican party , he charge , have become `` half McCarthy and half Eisenhower '' and Vice President Nixon , the principal Republican campaigner , he accuse of preach `` McCarthyism in a white collar. '' Mr. Nixon declare that Mr. Stevenson have `` not change since he testify for Alger Hiss , '' and he accuse Mr. Stevenson of unconsciously have spread Communist propaganda. After the election of 1954 Mr. Stevenson announce that he be return to the private practice of law in Chicago. `` I have do what I could for the Democratic party for the past two year , '' he say , `` and now I shall have to be less active and give more attention to my own affairs. '' Mr. Stevenson be admit to practice before the United States Supreme Court and be engage by the Radio Corporation of America to defend it in a $ 16,000,000 antitrust suit. He lose the first two legal skirmish of the case. He still keep in touch with political and foreign affair , however. In April , 1955 , after a long Democratic silence , he make a national radio address oppose the defense of the Chinese Nationalist island of Quemoy and Matsu. He also call for a joint declaration by the United States and it Allies pledge united defense of Taiwan pending it final disposition. Although Mr. Stevenson repeatedly refuse to say whether he would be a candidate for the Presidential nomination in 1956 , he have win the support of the party 's most influential leaders. However , many in the South who have oppose him in 1952 still do so. In sharp contrast with his preconvention attitude of indifference toward the 1952 nomination , Mr. Stevenson quickly jump into the fight for the 1956 nomination. He formally announce his candidacy on Nov. 15 , 1955. Moderation be the keynote of his campaign , particularly with respect to enforcement of the Supreme Court 's decision abolish racial segregation in public school , but generally with respect to all issue , foreign and domestic. Mr. Stevenson take an early lead in the race for the nomination. The support of political organization in large-population state give him an impose list of delegate strength. However , he suffer setback in early 1956 state primary , where Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee show surprising popular support. These revers stimulate Mr. Stevenson to more aggressive tactics. Instead of hold aloof from the crowd , he begin to make hand-shaking tour ask the voter for support. As the primary continue , he begin to fare good , and by May the political observer seem to agree that he have reverse the tide , which then appear to be run in his direction. Mr. Stevenson 's campaign manager from the beginning claim victory for him. They assert that more delegate have be pledge to him than the majority necessary to nominate at the Democratic National Convention. In 1952 Mr. Stevenson have surround himself largely with `` amateur , '' but in the 1956 campaign he put more emphasis on practical politics in choose top aide at his Chicago campaign headquarters. He pitch his early campaign speech to a vigorous attack on President Eisenhower 's foreign policy. Whenever possible he ignore his Democratic opponent for the nomination , and seek to draw the issue from the beginning a Stevenson versus Eisenhower. In the election , he be defeat by a great margin than in 1952 , poll 26 million popular vote to more than 35.5 million by President Eisenhower. The Electoral College figure be 73 to 457. His Father Was Executive Of Hearst Enterprises Mr. Stevenson be bear on Feb. 5 , 1900 , in Los Angeles , where his father , Lewis Green Stevenson , be at the time an executive of Hearst newspaper , mining and ranch properties. His family root go back to the pre-Revolutionary War period. He be a grandson and namesake of a Vice President of the United States -- the Adlai Stevenson who hold the office in the second term of Grover Cleveland 's Administration. Through his mother , he be a fifth-generation Illinoisan , a grandson of Jesse Fell , who be the first to propose Abraham Lincoln for the Presidency. When Adlai be 6 year old , the family move back to their home town of Bloomington , Ill. , where Mrs. Stevenson 's family own The Daily Pantagraph. Adlai 's father later become State Secretary for Illinois and , from 1914 to 1917 , serve a chairman of the State Board of Pardons. Mr. Stevenson go to the Choate Preparatory School , Wallingford , Conn. , and Princeton University , from which he be graduate in 1922. He be manage editor of The Daily Princetonian. After leave Princeton , Mr. Stevenson go to Harvard Law School for two years. He get pass mark but be disinterested in his studies. A legal case that evolve from the death of an uncle redistribute share in The Pantagraph between member of the family. As a result , Mr. Stevenson and his cousin , Davis C. Merwin , decide they would learn the newspaper business. Mr. Stevenson spend a couple of year on the paper in various editorial post , but by the time the court have rule that the Stevenson and Merwin family should have equal share of ownership , his interest in become a newspaper editor have waned. He decide to finish his law course and , have fall a year behind his classmate , who already have be graduate from Harvard , he enter the law school of Northwestern University. He receive his law degree in 1926. Soon after his graduation , he settle in Chicago to practice law. In December , 1928 , Mr. Stevenson marry Ellen Borden of Chicago. Her father , a socialite and financier who make the first of several fortune a a colleague of John Hertz in the Yellow Cab Company , later become active in mining in St. Louis. The Stevensons be divorce in 1949. His wife be say to abhor politics and to have wish to devote herself to the world of art and literature. No other person and no scandal be involve in the legal proceeding , hold in Las Vegas , Nev. The couple have three son , Adlai Ewing III , Borden and John Fell. Soon after the 1952 Presidential boom start for Mr. Stevenson , he be approach by a would- be biographer. The man tell the Governor he be go to write a book about him. `` I do n't see how you be go to do it , '' Mr. Stevenson said. `` My life have be hopelessly undramatic. I be n't bear in a log cabin. I do n't work my way through school nor do I rise from rag to rich , and there 's no use try to pretend I did. I 'm not a Wilkie and I do n't claim to be a simple , barefoot La Salle Street lawyer. You might be able to write about some of my ancestors. They accomplish quite a lot at one time or another but you ca n't do anything much about me. At least , I 'd hate to have to try it. '' Mr. Stevenson have lay the groundwork for his political career by public service that begin in 1933 , when he first go to Washington a one of the many bright young lawyer President Franklin D. Roosevelt have summon to help formulate the New Deal. For two year , Mr. Stevenson be special counsel to the Agricultural Adjustment Administration , tour the country , hold hearing and advise regional group of farmer , rancher , orchardists and dairymen how to utilize the measure and then return to Washington to try to work out market agreements. At the end of the two year he go back to private law practice in Chicago. He serve a president for one term of the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations -- a post in which he get considerable experience a an after-dinner speaker -- and he also become Chicago chairman of the William Allen White Committee to Defend America by Aiding the Allies. Mr. Stevenson bring people like Wendell Willkie , Carl Sandburg and Dorothy Thompson to address meeting , one of which , in 1941 , fill the Chicago Stadium. In the summer of that year the late Frank Knox , then Secretary of the Navy and a close friend of Mr. Stevenson 's , telephoned. Mr. Stevenson later quote Mr. Knox a say , `` Everyone else around Washington have a lawyer and I guess I ought to have one too. '' He be in Washington within a few day , start to prepare legal machinery whereby the Navy , in case it become necessary , could take over the strike-bound Kearny shipyard in New Jersey , then build essential warships. He continue to do similar legal work for the Navy Department until 1943 , when he lead a mission to Italy to plan occupation policies. Later he serve a an assistant to Secretaries of State Edward Stettinius and James Byrnes. He also be a representative to the San Francisco United Nations Conference , and then be an aide to the United States delegation in the United Nations General Assembly. At the meeting of the General Assembly hold in London in January , 1946 , Mr. Stevenson be senior adviser to the American delegation. He resign after the session end in March , but President Truman appoint him alternate delegate to the second session that fall. Mr. Stevenson return to Chicago in 1947. His friend back him a a `` clean-up '' candidate against the Republican administration of Gov. Dwight. W. Green. Winning the backing of Jacob M. Arvey , chairman of the Cook County Democratic Committee , Mr. Stevenson be nominate for Governor. Paul Douglas , then Professor of Economics at Chicago University , be name for Senator. The Democratic `` clean-up '' team sweep into office , Mr. Stevenson defeat Mr. Green by 572,000 vote , while President Truman be nose out Thomas E. Dewey in Illinois by a mere 34,000. The self-styled `` amateur '' in politics consecrate his Government in an inaugural address to `` plain talk , hard work and prairie horse sense. '' Drive on Gambling Listed Among Acts a Governor During his term in office Mr. Stevenson be credit with the following accomplishment : He send state policeman to stamp out commercial gamble downstate when local official fail to act. He lop off 1,300 non-working politician from the state payroll. He set up a merit system in the state police force that end the system of political by preferential appointments. He increase state aid to school districts. He start a broad road improvement program that include enforcement of truck-weight limit , a high gasoline tax and increase truck license to pay construction costs. He overhaul the state 's welfare program , place it on a merit basis and force financially able relative to pay for the care of patients. He streamline the state Government by push through 78 reform measures. He convert the political State Commerce Commission , the utility rate-fixing agency , into a bipartisan body. An attendant at the birth of the New Deal , Mr. Stevenson support Mr. Truman 's successor Fair Deal , but his difference with the Administration on some phase of domestic policy be implicit in his own record in Illinois. The variance be evident in his stand on the cost of Government , taxation and negligence toward official irregularity and corruption. `` I think government should be a small in scope and a local in character a possible , '' he say on one occasion. Mr. Stevenson be the author of seven book : `` Major Campaign Speeches , 1952 , '' `` Call to Greatness , '' `` What I Think , '' `` The New America , '' `` Friends and Enemies , '' `` Putting First Things First '' and `` Looking Outward . ''