June 23 , 1965 OBITUARY David O. Selznick , 63 , Producer Of 'Gone With the Wind ' , Dies Special to The New York Times HOLLYWOOD , June 22 -- David O. Selznick , one of the lead producer in the motion picture industry , die of a coronary occlusion this afternoon at Mount Sinai Hospital. Mr. Selznick , who be 63 year old , be stricken in the office of his lawyer , Barry Brannen , in Beverly Hills , and be rush to the hospital. His wife , Jennifer Jones , the actress , be with him at the time of the attack. Mr. Selznick , who produce `` Gone With the Wind , '' the movie ' big money-maker , and his wife have return to their Beverly Hills home last week after spend three month in New York City. Mercurial , shrewd , self-confident and enormously gift , David O. Selznick climb to the pinnacle of power and success in Hollywood with film that be now classic and actor who be consider screen immortals. His film include `` Intermezzo , '' `` Rebecca , '' `` David Copperfield , '' `` Little Women , '' `` The Prisoner of Zenda , '' `` Dinner at Eight , '' `` A Star Is Born , '' `` Duel in the Sun , '' and the epic , `` Gone With the Wind. '' He be instrumental in spur the career of such actor a Clark Gable , Vivien Leigh , Ingrid Bergman , Joseph Cotten , Gregory Peck , Katharine Hepburn , Joan Fontaine , Fred Astaire , Leslie Howard , Myrna Loy and his wife , Miss Jones. Mr. Selznick , a 6-foot 1-inch 200-pounder , move quickly , speak rapidly and work tirelessly. He produce quality film with three trademark : top star , the fine writer and no expense spared. Even in the twilight of his career , he remain wide-eyed and even brash , although a trace of pessimism and melancholy become apparent in recent years. `` Nothing in Hollywood be permanent , '' Mr. Selznick say in 1959 on a Hollywood set , a Tara , the mansion build for `` Gone With the Wind , '' be be dismember and ship to Atlanta , Ga. `` Once photograph , life here be ended. It be almost symbolic of Hollywood. Tara have no room inside. It be just a facade. So much of Hollywood be a facade. '' Mr. Selznick speak in quick , staccato sentences. While work on a film , he virtually exhaust himself , labor round-the-clock , seek perfection to the minute detail and stubbornly insist on his own ideas. Fighting Perfectionist As a producer , Mr. Selznick be preoccupy with quality , and his perfectionism lead him to many fight with directors. `` Gone With the Wind '' start with George Cukor directing. He be replace by Victor Fleming. `` A Farewell to Arms '' saw a classic feud between Mr. Selznick and John Huston. `` It be a case of one Alp and two Hannibals , '' say Mr. Huston after he have be replace in Italy by Charles Vidor. `` I ask for a violinist , '' Mr. Selznick shoot back , `` and , instead , in John , get a soloist. '' As one of Hollywood 's most famous memo writer , Mr. Selznick dictate more than 1.5 million word of memo to two exhausted stenographer during the filming of `` Gone With the Wind. '' At one point , he send a message to Vivien Leigh that weigh half a pound and take the actress 10 day to reply to. Mr. Selznick be bear in Pittsburgh , on May 10 , 1902 , the son of Lewis J. Selznick , a Russian immigrant who have earn and lose a fortune in the movie business. With unbounded confidence in the ability of his two son , Myron and David , the elder Selznick spar little expense in rear them a prodigals. Myron , who later become a Hollywood agent , be give an allowance of $ 1,100 a week at the age of 21. The young , David be give $ 300 a week at 18. David Selznick attend public and private school and , for a brief period , Columbia University. He develop an interest in filmmaking in his early teens. The Selznick family fortune be sweep away in the stock market crash. L. J. ( a he be call in Hollywood and New York ) move from a 22-room apartment on Park Avenue to three furnish room where Mrs. Selznick do the cooking. All the family 's possession , include Mrs. Selznick 's jewel be sold. Job a a Reader With zest and self-confidence , the young Selznick get his first movie job by cajole Harry Rapf of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer into hire him , nominally a a reader of script at $ 100 a week at a two-week trial. Mr. Rapf have initially protested. `` Readers do n't get that kind of money , '' he said. `` I know they do n't , '' Mr. Selznick retorted. `` But I 'll do more for you than read scripts. I 'll help you fix them. I 'll write titles. I 'll do everything that have to be do to them. '' Mr. Rapf hire him. Within several week , Mr. Selznick 's pay be double and he be give a permanent job. A few month later , his salary be increase to $ 300 and he be appoint Mr. Rapf 's assistant on the production of the Tim McCoy Western films. Mr. Selznick next go to Paramount , offer himself on a similar trial arrangement. He receive a $ 300 job and become an assistant to B. P. Schulberg , head of the studio , who have tell him early : `` You 're the most arrogant young man I 've ever known. '' In April , 1930 , Mr. Selznick marry Irene Mayer , Louis B. Mayer 's young daughter. Mr. Mayer , the head of M-G-M , be furious when the young Selznick court his daughter. He even refuse to speak to him at the wedding. Shortly afterward , however , when the young man walk away from his job at Paramount , Mr. Mayer do have a few word to say to his new son-in-law. `` How dare you give up that contract , '' he yelled. `` And you marry to my daughter. '' Mr. Selznick leave Paramount to make film on his own , become vice president , in charge of all production at R.K.O.-Radio. It be there that he start produce such quality film a `` A Bill of Divorcement , '' to which he bring Katharine Hepburn and George Cukor , the director , to Hollywood ; `` The Animal Kingdom , '' with Ann Harding , and the famous `` King Kong. '' After plan `` Little Women , '' Mr. Selznick resign from R.K.O. to return to his father-in-law 's studio , M-G-M , a vice president and head of his own production unit. Mr. Selznick be greet coolly by most of the executive there. Many felt that he be use his relationship with Mr. Mayer to get ahead. `` The son-in-law also rise , '' become one of the gag around Hollywood at the time. In an incident relate by Bosley Crowther , film critic for The New York Times , in `` The Lion 's Share , '' Mr. Selznick be treat so coldly by M-G-M executive that , at one point , he go home , throw himself on the bed and cried. His wife comfort him , `` Let them yammer , '' she said. `` You can still take the best that the studio have to work with. Serve your term -- and make some film ! '' Mr. Selznick 's early film at M-G-M include `` Dinner at Eight , '' `` Dancing Lady '' and `` Viva Villa. '' Freddy Bartholomew be discover by the producer and make famous in `` David Copperfield. '' In 1935 , the producer leave M-G-M to form an independent company. He be back by Cornelius V. Whitney , John Hay Whitney ; his brother Myron ; Robert and Arthur Lehman , the banker ; John Hertz and Irving Thalberg and Norma Shearer ( Mrs. Thalberg ) . Mr. Selznick do not invest any money but he own a little more than half of the company. In the early summer of 1936 , Mr. Selznick be busy with `` The Garden of Allah , '' with Marlene Dietrich , when a wire reach him from Kay Brown , the New York story editor , urge him to buy film right to a new Civil War novel. It be `` Gone With the Wind , '' by Margaret Mitchell , an unknown in the literary world. At the time , the feeling in Hollywood be that the Civil War have be play out with `` The Birth of a Nation. '' Mr. Selznick , however , be interested although he have misgiving about the problem of produce a novel of such length ( 1,037 page ) . Finally the novel be purchase for $ 50,000. As winter come and the sale of the novel soar , the read public , spur by Mr. Selznick 's publicity , become interested in the cast of the film. Tallulah Bankhead , Norma Shearer and Bette Davis be mention for the leading role of Scarlett O'Hara. So strong be the public interest that when Miss Shearer decline to play Scarlett , The New York Times regret her decision in an editorial. Curfew on Memos Vivien Leigh , a hazel-eyed , brown-haired British actress , be finally choose in almost typically dramatic fashion. In order to clear the studio 's lot for the building of Tara , the movie plantation , a maze of old set have to be removed. It be suggest that instead of tear down the set , they should be burn and use to represent the dramatic highlight of the film , the burning of Atlanta. Mr. Selznick agreed. While the camera be shoot the scene , and a flame rise in the studio 's night sky , the producer felt a tug on his sleeve. He turn and saw his brother , Myron , accompany by a beautiful girl. `` I want you to meet Scarlett O'Hara , '' Myron say dramatically. Mr. Selznick star at Miss Leigh and promptly sign her for the role. The picture go before the camera officially on Jan. 26 , 1938. During the 22 week of shoot , Mr. Selznick 's work habit become legend. He work at time at three-day stretch without sleep , feed himself Benzadrine and thyroid extract and playing poker and roulette to relax. His memo become more prolific. At one point Clark Gable , the film 's Rhett Butler , be rout out of bed at 3 A.M. by a messenger who present him with a document -- a memo on the portrayal of the role. Mr. Gable and the others finally revolt and establish a 9 P.M. curfew on memos. At the time , the film be the most expensive ( $ 4,250,000 ) and one of the long ( 3 hour and 45 minute ) ever produced. It have since gross in excess of $ 50 million and have be reissue several times. In seek Mr. Gable for the film , Mr. Selznick agree to a financial arrangement with M-G-M , the star 's studio , in which M-G-M put up half the production cost in return for a share in the film 's profits. `` I have never regret it , '' Mr. Selznick once said. `` I would n't have make the movie without Clark. '' At the peak of his career , Mr. Selznick be vote for 10 successive year a the No. 1 producer of box-office success by motion-picture exhibitor of the country. Despite this , Mr. Selznick be notably unsuccessful , at time , in hire top actor and producers. On receive an overture from the producer , Nunnally Johnson write : `` I should certainly like to work for you , although my understanding of it be that an assignment from you consists of three month 's work and six month of recuperation. '' A Hollywood saying be , simply , `` Selznick eat director , writer and secretaries. '' Since 1948 , Mr. Selznick have be generally inactive in Hollywood , and in recent year have be involve in European film distribution , the sale of his film to television and several stage plays. None of the stage play come to fruition. In 1949 Mr. Selznick marry Jennifer Jones , and he become involve in the production of most of her recent films. Miss Jones , who have be marry to the late actor Robert Walker , have star in several of Mr. Selznick 's film , include , `` Duel in the Sun , '' and `` Since You Went Away. '' The producer and his wife live in an elegantly rustic home on an estate atop a hill overlook Beverly Hills. They also maintain an apartment at the Waldorf Towers in New York. `` Very few people have master the art of enjoy their wealth , '' Mr. Selznick remark several month ago. `` I have master that art and therefore I spend my time enjoy myself. '' Mr. Selznick add that on some morning he arise with the determination to make another movie , but by 2 P.M. , after a few phone call and the reading of a script , he have decide to forget about it and take a nap instead. Mr. Selznick 's death yesterday come on the same day when the last of a series of essay on him appear in The Hollywood Reporter , a trade paper. The essay be publish a advertisement write and pay for by Russell Birdwell , his well-known press agent. In the last essay , the final word be : `` . . .come home , D.O.S. '' Mr. Selznick be survive by his widow , two son by his first marriage , Louis and Daniel , and a daughter , Mary , by his second wife. Irene Mayer Selznick be now a Broadway producer. She and the producer be divorce in 1948 .