January 24 , 1965 OBITUARY Churchill Dies at 90 At Home in London By ANTHONY LEWIS Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES LONDON , Sunday , Jan. 24 -- Sir Winston Churchill be dead. The great figure who embody man 's will to resist tyranny pass into history this morning. He be 90 year old. His old friend and physician , Lord Moran , give the news to the world after inform Queen Elizabeth and Prime Minister Harold Wilson. Lord Moran 's announcement say : `` Shortly after 8 A.M. , Sir Winston die at his home. '' ( Signed ) Moran. The announcement by Lord Moran be read to reporter near the Churchill home at 8:35 A.M. ( 3:35 A.M. , New York time ) . About 30 member of the press be stand in the rain at the entrance to Hyde Park Gate , the small street south of Kensington Gardens where Sir Winston have live for so long. A reporter for the Press Association read Lord Moran 's statement to them. Lord Moran have come to the house at 7:18. A few minute earlier Sir Winston 's son , Randolph , have drive up. Also there at the end be Lady Churchill and their daughter , Sarah , and Randolph 's son , Winston. Another daughter , Mary , Mrs. Christopher Soames , also survive Sir Winston. Other survivor be 10 grandchild and three great-grandchildren , the last born just two day ago. Queen Elizabeth II send the following message to Lady Churchill : `` The whole world be the poorer by the loss of his many-sided genius while the survival of this country and the sister nation of the Commonwealth , in the face of the great danger that have ever threaten them , will be a perpetual memorial to his leadership , his vision , and his indomitable courage. '' Prime Minister Wilson immediately pay tribute to his illustrious predecessor in office. `` Sir Winston will be mourn all over the world by all who owe so much to him , '' Mr. Wilson said. `` He be now at peace after a life in which he create history and which will be remember as long a history be read. '' The world have be watch and wait since Jan. 15 , when it be announce that Sir Winston have suffer a stroke. The last authentic giant of world politics in the 20th century be go down. Phenomenal Tenacity For nine day the struggle go on. Medical expert say that only phenomenal tenacity and spirit of life could enable a man of 90 to hold off death so long in these circumstances. But then those be the quality that have make Winston Churchill a historical figure in his lifetime. His pluck in rally Britain to victory in World War II save not only this country but , in all likelihood , free nation everywhere. Sir Winston will be give a state funeral , the first commoner so to be honor since the death of William Ewart Gladstone in 1898. The body will lie in state in Westminster Hall for several days. Then , after a long march from Westminster , the service will be hold in St. Paul 's Cathedral , whose huge dome have so long dominated London. Anniversary of Father 's Death Today be the anniversary of the death of Sir Winston 's father , Lord Randolph Churchill , a somewhat eccentric Tory politician. He die in 1894. For virtually everyone in Great Britain , Sir Winston 's death will be a wrenching personal loss and a symbolic break with a past whose glory seem already faded. For the world , too , it be the end of an age. Sir Winston will always be remember a the great war leader who defy Hitler. But he be more than that , a personality large than life , an extraordinary man in language and character as well a war and politics. War Was His Finest Hour Sir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill be one of the great men of his time. He be the linchpin of the Grand Alliance of 26 nation that vanquish the Axis power in 1945 after nearly six year of war. For him a for his countryman his fine hour come in 1940 when Britain stand alone , beleaguer at sea and in the air. He employ all his skill a an orator to rally British pride and courage and all his ability a a statesman to get arm and sustenance from abroad. With almost all of Europe under or about to fall under the Nazi jackboot , it be Sir Winston who fling this challenge at the enemy : `` We shall not flag , or fail. We shall go on to the end , we shall fight in France , we shall fight on the sea and ocean , we shall fight with grow confidence and grow strength in the air , we shall defend our island , whatever the cost may be , we shall fight on the beach , we shall fight on the landing ground , we shall fight in the field and in the street , we shall fight in the hill ; we shall never surrender , and even if , which I do not for a moment believe , this island or a large part of it be subjugate and starve , then our empire beyond the sea , arm and guard by the British fleet , would carry on the struggle , until , in God 's good time , the new world , with all it power and might , step forth to the rescue and the liberation of the old. '' As the late President John F. Kennedy say in 1963 , in confer upon him an honorary citizenship of the United States , `` He mobilize the English language and send it into battle. '' Won Nobel Prize in 1953 Quite apart from his fame a a world statesman and global strategist he win distinction a an artist and fame a a historian and author. He be award the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1953. A special citation pay tribute to his oratory. In 1953 , Queen Elizabeth II , the last of the six British sovereign he serve , confer upon him the high order of chivalry that can come to a commoner when she make him a Knight Companion of the Order of the Garter. Great a be his contribution to the strategy of victory in World War II , Sir Winston 's paramount place in history be a the man chiefly responsible for provide the leadership and insure the cohesion of the three great wartime ally -- Britain , the Soviet Union and the United States. He be a warm friend of Franklin D. Roosevelt and a tactfully candid collaborator with Josef Stalin. To this end Sir Winston , who be in his 66th year when he become Prime Minister in May , 1940 , be tireless. He be constantly on the go -- to Washington , to Moscow , to the various front and to the conference of the Big Three at Teheran , Yalta and finally at Potsdam. It be in the middle of this postwar conference in 1945 that he learn that the British people have turn out his Government at the polls. As leader the Opposition for the next six year he fight Socialism at home and Communism abroad. It be not until 1951 that he become Prime Minister a second time. His be among the first voice to warn of the danger of Soviet expansionist exploitation of the peace , a it have be among the first to cry out against the hidden danger of Hitlerism. Warned of 'Iron Curtain' On March 5 , 1946 , he deliver his famous speech at Fulton , Mo. Although he speak no longer a head of a government , his word be flash around the world. Introduced by President Harry S. Truman , he say : `` From Stettin on the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic , an iron curtain have descend across the Continent. Behind that line lie all the capital of the ancient state of central and eastern Europe -- Warsaw , Berlin , Prague , Vienna , Budapest , Belgrade , Bucharest and Sofia -- all these famous city and the population around them lie in what I must call the Soviet sphere and be all subject in one form or another not only to Soviet influence but to a very high , and in many case increase , measure of control from Moscow. Backward In School In his 81st year , on April 5 , 1955 , Sir Winston retire a Prime Minister but retain his seat in the House of Commons , until just prior to last October 's general election when he announce , near 90 , that would not stand again. Having be elect uninterruptedly since 1924 , he have become the `` Father of the House of Commons. '' He have contest 19 election and be successful in 14 since he be first elect in 1900. He have hold every important Cabinet post save that of Foreign Minister. Sir Winston , whose mother be the former Jennie Jerome of New York , never cease to promote the solidarity of the English-speaking people everywhere. Only through the close cooperation of Britain the United States and the British Commonwealth could peace and the civilization be assure , he believed. Sir Winston be bear on Nov. 30 , 1874 , at Blenheim Palace , build for his illustrious ancestor , the first Duke of Marlborough. His father , Lord Randolph Churchill , who have a distinguish political career , be the third son of the seventh Duke of Marlborough. Winston be an undersized , emotional child , sometimes shy , sometimes over-assertive. He adore his brilliant father , who , however , be convince by his son 's school failure that the boy be retarded. The child saw little of his mother and become deeply attach to his nurse , Mrs. Everest. When he become one of the great figure of his age , Mrs. Everest 's picture be over his desk. After attendance at a small private school , where he be brutally can , Winston be send to Harrow. He twice fail his entrance examination to the Royal Military College at Sandhurst and be finally admit to the `` cavalry class , '' a sort of scholastic back door for young gentleman wealthy enough to provide their own horses. Young Churchill be graduate from Sandhurst in 1894 and become a lieutenant in the Fourth ( Queen 's Own ) Hussars. There be no active service at the moment , he go to Cuba a a war correspondent , without give up his commission. The fall of 1897 find him fight in border expedition in India a a war correspondent- officer , a dual role then permitted. In 1898 he hold the same status in fight in the Sudan. Before the year be out , young Churchill be back in England. He have want to go to Oxford , but he have nothing like the Latin or Greek require for matriculation , and so he decide to enter politics forthwith. In his first try he be badly defeat in a hopeless race for a seat in the House of Commons. On Oct. 11 , 1899 , the South African War start and young Churchill take the field , once more with the conveniently vague status of correspondent-officer. It be his fifth campaign and he be not yet 25. On Nov. 15 , while he be take part in an armored train reconnaissance , the train be ambush by the Boers. The young correspondent leave his pistol on the train a he try to escape in the excitement and be capture a he run up the railway cut. Interned for the duration of the war , he plot an escape , which he finally bring off in a characteristic burst of skill and good luck. The Boers offer a reward for his capture. Their description of him state that he have a `` small , hardly noticeable mustache , talk through his nose and can not pronounce the letter S properly. '' Won Commons Seat Back again in England , Sir Winston stand again for Parliament from Oldham and this time he win and take his seat in the House of Commons for the first time on Jan. 23 , 1901. The young member from Oldham maintain his father 's tradition of be difficult in party harness. In 1904 he cross the floor and join the Liberals. In 1908 he be reward with the full Cabinet post of President of the Board of Trade. He be then 33. When the Liberal party consolidate it power in the 1910 election , Churchill be name Home Secretary. He take a somewhat military view of this office , which include maintenance of domestic order. It be a time of great labor strife in Britain , and the Home Secretary seem to some to be over-ready to use troop to suppress labor disorder , particularly in the coal mining district of Wales. On Oct. 21 , 1911 , Churchill be advance to the then more important post of First Lord of the Admiralty. To this position Churchill bring an ever-maturing talent for organization as well a a knowledge of global strategy that go far beyond either Sandhurst or his Indian and African combat experience. On Aug. 4 , 1914 , a state of war be declare to exist between Britain and Germany. Good luck and Churchill 's prevision and prompt action result in the rapid and uneventful concentration of the British fleet at it battle stations. It be not long , however , until Winston Churchill 's darting mind bring him into conflict with the more plodding personage associate with him in Britain 's war effort. These saw only the war in France. Britain and France be soon commit to a bloody , dead-locked struggle with the German army in France. Prime Minister Herbert Asquith and Lord Kitchener , the Secretary of State for War , believe that victory would go to him who pound hard in Flanders and Lorraine -- and the pounding be to be such a the world have never see before. The Gallipoli Campaign Winston Churchill realize that the existence of a British fleet on guard at Scapa Flow be his country 's chief buckler. Although he be horrify at the colossal bloodletting in France and suspect that it might not be entirely necessary , he know that Britain be irrevocably commit to this front. But a a student of Mahan , he believe in the strategic use of the British sea power reserve to relieve the pressure on the main front and find and exploit the flank of the conflict. The possibility of action in the Mediterranean , so stimulate to the mind of such strategic genius a Nelson and Napoleon , fascinate the agile imagination of Churchill in both World War I and World War II. In 1915 he argue with his Government for men and ship for a Dardanelles expedition , which he believe would `` raise the Balkans in the rear of Germany '' and open a road to Russia through the Black Sea. Largely a a result of Churchill 's enthusiasm , a joint British-French naval and military expeditionary force be send to try to open the Dardanelles. The expedition have the support of Field Marshal Lord Kitchener , Britain 's most widely respect soldier. It have the tepid and half-hearted backing of the mildly eccentric First Sea Lord of the Admiralty , Admiral John ( Jackie ) Fisher , the popular naval figure. After a severe naval reverse , the first infantry unit fight their way onto the Gallipoli Peninsula on April 25 , 1915. In month of desperate fight the British and Imperial troop and their French ally stand within a hairsbreadth of victory on several occasions. But they could not dislodge the rugged Turks from the rocky hills. More than 55,000 British and Imperial troop be kill in action there and the total British casualty be more than 251,000. The expedition be abandon and the last troop be withdraw on Jan. 6 , 1916. Churchill 's political career have come to an abrupt pause some time before the evacuation of Gallipoli. In Lloyd George Cabinet After a few month in a Cabinet sinecure , a Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster , Churchill resign from the Government early in November , 1915. He request an infantry command at the front in France , and after service a a major with the Grenadier Guards , in a short refresher course , he become a lieutenant colonel and be place in command of the Sixth Battalion of the Royal Scots Fusiliers. He serve six month a an infantry officer in France. Dissatisfaction with the conduct of the war lead to the resignation of Asquith on Dec. 5 , 1916. David Lloyd George become Prime Minister. He would have include Churchill in his original cabinet but five political leader necessary to his Government say they would not serve if Churchill be included. Lloyd George have to wait until July 15 , 1917 , to name Churchill , Minister of Munitions. On Jan. 15 , 1919 , Churchill become Secretary of State for War and be face with the politically undesirable task of demobilize Britain 's large wartime armies. In January , 1921 , Churchill leave the War Office to take the post of Colonial Secretary and become chairman of the Cabinet Committee on Irish Affairs. Civil war loom in Ireland and the negotiation with the Irish leader require great skill and patience. Churchill return to the Conservative party in 1924 and , on Nov. 4 , Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin name him Chancellor of the Exchequer. It be a post that his father have hold and it be the high post in the Government after Prime Minister. Important difference of opinion arose between the bland , pipe-smoking Prime Minister Baldwin and his Chancellor of the Exchequer. The spirit of the country at the time be largely pacifist , and Baldwin act upon the belief that the British people want peace at almost any price. Churchill believe that the nation should be arouse to the danger of a second world war. Warned of Hitler Rise Churchill 's tenure a Chancellor of the Exchequer end with the fall of the Conservative Government in 1929. For some time difference have develop between Baldwin and Churchill over India. Churchill believe that Baldwin be make a mistake in deal so extensively with Mohandas K. Gandhi , leader of the Indian independence movement. Accordingly , Churchill resign from the Conservative party 's direct group. Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald , who come to power in 1929 , be succeed by Baldwin in 1935. Many believe that Churchill 's political power be so great that Baldwin would not dare to exclude him from the Government. However , when the Cabinet be constitute , Churchill be not included. In the Churchill of the early nineteen-thirties , portly , middle-aged and at time somewhat pugnacious , dignity join with youthful high spirit to make the figure that the world be to know in World War II. Sir Winston live handsomely in the international world of fashion and politics. He smoke expensive cigar and drink the best brandy. He know many of the world 's most interesting people. Churchill 's earnings be large a an author and journalist , but his scale of living require his diligence a a lecturer and investor a well. Churchill spend much of his time between 1931 and 1935 at his home , Chartwell , in Kent. He be an enthusiastic amateur mason and build garden wall and a swimming pool. In 1932 Churchill visit Germany and an appointment be make for him to meet Hitler. The Nazi leader do not keep the appointment , and Churchill later write : `` Thus Hitler lose his only chance of meet me. '' The drift toward war quicken on March 7 , 1936 , when Hitler suddenly occupy the demilitarized Rhineland zone. On May 28 , 1937 , the first coalition Government of Neville Chamberlain come to power , but pacifist sentiment be strong and Churchill be not ask to join the Government. First Lord of Admiralty At 6 P.M. Sept. 3 , 1939 , seven hour and 45 minute after Britain have declare war on Germany , a wireless flash tell British man-of-war in all part of the world : `` Winston be back. '' Churchill be make First Lord of the Admiralty , his post in 1914 at the outbreak of the World War I. On April 9 , 1940 , Germany invade Norway , and the presence of a British expeditionary force in Norway be announce April 15. Churchill play a great part in the planning and launching of this expedition , but it be a complete failure. On May 10 Germany invade the Netherlands and Belgium and the distraught Neville Chamberlain resign a Prime Minister. King George VI invite Churchill to form a new Government. In his memoir Churchill write : `` But I can not conceal from the reader of this truthful account that a I go to bed about 3 A.M. I be conscious of a profound sense of relief. At last I have authority to give direction over the whole scene. '' Churchill be 65 when he first become Prime Minister. He be a tried statesman , politician and military strategist , and he possess a capacity for work seldom equal by one in his position. He drive his associate with memorandum that crackled. It be usually : `` Pray let me know by 4 P.M. today on one sheet of paper. . . . '' Recent event have prove his wisdom in international affair and his prestige be enormous. On May 11 the formation of his National Coalition Government be announce and on May 13 he tell Parliament grimly that : `` I have nothing to offer but blood , toil , tear , and sweat. '' Within a few day it become apparent that disaster be overwhelm the French , British and Belgian Armies in Flanders and on May 28 King Leopold of the Belgians surrender his forces. On May 29 the perimeter of Dunkirk be form and the last contingent of Allied troop be evacuate on the night of June 3-4. Britain have not be in such peril since the Spanish Armada. A French military leader predict that Britain be go to have her `` neck wrung like a chicken. '' Later , Churchill remark : `` Some neck. Some chicken ! '' The Fall of France On June 4 Churchill speak plainly in tell Parliament of the Dunkirk evacuation and , although he assert that it have be a disaster of the first magnitude , a he describe it , it take on a heroic quality of victory. On May 15 Churchill learn from France that disaster be in the making , and he fly to Paris the next day. Churchill love and admire the French and speak their language with vehemence , but with a high disregard for verb form. During this and four subsequent visit he plead with France 's leader to keep their country in the war. Also , he want to establish the fact of the situation to the end that history would not distort his or Britain 's part in the disaster. As discreetly a possible he cultivate Brig. Gen. Charles de Gaulle , then Assistant Defense Minister of France , a a rallying point for French resistance. A few French leader would have try to fight on. Others be skeptical of the results. Albert Lebrun , President of France , wring his hand and wept , and the aged Marshal Henri- Philippe Petain and the conspiratorial Pierre Laval join with their associate to carry France out of the war on June 22 , 1940. Britain now face the foe alone. On June 18 , when it have become apparent that France be capitulate , Churchill broadcast a message of courage and defiance. His conclude sentence will be long remember : `` Let u therefore brace ourselves to our duty , and so bear ourselves that , if the British Empire and it Commonwealth last for a thousand year , men will still say , 'This be their fine hour. ' '' After the Dunkirk evacuation Churchill direct Britain 's prodigious effort to prepare home defense against the German invasion that be expect daily. It be not long before the Germans launch the long-expected air attack against Britain , much of it from airfield establish conveniently in France and Belgium. The first heavy attack occur on July 10 and the culminating date be Sept. 15 , when it be anyone 's bet whether Britain 's air force could stave off defeat from the air. As World War II progress Churchill 's obvious diplomatic tactic be to seek to convince the United States that it interest demand that it join Britain in the war. Toward this end Churchill be greatly aid by the presence in the White House of President Roosevelt , a cultivate , European-minded statesman and a strong Anglophile. Early in August , 1941 , Churchill and President Roosevelt meet for the first time a they confer on warship of their respective country in Placentia Bay , Nfld. It be at this conference that swiftly and informally , they draw up the famous Atlantic Charter , in which they state that they `` deem it right to make known certain common principle in the national policy of their respective country on which they base their hope for a good future for the world. '' The war be rapidly become global. The ebb and flow of Britain 's fortune in the battle of Libya , the British failure in Greece and her victory in Ethiopia , together with the many problem of the home front , engage Churchill 's attention in 1941. When the Japanese attack at Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7 , 1941 , insure the entrance of the United States on Britain 's side , Churchill 's relief be great. Of his feeling at that moment he write at a late date : `` Being saturate and satiate with emotion and sensation , I go to bed and sleep the sleep of the save and thankful. '' Christmas , 1941 , find Churchill in Washington for the first of several American wartime conferences. Returning home , Churchill find a brisk political storm brewing. British revers in the Western Desert , the loss of the battleship Prince of Wales and the battle cruiser Repulse , the other war event have stir some parliamentary opposition to the Prime Minister. On Jan. 27 , 1942 , a three-day secret debate begin in the House of Commons. The House finally vote confidence in the Government by 461 to 1. President Roosevelt send Churchill his congratulations. `` It be fun to be in the same decade with you , '' the President cabled. In March of 1942 Churchill fly to Moscow for the first of several conference with Stalin. In January , 1943 , the President and the Prime Minister meet near Casablanca , French Morocco , where Roosevelt enunciate a policy of `` unconditional '' surrender for Germany. Churchill 's enthusiasm for this policy be somewhat less than that of Roosevelt , but he adhere rigidly to that policy. In August of the same year , aid to China be a major topic discuss by the two statesman at Quebec. In Cairo , in November , the two meet with Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek of China to clarify Allied war aim in the Pacific. Later in the same month , Prime Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt meet at Teheran , Iran , with Premier Stalin. Of all the wartime meeting of the Allied leader , none become so controversial a the meeting of Churchill , Roosevelt and Stalin at Yalta , in the Crimea , in February , 1945. The Prime Minister , whose principal concern be to obtain Polish frontier satisfactory to Britain , cannily avoid involve himself in anything more than the most perfunctory assent to the agreement make between President Roosevelt and Stalin regard the Soviet position in the Far East after Japan 's defeat. These agreement be to plague Roosevelt 's Democratic party after the war. Defeated in 1945 Election During the remainder of the war in Europe , Churchill be tenacious , but not always successful , in have his strategic conception followed. But on the frequent occasion when the counsel of General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Allied commander , prevailed. Prime Minister Churchill support the general 's plan with all his strength. On May 7 , 1945 , the Prime Minister proclaim the end of European hostility in a broadcast to the British people. A few week later his coalition Government break up. In the election the Tories be defeated. In an election in February of 1950 , the Labor Government skin through with a majority of only six. Then Churchill force an election and he and his Conservative party be return to power in October , 1951 , but with a Commons majority of only sixteen. On April 24 , 1953 , the Knighthood of the Order of the Garter be confer on the British statesman by Queen Elizabeth II and on June 2 Sir Winston have the satisfaction of occupy the Prime Minister 's place in Westminster Abbey when the young Queen be crowned. Long sick of war and it horror , Sir Winston would have like to crown his career with the creation of a structure for durable and lasting world peace. On March 5 , 1953 , he tell the Commons that the time be ripe for a conference of the major power , include the Soviet Union , to seek pacific solution for their problems. On June 27 the Prime Minister , then in his seventy-ninth year , suffer a slight paralytic stroke and be absent from his desk until Aug. 19. For some time he have want a conference with the United States and France on way and mean of negotiate a peaceful settlement between the Soviet Union and the West. On Dec. 2 , 1953 , Sir Winston fly to Bermuda and confer with General Eisenhower , by then President of the United States , and Joseph Laniel , Premier of France. The result of the meeting fell considerably short of Sir Winston 's hopes. On April 27 , 1954 , a conference of the big power , include Communist China , open at Geneva. Hoping to draw the United States into a common front with Britain , Sir Winston and Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden fly to Washington on June 24 to confer with President Eisenhower and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles concern the problem come up at Geneva. On April 1 , 1955 , Queen Elizabeth and a group of the most distinguished person of the realm be the guest of Sir Winston at 10 Downing Street. The following day Sir Winston call upon the Queen at Buckingham Palace and receive her permission to submit his resignation a Prime Minister. He do so. In retirement , Sir Winston frequently visit the French Riviera and Monte-Carlo. On one visit to the Riviera , in 1958 , he be stricken with pneumonia and pleurisy. On his recovery he return to England. In 1962 , he fell while get out of bed in Monte Carlo and fracture his left thigh. Although hospitalize in England for almost two month , the 87-year-old statesman flash the V-for-victory sign a he return to his home in late August. In the opinion of the most competent critic , no statesman or military figure of the first half of the 20th century write good prose than do Winston Churchill. The 1953 Nobel Prize for Literature be award to him. He be the sixth Briton to be thus honored. When Churchill 's historical narrative style be at it best , it be not surpass by write of it kind anywhere. Sir Winston write about 20 book and his speech and other paper be collect into other volumes. His first book , `` The Story of the Malakand Field Force , '' be publish in 1898 and recount his Army adventure in India. Other book , publish in the early Nineteen Hundreds , tell of his experience in war in Egypt and South Africa. `` The River War , '' an account of the 1898 reconquest of the Egyptian Sudan , mark Churchill a a writer of promise. His two-volume biography of his father , Lord Randolph Churchill , be publish in 1906 and win critical praise. In 1923 Mr. Churchill begin a four-volume series , `` The World Crisis , '' in which he tell the story of Europe during and immediately after World War I. One of these book , `` The Unknown War , '' tell the story of the vast , bloody and complicated battle on the Eastern Front. Critics have say this book show the author at his best a a student of military strategy and a writer of vivid and compelling prose. The first volume of Churchill 's study of his distinguished ancestor , the first Duke of Marlborough , be publish in 1933. In these book Churchill defend Marlborough against charge of political treachery and peculation , and show the great commander against the background of the morality of his time. Novel Was Fevered Churchill write one novel , `` Savrola , a Tale of the Revolution in Laurania , '' publish in 1900. It be a fevered affair in which a democratic young hero with a marked resemblance to the Winston Churchill of that day grapple with the force of reaction in a mythical European kingdom. In late year Churchill earnestly urge his friend not to read it. `` Savrola '' be reprint in 1956 and in New York be make into a television drama in which Sara Churchill , Sir Winston 's actress-daughter , play a part. For many year Sir Winston have find time to work on an extensive study of the British and other English-speaking peoples. The first volume of this study appear in 1956 and be follow by three other volumes. Before Sir Winston 's World War II recollection appear in book form in six volume , Life magazine and The New York Times published selection from these books. The first of these article appear in The Times for April 16 , 1948 , and the last in the issue for Nov. 26 , 1953. Churchill be widely know a an enthusiastic amateur painter. A need for distraction after he be drop from the British Cabinet in 1915 and before he go to the French front a an infantry officer cause him to take up water colors. He soon switch to oils. Because of his world fame , many of Churchill 's painting bring good prices. Sometimes he give one to be sell for some charitable purpose. By 1950 , 300 of his painting be in his home at Chartwell. Sir Winston 's touch on canvas be soft than that of Hitler , who also have seek relaxation at the easel. Hitler , who have once strive to be an architect , tend to hold to a hard drawn line. Sir Winston like the soft touch of the French impressionists. For several year Sir Winston 's painting be reproduce a Christmas card .