December 10 , 1965 OBITUARY Branch Rickey , 83 , Dies in Missouri By UNITED PRESS INTERNATIONAL COLUMBIA , Mo. Dec. 9 -- Branch Rickey , a dominant figure in baseball for half a century , die tonight in Boone County Memorial Hospital at the age of 83. He break the color barrier in the major league and develop the farm system. Mr. Rickey have remain unconscious in the hospital since he collapse with a heart attack the night of Nov. 13 while be induct into the Missouri Sports Hall of Fame. Mr. Rickey , who develop baseball dynasty with the St. Louis Cardinals and Brooklyn Dodgers , have leave a St. Louis hospital Nov. 13 so he could attend the Missouri-Oklahoma football game and make his acceptance speech at the Sports Hall of Fame banquet that night. Collapsed During Speech He be schedule to go back to the hospital after the ceremonies. But he collapse shortly after he have start to talk. `` I do n't believe I 'm go to be able to speak any long , '' Mr. Rickey say a he slump over before the stunned audience. The cigar chomp Mr. Rickey , who throughout his career decline to attend Sunday baseball game because of a promise to his mother and who be seldom know to say anything strong than his famous `` Judas Priest , '' remain in the hospital 's intensive-care ward until his death , continuously receive oxygen. Mr. Rickey 's wife , Mrs. Jane Moulton Rickey , and a daughter , Mrs. Stephen S. Adams Jr. of St. Louis , be with him when he died. He leave four other daughter , Mrs. John Eckler of Columbus , Ohio ; Mrs. Robert Jones of Elmira , N.Y. ; Mrs. Edward Jakle of Los Altos , Calif. , and Mrs. Lindsay Wolfe of Swarthmore Pa. Also among his survivor be many grandchild and several great-grandchildren. A son , Branch Jr. , die several year ago. Mr. Rickey 's body be take to the Lupton Chapel in St. Louis. A Teller of Folksy Tales Branch Rickey be an owlish , rumpled man who give flowery speech in answer to simple questions. He have , by his own count , more than a thousand folksy story to illustrate his point and most of these have be tell to him by his mother. One of them sum up his philosophy of life : `` My father be 86 when he died. As an old man he be still plant peach and apple tree on our farm near Portsmouth , Ohio. When I ask who would take in the fruit he say , 'That 's not important. I just want to live every day a if I be go to live forever. ' '' Jackie Robinson , pick to become the first Negro in the major league , recall his first meeting with Mr. Rickey : `` The hand hold mine be hard , gnarl , with the often broken finger of an ex-baseball catcher. His hair be thick , deep brown. Heavy , bushy eyebrow flap like twin crow from side to side a he talked. '' This description be include in a Reader 's Digest article by Mr. Robinson in 1961. He write of Mr. Rickey : `` He be take off his coat , roll up his sleeves. His mobile face have suddenly take on a droll , cunning look. `` 'Let 's say I 'm a hotel clerk. You come in with the rest of your team. I look up from the register and snarl , `` We do n't let nigger sleep here. '' What do you do then ? ' `` Again , before I could answer , the smudgy cigar shot toward my chin , and he be an umpire wave his huge fist too close under my nose , banish me from the game. As a race-baiting fan he hurl pop bottle and insults. When the performance be over his shirt be soggy with sweat , his hair matted. `` His curtain line explain everything. It be the most dramatic I have ever hear , before or since : `` 'Jackie , this talk of organize a Negro team in Brooklyn be only a cover-up for my real plans. I want you to be the first Negro player in the major leagues. I 've be try to give you some idea of the kind of punishment you 'll have to absorb. Can you take it ? ' '' Mr. Rickey bring the young Robinson to Montreal in the International League in 1946 and then to the Dodgers the follow season , open the way for numerous Negro star who follow him into the major leagues. Many Roles in Career Mr. Rickey have be a farm boy , teacher , college athletic director , college trustee , college board member , prohibitionist , ballplayer , manager , general manager , club president , part owner and even president of a baseball league. The sport be indebted to him for the `` knothole gang '' idea , which help promote the interest of youngster in baseball. With this movement he develop the fan who would in the future pay the salary of the players. Blackboard talk , slide pit , play develop exclusively to catch runner off base , these be innovation by Mr. Rickey. Mr. Rickey , who be never know to play , direct or attend a ball game on Sunday , come from a devout Methodist family. In his late year he be an inveterate cigar smoker , but he never drink or use profane language. He have a reputation a a lay preacher and sometimes speak at religious meetings. Notable player whose development be make possible by Mr. Rickey , or with whose success he be associate , include the Dean brother , Dizzy and Paul , whose place in St. Louis baseball will long be remember , and Joe Medwick , a star of the `` Gas House Gang '' era. Mr. Rickey , who be know a the `` master trader '' of his time , use shrewd judgment in trade many top star , often when they have pass their peak a performer but could still draw a high price. His most famous deal be probably the sale of Dizzy Dean to the Chicago Cubs in 1937. In exchange for the once-great pitcher who be suffer from a sore arm , he obtain the pitcher Curt Davis and Clyde Shoun in addition to a sum report to have be $ 185,000. He even trade the incomparable Rogers Hornsby , who have be the playing manager of the Cardinals. Mr. Rickey always look for what he call the `` young , hungry player with the basic attribute of youth and speed plus strength of arm. '' The result be a Rickey dynasty of great young player who repeatedly win pennant for the Cardinals and later the Dodgers. Born on Ohio Farm Branch Wesley Rickey be bear on a farm at Stockdale , Ohio , on Dec. 20 , 1881 , the second of three son , to Jacob Franklin and Emily Rickey , who be know for their piety. After receive an elementary school education , Mr. Rickey become a country school teacher. He teach himself Latin , high mathematics and other subject , and be able to enter Ohio Wesleyan University. Later he obtain a law degree from the University of Michigan. The young Rickey earn his way through Ohio Wesleyan by play both baseball and football. His baseball position be always catcher , which he go on to play in his major-league career. As a big-league player , Mr. Rickey do not amount to much. In a game against Washington in 1907 , when he be catch for New York , there be 13 steal base charge against him. In 11 game he be charge with nine errors. Work Brought on Illness He enter the big league in 1903 with the Cincinnati Reds , but be release because of his scruple against play on Sundays. He return the next year from Dallas to the St. Louis Browns , by way of the Chicago White Sox. Meanwhile , he receive an A.B. degree at Ohio Wesleyan in 1905 , the year in which he marry Jane Moulton , after have propose `` more than a hundred time , '' a he later recounted. In the off-season of 1908 , he tour a a prohibition advocate. The same year he enter the University of Michigan , where he serve a baseball coach while get his law degree. The strain of work , play and study have it effect , and a touch of tuberculosis send him to Saranac Lake , N.Y. His health regain , Mr. Rickey go to Boise , Idaho , to practice law. However , in 1913 , he accept the invitation of Robert Lee Hedges , president of the St. Louis Browns , to become a scout for the club. Mr. Rickey later become club secretary and then field manager. He have Burt Shotton manage the club on Sundays. He be vice president and general manager by 1917 , when he be hire a president of the poverty-stricken St. Louis Cardinals. Under the term of his contract , he be the highest-paid executive in baseball. After a hitch a a major in the Chemical Warfare Service , he return to the Cardinals in 1918. Mr. Rickey assume the field management and start the `` farm '' idea. It have it origin in 1919 , when the Cardinals buy an 18 per cent interest in the Houston club of the Texas League. In 1920 Sam Breadon replace Mr. Rickey a president , but Mr. Rickey continue to develop his chain-store idea until at one time he control the player of two minor league and have interest in , or agreement with , a number of others. Violently oppose to the Rickey idea from the outset , Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis , the commissioner of baseball , shake the Cardinal farm structure with a decree that limit the club to only one affiliation in each minor league. The reign of Mr. Rickey a manager of the Cardinals end in 1925 , when Mr. Breadon replace him with Rogers Hornsby. Mr. Rickey be retain a vice president and business manager. This arrangement continue until 1942 when , after the Cardinals have win the World Series , report of a rift between the executive bring an announcement by Mr. Breadon that Mr. Rickey 's contract would not be renewed. Mr. Rickey have take the Cardinals when the club be $ 175,000 in debt and , by spend only enough for a railroad ticket at time , have develop player who bring the club the National League pennant in 1926 , 1928 , 1930 , 1931 , 1934 and 1942 , along with World Series victory in four of those years. Chosen to Head Dodgers Shortly after leave the Cardinals , Mr. Rickey be engage a president of the Dodgers. A storm ensue in Brooklyn when Mr. Rickey sell Dolph Camilli and Joe Medwick , Dodger favorites. It do not diminish when there be recurrent report of friction between him and his club manager , Leo Durocher. He rehired Durocher a his manager shortly before spring training of 1948 , thus end much wild speculation on that score. But he draw more resentment from the fan when he trade the beloved Dixie Walker to Pittsburgh and later , when the Dodgers be in spring training , he trade Eddie Stanky , the Dodgers ' sparkplug second baseman , to Boston. Mr. Rickey 's big baseball deal after come to Brooklyn be the sale of Kirby Higbe and others to Frank McKinney , the new president and part owner of the Pirates. It be reveal long after the deal be make that Mr. McKinney have part with almost $ 300,000 in the deal. In November , 1950 , Mr. Rickey sign a five-year contract a executive vice president and general manager of the Pirates. When he leave Brooklyn , he be report to have sell his Dodgers stock for $ 1,000,000. Although he resign a chairman in 1959 , his rebuild program pay off in 1960. The Pirates , under field manager Danny Murtaugh , win the National League pennant and go on to take the World Series from the New York Yankees. After leave the Pirates , Mr. Rickey be appoint president of the newly form Continental League. An hour after his appointment , he be conduct the league 's first meeting. The eight team constitute the league be New York , Buffalo , Toronto , Minneapolis-St. Paul , Houston , Dallas-Fort Worth , Atlanta and Denver. For nearly two year , it appear that Mr. Rickey 's `` dream '' would be realize , but he be never able to get the league out of the dugout. The final blow be strike by the two exist major leagues. At the end of 1960 , the American League issue franchise to the Los Angeles ( now the California ) Angels and a new Washington Senator club ( the old one move and become the Minnesota Twins ) , while the National League make plan to become a 10-team league in 1962 with the admission of the New York Mets and the Houston Colt 45s ( now the Astros ) . Mr. Rickey return to the Cardinals late in 1962 a a `` consultant on player personnel. '' He hold that position for two year , leave after a shake-up of the club 's executives. The aging , ail Mr. Rickey be critical of Manager Johnny Keane and other Cardinal executives. The Rickey influence work revolution in baseball -- notably his develop the farm system and break the color barrier -- that profoundly change the game. Frick Pays Tribute Ford Frick , a baseball 's retiring commissioner , say last night that Mr. Rickey `` be a man of great dedication and one whose contribution to baseball would be difficult to over-estimate. '' The president of the National League , Warren C. Giles , say , `` No one in the game make a great contribution to baseball than Branch Rickey. '' Jackie Robinson , who be sign by Mr. Rickey to break baseball 's barrier against Negro player , say `` the passing of Mr. Rickey be like lose a father. '' He say his death be `` a great loss not only to baseball but to America. '' Casey Stengel , who retire a manager of the New York Mets last September , describe Mr. Rickey a `` a terrific man in baseball , an outstanding builder. '' He join numerous other baseball leader in praise Mr. Rickey for develop baseball 's farm system and break the color barrier .