June 14 , 1965 OBITUARY Martin Buber , 87 , Dies in Israel ; Renowned Jewish Philosopher Special to The New York Times JERUSALEM ( Israeli Sector ) June 13 -- Prof. Martin Buber , the renowned Jewish philosopher and educator , die here today. He be 87 year old. Professor Buber 's health have be fail since he underwent surgery for a broken leg last April. Since his release from the hospital last month he have be confine to bed at his home in the residential quarter of Talbeih. One of the great thinker of this century , Dr. Buber have serve a a professor at the Hebrew University since his arrival in Palestine in 1938 from his native Austria. His translation of the Old Testament into German , begin with the late Franz Rosenzweig , be consider by many the best in existence. Since 1951 , when he retire from teaching , he have hold the title of professor emeritus of social philosophy at the university. A few week ago he receive the Freedom of Jerusalem Award , the last of many honor accord him. Several year ago he be nominate for the Nobel Prize by the late Dag Hammarskjold who rarely fail to visit Dr. Buber when his duty a Secretary General of the United Nations bring him to Jerusalem. When Dr. Buber die this morning , President Zalman Shazar immediately go to the philosopher 's home to present his condolences. Press tribute will not come until tomorrow but the lead item on all the Government-controlled radio and news program be the death of Professor Buber. His leading disciple and close friend and associate , Prof. Shemuel Hugo Bergman , say that with Dr. Buber 's death , `` humanity have lose one of it great son , Jewry have lose it great son and Israel have lose her living conscience. '' Professor Buber be survive by two child and several grandchildren. Views Affected Christianity Martin Buber be a religious philosopher whose view on human and divine relationship have a fertilizing effect on the Christian world. His philosophy of personalism be an amalgam of religious mysticism , Old Testament inspiration , modern psychology and earthy common sense. It contend that man could achieve an intimate relationship with God through an intimate interrelationship with his fellow man , and that each man 's relationship with God and a fellow man be distinct. He strive for a `` a dialogue , '' between man and God with man a `` I '' and God a `` Thou. '' This concept be develop in his major philosophical work , `` I and Thou. '' Professor Buber 's view influence Protestant theologians. He impress Reinhold Niebuhr a `` the great living Jewish philosopher , '' and he be an inspiration in Dr. Niebuhr 's thinking as well a in that of Paul Tillich , another lead Protestant theologian. By his emphasis on dialogue , Professor Buber be regard a a pioneer bridge builder between Judaism and Christianity. His view accent the non-formal aspect of religion a oppose to theological systems. Saw Religion a Experience Religion for Professor Buber be experience , not dogma. He doubt that man be make to conform with canon law , or with elaborately work out plan for existence. On the contrary , Professor Buber 's credo stress individual responsibility. A story that be tell to illustrate this point concern an age pious man , Rabbi Susya , who become fearful a death draw near. His friend chide him , `` What ! Are you afraid that you 'll be reproach that you be n't Moses ? '' `` No , '' the rabbi reply , `` that I be not Susya. '' The responsibility to be oneself mean , in Professor Buber 's view , that there be no rigid fate ; that man can improve his chance for happiness. In fact , accord to Professor Buber , man have an obligation to achieve an identity by refuse to abdicate his will before the monolithic power of party , corporation or state. Professor Buber point to the duality of thing -- love and justice , freedom and order , good and evil : but he do not suggest a happy middle way between them. Contraries Held Inseparable `` According to the logical conception of truth , '' he once explain , `` only one of two contrary can be true , but in the reality of life a one live it they be inseparable. `` I have occasionally describe my standpoint to my friend a the 'narrow ridge. ' I want by this to express that I do not rest on the broad upland of a system that include a series of sure statement about the absolute , but on a narrow , rocky ridge between the gulf , where there be only the certainty of meet what remain undisclosed. '' Professor Buber suggest two form of relationship for man -- an I-It relationship and an I- Thou. The first be impersonal and imperfect. An example of the I-It relationship would be where one person treat another a a machine , or when lover find only a projection of themselves in each other. In religious matter , the I-It be express when man abstract God , or regard Him a out of reach , or build theological system in which God be remote , or considers God too vast. Professor Buber , however , do not deny that God be the great mystery of the Old Testament , but he insist that He be also personal. Paradox of God Noted `` Of course , '' Professor Buber write , `` He [ God ] be the Mysterium Tremendum that appear and overthrow , but He be also the mystery of the self-evident , nearer to me than my I. '' The I-Thou of Professor Buber 's thinking stand for the kind of dialogue -- love or even hate -- in which two person face and accept each other a truly human. There be in such a dialogue , he argue , a fusion of choosing and be choose , of action and reaction , that engage man 's high qualities. I-Thou meeting , he explain , be `` strange , lyric and dramatic episode , seductive and magical , but tear u away to dangerous extremes. . .shattering security. '' The I-Thou relationship , because it do away with pretension , permit man to meet with himself , Professor Buber said. And , ultimately , it bring man into contact with God , whom Professor Buber call the `` Eternal Thou. '' This supreme confrontation have be describe by Prof. Maurice S. Friedman of Sarah Lawrence College , Bronxville , N.Y. , one of the lead interpreter of Buberism. It be `` perhaps best understood , '' Dr. Freidman write in his `` Martin Buber , the Life of Dialogue , '' `` from the nature of the demand which one person make on another if the two of them really meet. If you be to meet me , you must become a much of a person a I am. In order to remain open to God [ man ] must change his whole being. '' Ideal Social Unit Like Kibbutz Believing that man 's earthly chore be to realize his distinctiveness through the dialogue process , Professor Buber oppose both rigid individualism and collectivism. His social ideal be a small community unit somewhat like the kibbutz of rural Israel. Professor Buber also look at Scripture in a special way. The Bible , in his view , be neither an infallible guide to conduct nor a mere collection of legend , but a dialogue between Israel a Thou and God a I. Because of this interpretation and because Professor Buber be casual in his observance of Talmudic law , many Orthodox rabbi look upon him a a heretic. As for Reform Jews , some of them also criticize Professor Buber because they think he have make too much of the metaphysical Hasidic sect , from which he draw many of his ideas. Many Jews also be dismay by the application that Professor Buber make of his belief in call for an improvement of Arab-Israeli relations. This attitude rest on Professor Buber 's assertion that `` the love of God be unreal unless it be crown with love for one 's fellow men. '' He Was Small and Bearded Professor Buber be a short plump man with a large paunch. He be bald with a fringe of hair that hang down to meet the luxurious growth of mustache and beard that conceal the low part of his face. He live in an old Arab stone house with red tile roof and garden in the section of Jerusalem that before Israel 's independence be the quarter of the wealthy Arab merchants. Dr. Buber 's house have belong to an Arab Christian family who leave Jerusalem shortly before the war break out in 1948. He live simply in the house. His study and bedroom be on the ground floor. The furniture be old and dark and heavy and look a if it have be bring from Vienna. The house be fill with books. He live with his granddaughter , Barbara Goldschmitt , who serve a his housekeeper. His secretary be often there but do not live in the house. For several year Dr. Buber have not be active outside his home because of periodic spell of illness and advance age. But he love to have visitor and to talk endlessly. When a caller phone he would hear a click and then a quick sharp one word response : `` Buber. '' Received in Shirt Sleeves When receive visitor in his study , Dr. Buber would be without tie , in shirt sleeve and slipper behind his desk. He do not like general question and frequently prompt his questioner with `` be specific. '' He get angry with anyone who try to ask him personal anecdotal question , insist that his personal life be just that. In conversation he would rest his interlocked finger on his paunch and then move them to his forehead a he consider his response. He weight every word and when he finally answer it would be in a very slow low voice that seem ting with melancholy. Professor Buber give up lecturing at the Hebrew University in 1951 , when he end his active life a an educator. However it be recall that some of his lecture on philosophy be reminiscent of the atmosphere that might have distinguish the Socratic dialogues. On other occasion , while lecture , he show the zeal and earnestness , even veneration , with which Hasidic student be say to follow the word and teaching of their rabbi. On his 85th birthday in 1963 , about 300 student of the university stag a torchlight parade to the philosopher 's house to pay homage to him. They swarm into his garden and in the darkness illuminate by the flame he walk out onto his veranda , his face wreathe in smile , deeply appreciative of the gesture. The student sing to him and he talk briefly to them a they listen in silence , and then they all go into his house for cooky and soft drinks. Six month later , Professor Buber fly to Amsterdam to accept one of Europe 's high prize , the $ 28,000 Erasmus Award , present to person who have contribute to the spiritual unity of Europe. Previous winner include Karl Jaspers , the philosopher , and Marc Chagall , the painter. Born in Vienna in 1878 Martin Buber be bear in Vienna Feb. 8 , 1878 , of middle-class parent who be divorce when he be 3 year old. He spend much of his childhood in Lemberg , Galicia , [ now Lvov , Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic ] with his grandfather Salomon Buber , a well-known Hebrew scholar. While study the Talmud with his grandfather , he also read poetry and novel and occasionally visit neighboring town where he meet Hasidic rabbi -- holy men who could lead a community unite by it love of God and it veneration for a wise man. When he be 13 he begin a drift away from formal Judaism. This be symbolize by his offer a bar mitzvah synagogue talk on Schiller , the dramatist , rather than on a scriptural subject. Later he give up the daily prayer ritual , but not without misgiving that almost lead him to suicide because of what he say later be `` a mysterious and overwhelming compulsion '' to visualize the `` limiting brink of time -- or it limitlessness. '' He be rescue , he say , by read Immanuel Kant and perceiving , a a result , `` an eternal far remove from the finite and the infinite. '' He enter the University of Vienna at 17 and study philosophy and the history of art there and at the Universities of Berlin , Zurich and Leipzig. He receive a Ph. D. from Vienna in 1904 , but he do not use the title. It be at the University of Leipzig , in 1900 , that the scholar be catch up by Theodor Herzl 's Zionism , in which he find not only a political movement that suit him but also a religious idea that help to resolve his spiritual confusion. Edited Zionist Journal In 1901 he come editor of Die Welt , the Zionist journal , and the following year he help to find Judischer Verlag , a Jewish publishing house. One of the writer for Die Welt be Paula Winkler , a brilliant , aristocratic Roman Catholic. She subsequently be marry to Professor Buber , convert to Judaism , and remain at his side until her death in 1958. In her own right , Mrs. Buber be a novelist under the name Georg Munk. Meanwhile , there be a split in Zionism. Professor Buber be one of those who believe that a spiritual revival be more urgent than political nationhood. Mr. Herzl favor a political solution. In the course of the division , Professor Buber drop out of active Zionism and retire into solitude for five years. He pass that time in remote Jewish village in what be then Galicia ( now Poland ) living among the Hasidim and study their literature and their zaddickim , or holy men. Joy Impressed Him At the time , this grass-roots Judaism be consider a border on the occult , but Professor Buber find in Hasidism an experience of direct communion with the Divine. He be also impress by the joy -- the ecstatic dance and the wordless song -- with which they worshipped. The Hasidic folklore , in it simplicity , be profound , he believed. Returning from his retreat among the Hasidim , Professor Buber be active in Jewish journalism , edit from 1916 to 1924 Der Jude , a periodical of the German Jews. From 1926 to 1930 , in concert with a Catholic and a Protestant , he edit the journal , Die Kreatur. At the same time he be professor of comparative religion at the University of Frankfurt , from 1923 to 1933. When the Nazis exclude Jewish student from institution of high learning in 1933 , Professor Buber help to set up adult education class for them. Dr. Buber be dismiss from his professorship. He speak out , however , once lecture on `` The Power of the Spirit '' in Berlin , although he know that 200 SS ( elite guard ) men be in the audience. Utterly silence in 1938 , he go to Palestine , where he be professor of social philosophy at the Hebrew University until his retirement in 1951. Professor Buber be a prodigious writer. More than 700 book and paper by him be list in one `` select '' bibliography. Many of them deal with aspect of the I-Thou philosophy. He be also a translator of renown. In Israel , Professor Buber be not a conformist. For example , he oppose the execution of Adolf Eichmann , the Nazi put to death by Israel for crime against the Jews. `` For such crime , '' he say at the time , `` there be no penalty. '' He take the position that where the imagination can not envision a suitable penalty for such horrendous crime a Eichmann 's , a death penalty be meaningless. Professor Buber visit the United States in 1951. The lecture he deliver here be later publish a `` Eclipse of God '' and `` At the Turning. '' He receive the Universal Brotherhood award from the Union Theological Seminary and an honorary Doctor of Letters degree from the Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati .