April 28 , 1965 OBITUARY Edward R. Murrow , Broadcaster And Ex-Chief of U.S.I.A. , Dies BY THE NEW YORK TIMES Edward R. Murrow , whose independence and incisive reporting bring heighten journalistic stature to radio and television , die yesterday at his home in Pawling , N. Y. , at the age of 57. The former head of the United States Information Agency have be battle cancer since October , 1963. He have be in and out of the hospital ever since , and death come three week after he be discharge from New York Hospital for the last time. The ever-present cigarette ( he smoke 60 to 70 a day ) , the matter-of-fact baritone voice and the high-domed , worried , lopsided face be the trademark of the radio reporter who become internationally famous during World War II with broadcast that start , `` This. . .is London. '' Later , on television , his series of news documentary , `` See It Now , '' on the Columbia Broadcasting System from 1951 to 1958 , set the standard for all television documentary on all networks. President Johnson , on learning of Mr. Murrow 's death , say that all Americans `` feel a sense of loss in the death of Edward R. Murrow. '' He be , the President say , a `` gallant fighter '' who have `` dedicate his life a a newsman and a a public official to the unrelenting search for truth. '' He be survive by his widow , the former Janet Huntington Brewster ; a son , Charles Casey Murrow , a freshman at Yale University ; and two brother , L. V. Murrow of Washington and Dewey Murrow of Spokane , Wash. A funeral service will be hold on Friday at 2 P.M. at St. James Episcopal Church , 865 Madison Avenue , between 71st and 72d Streets. Burial be to be announced. In many year of receive honor and tribute , the most recent be confer on Mr. Murrow on March 5 , 1965 , by Queen Elizabeth II , who name him an Honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire. On September , 14 , 1964 , President Johnson award him the Medal of Freedom , the high civilian honor a President can confer on an American citizen. Mr. Murrow 's career with the Columbia Broadcasting Company span 25 years. It end in January , 1961 , when President Kennedy name him head of the United States Information Agency. In October , 1963 , a malignant tumor make the removal of his left lung necessary , and three month later he resign a head of the agency. Last November , Mr. Murrow again underwent surgery. Brought Controversy Into Homes Mr. Murrow achieve international distinction in broadcasting , first a a radio correspondent reporting from London in World War II and then a a pioneer television journalist open the home screen to the stimulus of controversy. No other figure in broadcast news leave such a strong stamp on both media. In an industry often give to rule by committee , Mr. Murrow be always recognize a an individual , whether in the front line of the war , in the executive conference of a network or , in what he enjoy most , in plan his next story. His independence be reflect in do what he think have to be do on the air and worrying later about the repercussion among sponsor , viewer and individual stations. The fruit of his determination be share today by newsman at all network ; they enjoy a freedom and latitude not yet win by others work in the medium. Mr. Murrow a a realist about fame. He could not walk a block in New York without pedestrian turn for a look or someone try to strike up a conversation. But in the context of television he know the value of adulation. `` It can get a lot of thing do , '' he once remarked. That be his concern. In the last war , Mr. Murrow convey the fact with a compelling precision. But he go beyond the reporting of the facts. By describe what he saw in visual detail , he seek to convey the mood and feeling of war. Had a London street just be bomb out ? The young correspondent be soon there in helmet , gray flannel trouser and sport coat , quietly describe everything he saw against the urgent sound pattern of rescue operations. Or he would be in a plane on a combat mission , broadcast live on the return leg and describe the bombing he have watch a `` orchestrated hell. '' He fly 25 mission in the war , despite the opposition of top executive of the Columbia Broadcasting System in New York , who regard him a too valuable to be so regularly risked. In the endless German air raid on London , his office be bomb out three time but he escape injury. Mr. Murrow , never fevered or high-blown , have the gift of dramatize whatever he reported. He do so by understatement and by a calm , terse , highly descriptive radio style. Sometimes there be a sort of metallic poetry in his words. 'Blood on the Panes' In one memorable broadcast he say that a he `` walk home at 7 in the morning , the window in the West End be red with reflected fire , and the raindrop be like blood on the panes. '' For a dozen year , a radio 's high pay newscaster , he be know by voice alone to million of his countrymen. `` This. . .is London , '' be his matter-of-fact salutation , deliver in a baritone voice ting with an echo of doom. Later it be , `` This. . .is the news. '' Then television add to the distinctive voice an equally distinctive face , with high-doomed forehead and deep-set , serious eyes. Mr. Murrow 's casual television manner be superimpose on a quite obvious native tension. As the armchair interviewer on `` Person to Person , '' Mr. Murrow carry out a gentlemanly electronic invasion of the home of score of celebrity in the nineteen-fifties from Sophie Tucker through the evangelist Billy Graham. The darkly handsome Mr. Murrow , his brow knot and two finger hold his ever-present cigarette sit in the studio face a greatly magnified television image of his subject at home. He would make what one writer call `` urbane small talk '' with them , generously admire their child and perhaps inquire exactly where that handsome vase on the side table have be acquired. It be not momentous , but it be interesting. Series of Documentaries From 1951 to 1958 Mr. Murrow also do a series of news documentary under the title `` See It Now. '' In the 1953-54 season the telecast study the various aspect of the impact of the emotional and political phenomenon know a `` McCarthyism. '' Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , Republican of Wisconsin , be then conduct his crusade against allege Communist influence. Some regard it a a hard , honest search for subversive by a zealous patriot ; others saw it a a demagogic opportunism , the exploitation of a real issue for the purpose of gain political influence by intimidation. The debate over Senator McCarthy be supercharge with emotion and fervent belief. Since commercial television thrives by give little offense , the medium have give the matter gingerly treatment. Mr. Murrow and his long-time co-editor , Fred W. Friendly , break this pattern decisively on Tuesday evening , March 9 , 1954. Using film clip that show the Senator to no good advantage , the two men offer a provocative examination of the man and his methods. The program , many thought , have a devastating effect. `` McCarthyism '' do lose public force in succeed months. `` The timing be right and the instrument powerful , '' Mr. Murrow say of the telecast later. Decided to Go Ahead Jack Gould , television critic of The New York Times , write that `` Mr. Murrow decide to go ahead with the program at a time when passion in the broadcasting industry be run wild on the issue of Communist sympathizer and dupes. It be the autonomy of the Murrow- Friendly operation , often the source of internal controversy within C.B.S. , that get the vital show on the air. '' That autonomy be a singular thing in network broadcasting. It be base on Mr. Murrow 's immense prestige , initially gain when he become one of the first radio war correspondent and build a superb news staff for C.B.S. in Europe. Mr. Murrow , one writer say , `` have achieve a position at C.B.S. that be outside , and basically antithetical to , the corporate structure of authority '' and he thereby enjoy a large measure of `` freedom from authority of all kinds. '' He run his own news island within the network for many years. `` See It Now '' employ five full-time camera crew and they go anywhere in the world. A sponsor pay $ 57,000 a week for the show , but Mr. Murrow do not limit himself to that if he think a good show could be do for more. The network pay the difference. `` They come to me , the vice president , and say , 'Look , there 's so much go out of this spout and only so much come in. ' And I say , 'If that 's the way you want to do it , you 'd better get yourselves another boy , ' '' Mr. Murrow once said. Reduction in Authority When `` See It Now '' become `` C.B.S. Reports '' in 1958-59 , the network diffuse the responsibility for documentary telecast and Mr. Murrow 's authority be reduced. `` He be block , '' one friend write , `` in his rag desire to get the network he love onto new path of glory. '' On `` Small World , '' from the fall of 1958 to 1960 , he bring top world figure together by remote telecasting and moderate their continent-spanning discussions. But it be know that he be not very happy at the network then. Egbert Roscoe Murrow be bear on April 25 , 1908 , at Polecat Creek , N.C. , a `` mixture of English , Scotch , Irish and German '' descent. He change his first name to Edward in his second year at college. His father , a tenant farmer , move to Blanchard , Wash. , where his son grow up in the great Northwest and work on a survey gang in the timberland during summer vacations. In 1930 he graduate from Washington State College with a Phi Beta Kappa key. He become president of the National Student Federation that year , a job that pay $ 25 a week with a basement office in New York. In 1932 he become assistant director of the Institute of International Education. He meet Janet Huntington Brewster , a Mount Holyoke graduate , on a train that year and two year later they be marry in the bride 's hometown , Middletown , Conn. In 1935 , Mr. Murrow be employ by C.B.S. a director of talk and education. Part of his work be to address important group on the potential of radio a a medium of education. He be in New Orleans in 1937 , attend a meeting of the National Education Association , when he receive an unexpected call from headquarters ask if he would go to Europe. His answer -- '' yes '' -- be the decisive turn of his career. He later say that it have lead to his have `` a front row seat for some of the great news event of history. '' The young man , then 29 , become the network 's one-man staff in Europe , a pleasant life. He arrange cultural program and interview leaders. Though his office be in London , he travel extensively , typically visit Rome for a week to arrange a Vatican choir broadcast. As war begin to seem inevitable he hire William L. Shirer , a newspaper man , to cover the Continent. Both he and Mr. Shirer be arrange musical broadcast when Hitler march into Austria. Mr. Murrow fly to Berlin and charter a Lufthansa transport to Vienna for $ 1,000. He ride a streetcar into the city in time to watch the arrival of goose-stepping German troops. For 10 day he be allow to broadcast , and he describe the nation 's swift transition to a subject state. Life change drastically for the young newsman. At home , million hang on his and Shirer 's words. He Hired the Staff As news chief for C.B.S. in Europe he hire the men who be to become the network 's famous roster of war correspondent -- among them Eric Sevareid , Charles Collingwood , Howard K. Smith , Richard Hottelet , Cecil Brown and Larry LeSueur. `` I 'm hire reporter , not announcer , '' Mr. Murrow tell `` the shop '' ( a he usually call New York headquarters ) when C.B.S. executive complain that he be hire men who sound `` terrible '' on the air. Their on-the-scene report reach into farm and city home from New England to the Pacific state , bring the reality of war close. One former staff member recall the instruction Mr. Murrow give to his newsmen. The reporter must never sound excite even if bomb be fall outside , Mr. Morrow said. Rather , the reporter should imagine that he have just return to his hometown and that the local editor have ask him to dinner with , for example , a banker and a professor. `` After dinner , '' Mr. Murrow counsel , `` your host asks you 'Well , what be it like ? ' As you talk , the maid be pass the coffee and her boyfriend , a truck driver , be wait for her in the kitchen and listening. You be suppose to describe thing in term that make sense to the truck driver without insult the intelligence of the professor. '' Mr. Murrow 's wartime broadcast from Britain , North Africa and finally the Continent grip listener by their firm , spare authority ; nicely time pause ; and Mr. Murrow 's calm , grave delivery. One observer write that his voice always `` convey the impression that he know the worst. '' He be the first allied correspondent inside the Nazi concentration camp at Buchenwald. Near 300 body , he saw a mound of men 's , woman 's and child 's shoes. `` I regard that broadcast a a failure , '' he said. `` I could have describe three pair of those shoe -- but hundred of them ! I couldn't. The tragedy of it simply overwhelm me. '' Returning to the United States in 1946 after nine year overseas , he become a vice president of C.B.S. in news operations. He soon find executive task -- in and out basket , memo , conference and the rest -- wearisome. He be away from the microphone for 18 months. `` I want to be a reporter again because I need the dignity and satisfaction of be a reporter , '' he said. On Sept. 29 , the former war correspondent go on the air with his even radio report , `` Edward R. Murrow With the News. '' It be carry by 125 network station to an audience of several million people nightly except weekend for 13 years. Unlike most news commentator , Mr. Murrow do not allow his sponsor to break into the news with a middle commercial. When he have finish give the news and do what he call the `` end piece '' -- the graceful essay that cause him to be regard a `` the social philosopher of radio correspondent '' -- the closing commercial would be read. To hold the audience , Mr. Murrow would then come back with a brief `` Word for Today , '' usually a quotation appropriate to the news that have go before. His sign-off on both radio and television be a crisp `` Good night , and good luck. '' By 1949 Mr. Murrow be earn $ 112,000 a year , which jump to about $ 240,000 when he become the only major radio news personality to make a full successful switch to television. `` Hear It Now , '' the radio historical documentary series he start in 1948 , also make the transition to television , become `` See It Now , '' which run for seven years. Mr. Murrow and his wife occupy a 10th-floor apartment at 580 Park Avenue and a log house in Pawling , N.Y. , with acre thick with pheasant and duck , a trout stream and 9 hole of golf nearby. Off-camera Mr. Murrow be a convivial companion , give to a whisky sour at lunch , a relish of journalistic shoptalk and amusement and exasperation over the way of the television business. He appreciate humor if it have style and from year on the air instinctively lean to the short sentence. On hazardous mission overseas he be usually the cool passenger. If Mr. Murrow have one private concern about his professional life it be that he might slip into the role of the television news prima donna read the word of some anonymous rewrite man. An often chaotic schedule necessitate some measure of assistance in script preparation , but he felt it be his obligation to be in the field more often than not. His restlessness be always in evidence. Won Four Peabodys Mr. Murrow win the Peabody Award for excellence in broadcasting in 1943 , 1949 , 1951 and 1954. William S. Paley , then president of C.B.S. , call him `` a man fit for his time and task -- a student , a philosopher , at heart a poet of mankind and , therefore , a great reporter. '' Mr. Murrow become the nation 's chief tactician in the propaganda war when President Kennedy choose him a director of the United States Information Agency in January , 1961. The appointment end a 25-year association with C.B.S. -- he have be a member of it board of director from 1947 to 1956 -- and remove Mr. Murrow from the domestic broadcasting scene. His salary be $ 21,000 a year. From Washington , he direct the output of prodigious amount of news and propaganda , send the nation 's message in manifold form to all the nation of the earth. He emphasize plain speaking and straightforward reporting in 789 weekly hour of broadcasting and in the daily 10,000-word wireless file of news to newspaper in 100 city overseas. Professional Emphasis Mr. Murrow aim at put a more professional emphasis on Voice of America broadcast , with short , crisp reports. Because he believe that explain verity be more persuasive than sheer propaganda , he tell agency writer to report the fact in perspective , the bad as well a the good. He defend the agency 's policy of distribute news of racial flareups in this country , say such event could not be keep a secret and argue that there be no choice but to present the fact with balanced interpretation. `` We can not make good news out of bad practice , '' he say with typical pith when Senators criticize his staff for not depict thing a generally rosy. At one point , Murrow the reporter come into a singular conflict with Murrow the propagandist. Before join the agency , he have narrate the telecast `` Harvest of Shame , '' a chilling documentary on the exploitation of migrant farm laborer in the United States. The British Broadcasting Corporation buy the film from C.B.S. In an unusual intervention by a Government official , Mr. Murrow telephone the B.B.C. and ask that the film not be used. The B.B.C. announce that it have buy the film in good faith and add , with what must have seem stunning irrelevancy to Mr. Murrow , that it have `` the great faith in Murrow , '' mean the reporter. As the nation 's best-known chain smoker -- he smoke 60 to 70 cigarette a day -- Mr. Murrow once sit through a half hour televise round-table discussion without light a single cigarette. A reporter call the U.S.I.A. to see if he have quit smoking. `` His ashtray be still full , '' he be assure : Mr. Murrow be frequently mention in 1962 a a possible Democratic candidate for the United States Senate , but he say that he have never `` have a horizon of more than 90 days. '' In a Congressional hearing in 1962 , Senator Stuart Symington of Missouri call Mr. Murrow 's estimate of the cost for use of communication satellite by the U.S.I.A. `` obviously ridiculous. '' Mr. Murrow reply calmly , `` I respectfully suggest that the Senator 's estimate have no claim to any high validity. '' Leaders Offer Tributes Besides President Johnson 's tribute to Mr. Murrow , there be a number of others. Senator Jacob K. Javits , Republican of New York , call the Senate 's attention to Mr. Murrow 's passing , and note that he have lose a longtime friend who have `` a passion for truth. '' Adlai E. Stevenson , United States representative at the United Nations , say that `` few voice in my generation be good known. He bring into the home of million many of the great event of our time. Ed Murrow serve the cause of truth gallantly , even a he serve his fellow countryman and his government. '' Mayor Wagner say that Mr. Murrow have `` serve his nation and the cause of freedom throughout the world with brilliance and devotion. I be honor to count him among my friends. '' Mr. Paley , now chairman of the board of C.B.S. say that the newscaster be one of the nation 's `` most dedicated and eloquent spokesmen. '' The two other television network also issue statements. The National Broadcasting Company say `` his accomplishment a a reporter , his courageous devotion to duty so often at such great personal risk and his loyalty to his ideal can never be forget by his friend , his colleague and his associate and his competitors. '' Leonard H. Goldenson , president of American Broadcasting-Paramount Theaters , Inc. , state , `` The Murrow imprint on electronic journalism be indelible and will last as long a the medium itself. '' Britain Mourns a Friend Special to The New York Times LONDON , April 27 -- Edward R. Murrow 's death be mourn tonight in the country whose story he tell in her darkest hour. An official statement from 10 Downing Street call him `` a unique friend of this country. '' A spokesman for Prime Minister Harold Wilson issue a lengthy and laudatory comment in Mr. Wilson 's absence on a trip to Italy. `` Successive British government , '' the spokesman say , `` have reason to be grateful to him for his presentation of the nation 's story to those who find it difficult to understand that a tiny island could be so important to the future history of the world. '' Tonight , the British Broadcasting Corporation suspend it scheduled program for half an hour to do a special program on Mr. Murrow. It be arrange by the B.B.C. 's principal news commentator , Richard Dimbleby. `` He tell our story in the United States , '' Mr. Dimbleby said. He and the program suggest that as much an American a he be , Mr. Murrow have a special relationship with the people of Britain. `` He die a great figure in the United States -- and a much love one here , '' Mr. Dimbleby said. The program show excerpt of the famous Murrow duel with Senator Joseph R. McCarthy and spoke of his courage during that period. It also show Mr. Murrow in a more recent television interview record by the B.B.C. in Britain. In the course of it Mr. Murrow say : `` I leave all of my youth and much of my heart here. '' The statement issue tonight from 10 Downing Street be a follow : `` The friend of Ed Murrow be to be find in all walk of British life. They will remember a remarkable man who be a unique friend of this country. He be an American who identify himself with Britain when our fortune be at their low and he understand with great clarity the power of the medium of communication that he served. `` Successive British government have reason to be grateful to him for his presentation of the nation 's story to those who find it difficult to understand that a tiny island could be so important to the future history of the world. `` He report on the blitz and our struggle to recover from the succession of bitter blow in the early forties. He saw our plight and he share it with u -- stay in London through the most devastating of raids. And he remain a friend of Britain in the difficult postwar years. `` When he be make a Knight of the British Empire all too short a time ago it be only a formal recognition of the fact that he have be for many year an honorary Briton . ''