September 6 , 1965 OBITUARY Albert Schweitzer , 90 , Dies at His Hospital By REUTERS LAMBARENE , GABON , Sept. 5 -- Albert Schweitzer die last night in his jungle hospital here. He be 90 year old. Schweitzer 's death be keep secret through the night because of a request he have make to give his daughter time to send telegram to relatives. He die at 11:30 P.M. ( 6:30 P.M. New York time ) . His death be attribute to circulatory trouble bring on by his advanced age. He be bury in a brief and simple ceremony early this afternoon next to an urn contain the ash of his wife , Helene , who die in Europe in 1957. The grave , on the bank of the Ogooue River , be mark by a cross he make himself. Hospital worker , leper , cripple and other patient gather in the jungle heat a the body of the noted physician , scholar , philosopher and musician be lower into the ground. Director of the Lambarene hospital have be hand over to Schweitzer 's assistant , Dr. Walter Munz. Schweitzer 's only daughter , Mrs. Rhena Eckert , will be it administrator. Lambarene be where Schweitzer choose to die. `` I feel at home here. I belong to you until my die breath , '' he tell co-worker at the sprawling hospital on his 90th birthday Jan. 14. He fell ill from exhaustion on Aug. 28 and his condition worsen steadily. The family and close friend be prepare for the end. In a telegram that Mrs. Eckert send to them from here Saturday , she say : `` He be die , inevitably and soon. He go quietly , in peace and dignity. His brother , Dr. Paul Schweitzer , 83 , be not able to be with him. He be suffer from a heart ailment. Reverence for Life Man 's ultimate redemption through beneficent activity -- the theme of Part II of Goethe 's `` Faust , '' a metaphysical poem much admire by Albert Schweitzer -- thread through this extraordinary man 's long , complex and sometimes curious life. With Faust himself he could join in say : ... This sphere of earthly soil Astounding plan e'en now be brew : Still give u room for lofty doing. I feel new strength for bolder toil ... The Deed be everything , the Glory naught. `` You must give some time to your fellow man , '' Schweitzer counsel in paraphrase. `` Even if it 's a little thing , do something for those who have need of a man 's help , something for which you get no pay but the privilege of do it. '' Also like Goethe , on whose life and work he be expert , Schweitzer come near to be a comprehensive man. He be theologian , musicologist , organ technician , physician and surgeon , missionary , philosopher of ethic , lecturer , writer and the builder and chief force of the famous hospital at Lambarene , in Gabon , the former French Equatorial Africa. To a marked degree , Schweitzer be an eclectic. Franco-German yet cosmopolitan in culture , he draw deeply from the music and philosophy of the 18th century , especially Bach , Goethe and Kant. At the same time , he be a child of the 19th century , accept it creature comfort yet reject it complacent attitude toward progress. In line with the 20th century he seek to put religion on a rational footing and to accept the advance of science ; yet he be a foe to materialism and to the century 's criterion for personal success. As a person , Schweitzer be a curious mixture. Widely honor with degree , citation , scroll , medal , special stamp , even the Nobel Prize for Peace in 1952 , he seem oblivious to panoply. He do not preen himself , nor do he utter cosmic statement at the drop of a cause. Instead , he seem to many observer to be a simple , almost rustic man , who dress in rumpled clothing , suffer fool gladly , state fundamental verity patiently and paternally and work unobtrusively. In this respect , he be undoubtedly make more of by cultist than he be willing to make of himself , although he be by no mean a man with a weak ego. Some of his more ardent admirer insist that he be a jungle saint , even a modern Christ. But Schweitzer reject such adulation ; he hold that his own spiritual life be it own reward and that work redeem him. In World and In God He take the search for the good life seriously. For him it have profound religious implications. `` Anyone can rescue his human life , '' he once say , `` who seize every opportunity of be a man by mean of personal action , however unpretending , for the good of fellow men who need the help of a fellow man. '' He seek to exemplify the idea that man , through good work , can be in the world and in God at one and the same time. For all his self-abnegation , Schweitzer have a bristly character , at least in his late year , a formidable sense of his own importance to Lambarene and a do-good paternalism toward Africans that smack more of the 19th than the 20th century. For example , John Gunther get a dressing-down from Schweitzer for write that he resemble Buffalo Bill and also , perhaps , for imply that he do not know what be go on in nationalist Africa. If Schweitzer be thin-skinned to criticism from irreverent journalist , he hear little of it at Lambarene , where his proprietorship be unquestioned. Not only do he design the station , but he also help build it with his own hands. His co-worker be quite familiar with the businesslike and sometimes grumpy and brusque Schweitzer in a solar hat who hurry along the construction of a building by ginger up the native craftsman with a sharp : `` Allez-vous OPP ! Allez-vous , OPP-opp. Hupp , upp. OPP ! '' When Schweitzer be in residence at Lambarene , virtually nothing be do without consult him. Once , for instance , he all but halt the station 's work when he receive a letter from a Norwegian child seek a feather from Parsifal , his pet pelican. He insist on see personally that the youngster get a prompt and touch reply from his own pen before work be permit to resume. His autocracy be more noticeable a his year advance and a his medical assistant grow less awesome of him. Schweitzer regard most native Africans a child , a primitives. It be say that he have scarcely ever talk with an adult African on adult terms. He have little but contempt for the nationalist movement , for his attitude be firmly ground in 19th-century benevolence. Although thousand of Africans call him `` le grand docteur , '' others plaster his village with sign , `` Schweitzer , Go Home ! '' Needs Held Elementary `` At this stage , '' Schweitzer say in 1963 , `` Africans have little need for advanced training. They need very elementary school run along the old missionary plan , with the Africans go to school for a few hour every day and then go back to the fields. Agriculture , not science or industrialization , be their great need. '' His attitude be sharply express in a story he like to tell of his orange trees. `` I let the Africans pick all the fruit they want , '' he said. `` You see , the good Lord have protect the trees. He make the Africans too lazy to pick them bare. '' Although Schweitzer 's view on Africa be out of date , he do what no man have do before him -- he heal thousand and he weld world attention on Africa 's many plights. A jungle saint he may not have be ; a jungle pioneer he surely was. Whatever Schweitzer 's idiosyncrasy , he construct a profound and endure ethical system express in the principle Ehrfurcht vor dem Leben or Reverence of Life. It be conceivably the only formal philosophical concept ever to spring to life amid a herd of hippopotamuses. As Schweitzer recount this climactic incident , he have be baffle in get an answer to the question : Is it at all possible to find a real and permanent foundation in thought for a theory of the universe that shall be both ethical and affirmative of the world and life ? The answer come in a flash of mystic illumination in September , 1915 , a he be steam up the Ogooue River in Africa. Late in the third day of his journey he be on deck thinking and writing. `` At the very moment when , at sunset , we be make our way through a herd of hippopotamus , there flash upon my mind , unforeseen and unsought , the phrase 'Reverence for Life. ' '' `` The iron door have yield , '' he go on , `` the path in the thicket have become visible. Now I have my way to the idea in which world [ affirmation ] and life-affirmation and ethic be contain side by side ! Now I know that the world-view of ethical world-and- life-affirmation , together with it ideal of civilization , be found in thought. '' Schweitzer 's ethical system , elucidate at length in `` The Philosophy of Civilization , '' be boundless in it domain and in it demands. He summarize it once by say : `` A man be ethical only when life , a such , be sacred to him , that of plant and animal a that of his fellow men , and when he devote himself helpfully to all life that be in need of help. '' `` Let me give you a definition of ethic , '' he write on another occasion. `` It be good to maintain and further life ; it be bad to damage and destroy life. And this ethic , profound , universal , have the significance of a religion. It be religion. '' Called upon to be specific about Reverence for Life , he explain that the concept `` do not allow the scholar to live for science alone , even if he be very useful to the community in so doing. '' `` It do not permit the artist , '' he continue , `` to exist only for his art ; even if it give the inspiration to many by it means. It refuse to let the businessman imagine that he fulfill all legitimate demand in the course of his business activity. It demand from all that they should sacrifice a portion of their own life for others. '' A Guide to Action Schweitzer earnestly seek to live his philosophy , which for him be a creedal guide to action. He be genuinely proud of his medical and missionary station at Lambarene. He have scratch it out from the jungle beginning in 1913 ; he have design it ; he have work a an artisan in construct many of it building ; and , although the station be many time beset by adversity that would have discourage a less dedicated man , it have grow at his death to more than 70 building , 350 bed and a leper village of 200. The compound be staff by 3 unpaid physician , 7 nurse and 13 volunteer helpers. Visitors who equate cleanliness , tidiness and medicine be horrify by the station , for every patient be encourage to bring one or two member of his family to cook for him in the ditch beside the wards. Babies , even in the leper enclave , drop toy into the dust of the unpaved street and then pop them into their mouths. Noisome animal wander in and out , include Schweitzer 's pet parrot ( which be not teach to talk because that would lower it dignity ) and a hippopotamus that once invade the vegetable garden. Lambarene resemble not so much a hospital a a native village where physician care for the sick. Actually , Schweitzer prefer ( and plan ) it in this fashion on the ground that the native would shun an elaborate , shiny and impersonal institution. The compound even lack electricity , except for the operating and dental room , and member of the staff read by kerosene lamp. Of course , it have no telephone , radio or airstrip. Schweitzer 's view that `` simple people need simple heal method , '' however it might have outrage medical sophisticate , win for Lambarene a tremendous measure of native confidence. Thousands flock there , and thousand respond to Schweitzer 's sermon as well a to his scalpel , for he believe that the good shepherd save not only the animal but also his soul. Lambarene be suffuse with Reverence for Life to what some critic think be an exaggerated degree. Mosquitoes be not swat , nor pest and insect douse with chemical ; they be leave alone , and human put up with them. Indeed , building be often bring to a halt l nest of ant be kill or disturbed. On the other hand , patient receive splendid medical care and few seem to suffer greatly from the compound 's lack of polish. Critic 's Accolade Schweitzer 's accomplishment be recognize even by his most caustic critics. One of them , Gerald McKnight , write in his book `` Verdiot on Schweitzer '' : `` The temptation for Schweitzer to see Lambarene a a place cut off from the world , in which he can preserve `` it original form and so reject any theory of treatment or life other than his own , be understandable when one consider the enormous achievement he have attain in his own lifetime. He come to the Ogooue in 1913 when horse draw the bus of London and leprosy be consider an incurable scourge. Housed originally in the ground of a mission , he choose to leave this comparative sanctuary for the unknown and forbidding region of the jungle nearby. `` No doubt a wish to have absolute dominion over his hospital drive him to this course , link with the inner purpose which have bring him to Africa , but it be nonetheless heroic. Today , the hospital have grow , entirely under his hand and direction , into a sizable colony where between 500 and 600 people live in reasonable comfort. No great tribute to his ability a a conqueror of jungle need be cite than the fact -- regard locally a something of a miracle -- of his own survival. '' Schweitzer come to French Equatorial Africa a a tall , handsome , broadly powerful young man with a shock of rich , black hair , an enormous mustache and a look of pierce determination in his bold eyes. The year thin and gray his hair ( without make it less unruly ) ; age seam his face , shrink his frame , make him appear bandy-legged ; time soften his eye and make them less severe. But determination to make his life an `` argument '' for his ethical creed be a firm at 90 a it be on his 30th birthday , the day he decide to devote the rest of his life to the native of Africa a a physician. Schweitzer 's arrival at this decision be calculate , a step in a quest for a faith to live by. It be a search that have haunt him , drive him , since childhood. Albert Schweitzer be bear at Kaystersberg , Haute Alsace ( now Haut-Rhin ) , Jan. 14 , 1875 , just two month after Germany have annex the province from war-prostrate France. During that year , his father , a Lutheran pastor , move his wife and eldest son to the neighboring village of Gunsbach amid the foothill of the Vosges. It be to this picture-book Franco-German village and it vineyard that Schweitzer be invariably to return between period of self-imposed exile in Africa. A Musical Prodigy As a child , he be frail and an indifferent student in everything but music , for which he show the interest of a prodigy. He begin to play the church organ at 8 , when his foot barely reach the pedals. At the age of 18 he enter the University of Strasbourg a a student in theology , philosophy and musical theory. But this time he have also study the organ briefly in Paris under the legendary Charles Marie Widor , who be so impressed with Schweitzer 's talent that he teach him then and later without fee. Indeed , Schweitzer become a notable organist , especially in the work of Bach. Schweitzer 's university life be interrupt by a year of compulsory military service in 1894 , a period that prove crucial to his religious thinking and to his life 's vocation. The moment of awaken come a he be read Matthew x and xi in Greek , chapter that contain Jesus ' injunction to His apostle , among them the one that command , `` Heal the sick , cleanse the leper , raise the dead , cast out devil : freely ye have receive , `` freely give '' ; and the verse that urge men , `` Take my yoke upon you , and learn from me ; for I be meek and lowly in heart ; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. '' Why Jesus Cried Out Schweitzer be not only strike by the application of these verse to himself , but even more by the over-all content of the two chapter a express in Jesus ' assertion that `` the kingdom of heaven be at hand. '' These chapter start a chain of thought that result in `` The Quest for the Historical Jesus. '' Published in 1910 , it at once establish Schweitzer a an eminent , if controversial , theologian whose explosive idea have a profound influence on contemporary religious thinking. Schweitzer depict Jesus a a child of his time who share the eschatological idea of late Judaism and who look for an immediate end of the world. Jesus , Schweitzer contend , believe himself the Messiah who would rule in a new kingdom of God when the end come ; at first Jesus believe that his Messianic reign would begin before his disciple return from the teach mission command of them in the Gospel accord to St. Matthew. When the world 's end do not occur , accord to Schweitzer 's view , Jesus decide that He must undergo an atoning sacrifice , and that the great transformation would take place on the cross. This , too , fail , Schweitzer argue , hence the despairing cry , `` My God , My God , why hast Thou forsake Me ? '' `` The Jesus of Nazareth . . . who found the kingdom of Heaven upon earth , and die to give his work the final consecration , never have any existence , '' Schweitzer wrote. `` He be a figure design by rationalism , endow with life by liberalism and clothe by modern theology in an historical garb. '' Schweitzer maintain , nonetheless , that Jesus ' concept be eternal. `` In reality , that which be eternal in the word of Jesus be due to the very fact that they be base on an eschatological world-view , and contain the expression of a mind for which the contemporary world with it historical and social circumstance no longer have any existence. `` They be appropriate , therefore , to any world for in every world they raise the man who dare to meet their challenge , and do not turn them and twist them into meaninglessness , above his world and time , make him inwardly free , so that he be fit to be , in his own world and in his own time , a simple channel of the power of Jesus. '' Meantime , a these belief be mature in Schweitzer 's mind , he continue his student life at Strasbourg and fix with great precision the course of his future. In 1896 , at the age of 21 , he pledge himself that he would give the following nine year to science and art and then devote himself to the service of suffer humanity. Wrote on Kant In those year he complete his doctoral thesis in philosophy , a study of Imanuel Kant 's view on religion ; study the organ , again with Widor in Paris ; win his doctorate in theology ; be ordain a curate ; taught theology and become principal of the faculty at Strasbourg ; write `` The Mystery of the Kingdom of God '' ; and , at Widor 's urging , complete a study of the life and art of Johann Sebastian Bach. The English version , `` J. S. Bach , '' be a two-volume translation of the German text , itself an entire reworking of the first version write in French. It approach Bach a a musician-poet and concentrate on his chorale ; cantata and Passion music. Schweitzer present Bach a a religious mystic , as cosmic a the force of nature. Bach , he say , be chiefly a church composer. As such , and a a Lutheran , `` it be precisely to the chorale that the work of Bach owe it greatness. '' `` The chorale not only put in his possession the treasury of Protestant music , '' Schweitzer write , `` but also open to him the rich of the Middle Ages and of the sacred Latin music from which the chorale itself came. `` From whatever direction he be consider , Bach be , then , the last word in an artistic evolution which be prepare in the Middle Ages , freed and activate by the Reformation and arrive at it full expression in the 18th century. '' Turning to Bach 's nonchurch music , Schweitzer say : `` The Brandenburg concerto be the pure product of Bach 's polyphonic style. We really seem to see before u what the philosophy of all age conceives a the fundamental mystery of thing -- that of self-unfolding of the idea in which it create it own opposite in order to overcome it , and so on and on until it finally return to itself , have meanwhile traverse the whole of existence. '' Bach 's `` Well-Tempered Clavier '' also draw Schweitzer 's warm praise. Schweitzer 's probe conception of Bach create a sensation in it time , and it still remain a classic study , not only for the detailed instruction it provide for the playing of Bach but also for it challenging esthetic. True to his pledge , Schweitzer turn from music and theology to service to others. On Oct. 13 , 1905 , he post letter from Paris to his parent and friend say that at the start of the winter term he would become a medical student to prepare himself for the life of a physician in French Equatorial Africa. This decision , protest vigorously by his friend , be , like so many others in his life , the product of religious meditation. He have ponder the meaning of the parable of Dives and Lazarus and it application to his time , and he have conclude that Dives represent opulent Europe , and Lazarus , with his open sore , the sick and helpless of Africa. Explaining his decision later in more mundane term , Schweitzer say : `` I want to be a doctor that I might be able to work without have to talk. For year I have be give myself out in words. This new form of activity I could not represent to myself a talk about the religion of love , but only a an actual put it into practice. '' Studied Medicine 7 Years For seven year , from 1906 until he receive his M.D. degree in February , 1913 , Schweitzer study medicine , but he do not entirely cut himself off from his other worlds. Attending the University of Strasbourg , he serve a curate at St. Nicholas , give concert on the organ , conduct a heavy correspondence and examine Pauline idea , especially that of die and be bear again `` in Jesus Christ. '' It result in a book , `` Paul and His Interpreters , '' publish in English in 1912. That same year he resign his curateship and his post at the university and married Helene Bresslau , the daughter of a well-known Strasbourg historian. A scholar herself , she become a trained nurse in order to share her husband 's life in Africa. On Good Friday , 1913 , the couple set sail from Bordeaux for Africa , where Schweitzer establish a hospital on the ground of the Lambarene station of the Paris Missionary Society. The society , wary of Schweitzer 's unorthodox religious view , have bar him from preach at the station , but agree to accept his medical skills. Lambarene , on the Ogooue River a few mile from the Equator , be in the steaming jungle. Its climate be among the world 's bad , with fiercely hot day , clammy night and seasonal torrent of rain. The native have all the usual disease , plus Hansen 's disease ( leprosy ) , dysentery , elephantiasis , sleep sickness , malaria , yellow fever and animal wounds. From the first , when Schweitzer 's hospital be a broken-down hen coop , native flock by foot , by improvised stretcher , by dugout canoe to Lambarene for medical attention. He have barely start to clear the jungle when World War I break out. He and his wife ( they be German citizen ) be intern a prisoner of war for four month , then release to continue the work of the hospital. In this time and the succeeding month he start to write the two-volume `` The Philosophy of Civilization , '' his masterwork in ethic that be publish in 1923. It be a historical review of ethical thought lead to his own original contribution of Reverence for Life a an effective basis for a civilized world. Schweitzer 's book ( and other writing a well ) dispute the theory that human progress toward civilization be inevitable. He disagree sharply with Aristotle 's view that man 's knowledge of right and wrong would surely lead him to make the right choices. He maintain , instead , that man must rationally formulate an ethical creed and then strive to put it into practice. In Reverence for Life , he conclude , `` knowledge pass over into experience. '' In 1917 , the Schweitzers be return to France and later to Alsace. To support himself and to carry on the work at Lambarene , Schweitzer join the medical staff of the Strasbourg Hospital , preach , give lecture and organ recital , travel and wrote. He return to Africa alone in 1925 , his wife and daughter , Rhena , who be bear in 1919 , remain in Europe. In the almost eight year of his absence , the jungle have reclaim the hospital ground , and the building have to be rebuilt. This be no sooner under way than Schweitzer fell ill , an epidemic of dysentery break out and a famine set in. The epidemic promoted Schweitzer to move his hospital to a large site two mile up the Ogooue , where expansion be possible and where garden and orchard could be planted. Two physician have arrive from Europe , and to them and to two nurse he turn over all medical responsibility for a year and a half while he supervise ( and help ) to fell tree , clear ground and construct buildings. The main hospital room and the dispensary be complete when he depart for Europe in midsummer 1927. He return to Lambarene in 1929 and remain for two year , establish a pattern of work in Africa and sojourn in Europe during which he lecture , write and concertize to raise fund for his hospital. On one of these occasion , in 1949 , he visit the United States and lecture on Goethe at a conference in Aspen , Colo. Le Mot Juste Hundreds flock to hear him and to importune him. On one occasion a group of tourist pull him away from the dinner table to get an explanation of his ethics. He respond with remarkable courtesy for about 20 minute until one questioner prod him for a specific application of Reverence for Life. `` Reverence for Life , '' Schweitzer reply , `` mean my answer your kind inquiry ; it also mean your reverence for my dinner hour. '' The tourist get the point and he return to his meal. On his trip to Europe , Schweitzer invariably make his headquarters at his home in Gunsbach , which be expand until it be also a leave and rest center for the hospital staff. On an afternoon , Schweitzer could often be see leave his home to slip over to the church to play Bach. ( He play Bach at Lambarene , too , on piano especially line with zinc to prevent rot. ) He not only play throughout Europe , but he also repair church organ and keep up a ceaseless study of music. Schweitzer receive many honorary degree and recognition from a number of government and learn societies. He be make an honorary member of the British Order of Merit in 1955. He be elect to the French Academy in 1951. After his wife die in 1957 , Schweitzer be almost continuously in Lambarene. He celebrate his 90th birthday there a hundred of Africans , Europeans and Americans gather to wish him well. Among the message he receive be one from President Johnson. `` In your commitment to truth and service , '' the President cable , `` you have touch and deepen the live of million you have never meet . ''