August 10 , 1965 OBITUARY Shirley Jackson , Author of Horror Classic , Dies Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES NORTH BENNINGTON , Vt. , Aug. 9 -- Shirley Jackson , the short-story writer and novelist , die at her home here yesterday afternoon after an apparent heart attack. She be 45 year old. Miss Jackson be widely know a the author of `` The Lottery , '' a short story publish in 1948 that become a classic horror tale. In addition to story deal in abnormal psychology and witchcraft , she write novel of family life. Her most recent book , `` We Have Always Lived in the Castle , '' publish in 1962 by Viking Press , be be adapt for the Broadway stage. Miss Jackson be the wife of Stanley Edgar Hyman , the literary critic , who be on the faculty of Bennington College. She be also survive by four child , Laurence , of New York , Joanne , Sarah and Barry , of North Bennington ; and two grandchildren. In accordance with a request Miss Jackson make some time ago , no funeral or memorial service will be held. Domesticity and the Macabre Shirley Jackson write in two styles. She could describe the delight and turmoil of ordinary domestic life with detached hilarity ; and she could , with cryptic symbolism , write a tenebrous horror story in the Gothic mold in which abnormal behavior seem perilously ordinary. In either genre , she write with remarkable tautness and economy of style , and her choice of word and phrase be unerring in build a story 's mood. Of all Miss Jackson 's eerie and gruesome fantasy , `` The Lottery , '' publish in The New Yorker magazine , be the best know and most baffling to readers. The dark and sinister story , open on a quiet note , describe with mount suspense , an annual village lottery to select a ritual victim to be put to death by stoning. The excitement be all in the selection of the woman 's name from slip of paper in a black box. The stone itself be dispassionately cold-blooded. The magazine receive hundred of letter , virtually all of them demand to know what the tale meant. Housework Came First Was the stone a parable of institutionalized fury ? Was it an exposition of the cruelty of conformity ? Was it a statement of the fundamental baseness of man ? Or be it just a good chiller ? No one could say for certain. But other story and novel of a similar kind give the impression that Miss Jackson be at bottom a moralist who be say that cruel and lustful conduct be not far below the surface in those who count themselves normal and respectable , and that society can act with inquisitorial torture against individual it find odd. The harmless eccentric , Miss Jackson appear to say , could be damn and kill with the ferocity usually reserve for overt social enemies. Because Miss Jackson write so frequently about ghost and witch and magic , it be say that she use a broomstick for a pen. But the fact be that she use a typewriter -- and then only after she have complete her household chores. Although many writer profess a distaste for their craft , Miss Jackson be unusual in that she like to write. `` I ca n't persuade myself , '' she once say , `` that writing be honest work. It 's great fun and I love it. For one thing , it 's the only way I can get to sit down. '' And there be pleasure , she go on , `` in see a story grow. '' `` It 's so deeply satisfy -- like have a winning streak at poker. '' Miss Jackson believe in magic -- both white and black -- but look deceptively tranquil and maternal. If one be look for the witch in her , there be , of course , the broomstick that she wield about the house and an assortment of black cat that sometimes number six. `` Fifty per cent of my life , '' she say , `` be spent wash and dress the child , cooking , wash dish and clothes , and mending. '' For all the disorganization and anticness with which Miss Jackson like to invest her household and herself , she be in true life a neat and cozy woman whose blue eye look at the world through light horn-rimmed spectacles. She be 5 foot 6 inch tall and inclined to pudginess. But the most notable thing about her be a voice full of laughter. This sense of merriment come through in two book that dealt with her family life in North Bennington , where she have live in an old and noisy house with her husband and four rambunctious children. These book be `` Life Among the Savages '' ( 1953 ) and `` Raising Demons '' ( 1957 ) . Deftly and artfully , Miss Jackson tell of the perpetual pandemonium and the constant crisis that accompany grow up. The mother , it seem , be always the heroine. Orville Prescott , The New York Times critic , say that he have read `` Life Among the Savages '' `` until I laugh so much the tear come to my eye and I have to stop. '' Miss Jackson 's sketch of domesticity be officially classify a nonfiction , but it be evident from a reading that their author could not resist embellish a good story. The fiction , on the other hand , be an unburnished exercise in the sinister , which stem from her study of social anthropology and magic and her conviction that a witch ' brew could be a powerful libation. In that connection , Brendan Gill , the critic , who be a friend of Miss Jackson , say yesterday that she have consider herself responsible for an accident to an enemy by have fashion a wax figure of him that have a broken leg. Miss Jackson 's Gothic romance -- '' Hangsaman '' ( 1951 ) , `` The Bird 's Nest '' ( 1954 ) , `` The Sundial '' ( 1958 ) , `` The Haunting of Hill House '' ( 1959 ) and `` We Have Always Lived in the Castle '' ( 1962 ) -- could be read a splendidly execute chill story or a macabre commentary on human sanity. From either approach , Eliot Fremont-Smith , a daily book critic for The Times , say yesterday , Miss Jackson `` be an important literary influence. '' `` She be a master of complexity of mood , an ironic explorer of the dark , conflict inner tyranny of the mind and soul , '' he declare add that `` she leave the flourish -- or rather , direct them -- to the reader 's imagination. Set the Tone Early Miss Jackson be adept at set a mood , a in this opening paragraph from `` We have Always Lived in the Castle : '' `` My name be Mary Katherine Blackwood. I be 18 year old , and I live with my sister Constance. I have often think that with any luck at all I could have be bear a werewolf , because the two middle finger on both my hand be the same length but I have have to be content with what I had. I dislike wash myself , and dog , and noise. I like my sister Constance , and Richard Plantagenet , and Amanita phalloides , the death-cup mushroom. Everyone else in my family be dead. '' In other novel , Miss Jackson write about a girl afflict with a severe case of multiple personality ; about the nature of fright and the haunting of a house ; about a girl 's lunatic fantasy ; and about the end of the natural world. In that novel ( `` The Sundial '' ) there be a hint of Miss Jackson 's own view of humanity when one of the character remark : `` You all want the whole world to be change so you will be different. But I do n't suppose people get change any by just a new world. And anyway that world be n't any more real than this one. '' Wrote of Early Life Shirley Jackson be bear in San Francisco Dec. 14 , 1919 , the daughter of Leslie Hardie and Geraldine ( Bugbee ) Jackson. She pass her childhood on the coast and make it the subject of her first book , `` The Road Through the Wall '' ( 1948 ) . She receive a Bachelor of Arts degree from Syracuse University in 1940 , be marry to Mr. Hyman the same year and move to Vermont. Miss Jackson make her first appearance in The New Yorker in 1943 with a casual sketch , `` After You , My Dear Alphonse , '' and for the next 10 year be a regular contributor of short stories. According to her friend at the magazine , Miss Jackson 's story gestate for some time in her mind and subconscious before she put them down almost flawlessly in a first draft. Aside from The New Yorker , Miss Jackson 's story appear chiefly in McCalls , Redbook , The Saturday Evening Post , Harper 's Bazaar and The Ladies ' Home Journal .