September 7 , 1966 OBITUARY Margaret Sanger Is Dead at 82 ; Led Campaign for Birth Control Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES TUCSON , Ariz. , Sept. 6 -- Margaret Sanger , the birth control pioneer , die this afternoon of arteriosclerosis in the Valley House Convalescent Center. She would have be 83 year old on Sept. 14. Mrs. Sanger be the widow of J. Noah H. Slee , owner of the Three-in-One Oil manufacturing concern. She be survive by two son by her previous marriage to William Sanger , Dr. Stuart Sanger and Dr. Grant Sanger , and eight grandchildren. A funeral service will be hold at 11 A.M. on Thursday at St. Philip's-in-the-Hills Episcopal Church here. A memorial service will be conduct at St. George 's Church in Stuyvesant Square , New York City , at 11 A.M. on Wednesday , Sept. 21. Burial will be in Fishkill , N.Y. Toward World Acceptance As the originator of the phrase `` birth control '' and it best-known advocate , Margaret Sanger survive Federal indictment , a brief jail term , numerous lawsuit , hundred of street-corner rally and raid on her clinic to live to see much of the world accept her view that family planning be a basic human right. The dynamic , titian-haired woman whose Irish ancestry also endow her with unfailing charm and persuasive wit be first and foremost a feminist. She seek to create equality between the sex by free woman from what she saw a sexual servitude. An active worker for the Socialist party , her friend included radical of all shade -- John Reed , Mabel Dodge Luhan , Bill Haywood , Emma Goldman , Alexander Berkman , and Jessie Ashley. The phrase `` birth control '' first appear in 1914 in her magazine , Woman Rebel , which bore the slogan `` No Gods ; No Masters ! '' on it masthead. In her day on the barricade of the birth control movement , Mrs. Sanger present a figure not easy to forget. Many a policeman escort her to the station have his ear wilt by Irish invective. Trained in the method of public demonstration , she also could call attention to herself and her cause in more restrained environments. Lawrence Lader , one of Mrs. Sanger 's biographer , tell of meeting call by a wealthy birth control advocate to discuss the movement. When her guest be deep in discussion of the problem , she would `` telephone Margaret. '' `` Wearing a simple black dress ( the more radical the idea the more conservative you must be in your dress ) Mrs. Sanger would arrive in the doorway. `` And now here be the woman who can answer all your questions. With it be a dramatic entrance that lead easily into a short talk on birth control and often win new converts. '' Mother Died Young Mrs. Sanger be the daughter of Michael Hennessy Higgins , a tombstone cutter in Corning , N. Y. , who be describe a `` a philosopher , a rebel and an artist. '' Mr. Higgins specialize in chisel angel and saint out of stone. His wife -- Mrs. Sanger 's tubercular mother -- be Anne Purcell Higgins , who die at 48 after bear 11 children. Mrs. Sanger herself be affect with incipient tuberculosis in 1903 , the year after her marriage to Mr. Sanger , an artist and architect. The Sangers move to Saranac , N. Y. , in the Adirondacks , from a New York City apartment that have be a gathering place for Socialists. `` Almost without know it you become a 'comrade , ' '' Mrs. Sanger later write her husband of this period of their lives. The Sanger living room have become a place where liberal , anarchist , Socialists and Wobblies ( member of the Industrial Workers of the World ) could meet. `` My own personal feeling draw me toward the individualist , anarchist philosophy. . .but it seem necessary to approach the idea by way of Socialism , '' she later wrote. Trained a a nurse , she be educate at Claverack College in New York. She also study at White Plains Hospital and Manhattan Eye and Ear Hospital. Served a Maternity Nurse Mrs. Sanger 's life work begin shortly after she return to New York in 1912. It result from her job a a nurse for maternity case , principally on the Lower East Side. Many of her patient be wife of small shopkeeper , truck driver and pushcart venders. Others be from a low stratum of society. `` These submerge , untouched class be beyond the scope of organize charity or religion , '' she wrote. `` No labor union , no church , not even the Salvation Army reach them. '' The young nurse saw them , weary and old at 35 , resort to self-induced abortion , which be frequently the cause of their deaths. Mrs. Sanger nurse one mother , close to death after a self-inflicted abortion , back to health , and hear the woman plead with a doctor for protection against another pregnancy. `` Tell Jake to sleep on the roof , '' the physician said. The mother die six month later during a second abortion. Mrs. Sanger soon renounce nursing forever. `` I come to a sudden realization that my work a a nurse and my activity in social service be entirely palliative and consequently futile and useless to relieve the misery I saw all about me. '' Magazine Was Spearhead For nearly a year the ex-nurse read every scrap of material on contraception. In 1913 , she go to France and Scotland to study birth control condition , return the following year. Her magazine , Woman Rebel , be the spearhead of her movement. In an early issue she specify seven circumstance in which birth control should be practice : when either spouse have a transmittable disease ; when the wife suffer a temporary infection of lung , heart or kidney , the cure of which might be retard in pregnancy ; when a mother be physically unfit ; when parent have subnormal child ; if the parent be adolescent ; if their income be inadequate , and during the first year of marriage. The article adhere to New York 's Comstock law , which make it a crime to offer contraceptive information. Nevertheless , most of the issue of the Woman Rebel be ban by the New York Post Office. Fled to Europe In August , 1914 , Mrs. Sanger be indict on nine count of send birth control information through the mail and be make liable to a prison term of 45 years. She stand virtually alone. Even progressive woman , Socialists and physician offer her no assistance. Fighters for woman 's suffrage seem more concerned with the vote than with Mrs. Sanger 's immediate problem. On the eve of her trial , Mrs. Sanger flee to Europe without the court 's permission. There , she meet H. G. Wells and become a friend of Havelock Ellis , the author of the pioneer study `` Psychology of Sex. '' During her absence , Anthony Comstock , secretary of the New York Society for the Suppression of Vice , go to Mrs. Sanger 's home , represent himself to Mr. Sanger a an impoverished father in search of aid and buy a birth control pamphlet from Mr. Sanger. For this sale , Mr. Sanger serve a month in jail. Opened Brooklyn Clinic The indictment be quash in 1916 , shortly after she return to this country. But Mrs. Sanger find that the indictment have arouse worldwide interest in the movement and she decide to take a step beyond the propagandizing then carry on by the National Birth Control League. Mrs. Sanger and a sister , Mrs. Ethel Byrne , a trained nurse , open a birth control clinic on Oct. 16 , 1916 , in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn. The clinic , at 46 Amboy Street , be the first birth control clinic in the United States. The legislative approach , Mrs. Sanger write , `` seem a slow and tortuous method of make clinic legal ; we stand a good and quick change by secure a favorable judicial interpretation through challenge the law directly. '' Mrs. Sanger serve 30 day in jail , but the case lay the groundwork for subsequent court ruling enable physician to give contraceptive advice `` for the prevention or cure of disease. '' Her sister go on an eight-day hunger strike in Brooklyn 's Raymond Street Jail after her arrest. Despite continued legal harassment , Mrs. Sanger 's work be increasingly accepted. In 1937 , a year after the Comstock law be reinterpret to provide for distribution of contraceptive information , the American Medical Association adopt a report that recognize birth control a part of legitimate medical practice. In addition , she be the author of a number of book on birth control , include `` What Every Girl Should Know. '' Mrs. Sanger 's often picturesque struggle with the police and her difference with the Roman Catholic hierarchy furnish the birth control movement with ample publicity. On Nov. 14 , 1921 , when Mrs. Sanger arrive at Town Hall on West 43d Street to take part in the discussion , `` Birth Control : Is It Moral ? '' she find the police close the meeting. In the angry pulling , shove and shout that follow , Mrs. Sanger leave the platform with two policemen. A disorderly conduct charge against her be dismiss the next day. The New York Times account of the interrupted meeting state that the police intervention be `` bring about at the instance of Archbishop Patrick J. Hayes of this Roman Catholic Archdiocese. '' Honors Came Later Fifteen year later Town Hall be the scene of a ceremony in which the Town Hall Club give Mrs. Sanger it annual Award of Honor for the most conspicuous contribution of the year to the enlargement and enrichment of life. Three month ago her year of birth control advocacy appear to be make an inroad in Rome. Reports from the Vatican indicate that a more liberal Roman Catholic position be possible a a result of a three-year Vatican study of the problem. A majority of the 60 clerical and lay member of a commission originally appoint in 1963 by Pope Paul VI be report to have accept a position of leave the matter of specific birth control techniques to the individual Catholic conscience. Last month , a group of mother , child and college student demonstrate in front of St. Patrick 's Cathedral in New York to protest the Roman Catholic Church 's ban on artificial method of birth control. In contrast to police action at many rally when Mrs. Sanger and her supporter be chase , there be no heckler outside the cathedral. Among the mutterer and headshakers be many who accept leaflet with smiles. She and her adherent win a notable victory when , on Jan. 6 , 1936 in the famous case of `` The United States v. One Package , '' United States District Court Judge Grover Moscowitz decide that Dr. Hannah Stone , a physician , could legally receive a contraceptive device send to her by a physician in Japan. Subsequent interpretation of his decision greatly broaden the scope of the circulation of birth control device and artificial birth control information. During one of Mrs. Sanger 's visit to Europe the National Birth Control League be reorganize under the leadership of Mary Ware Dennett and Clara Stillman. Mrs. Sanger retain control of the New York State Birth Control League and later become the president of Planned Parenthood. Mrs. Sanger 's American Birth Control League , establish in 1921 , become the Planned Parenthood Federation of America in 1946 and lead to the establishment of more than 250 Planned Parenthood Centers in 150 city throughout the country. The movement be now worldwide , with 38 member organization and project in 88 countries. Welcomed Abroad `` It be she who convince America and the world that control of conception be a basic human right and like other human right must be equally available to all , '' say Dr. Alan F. Guttmacher , president of the Planned Parenthood World-Wide Association. On a visit to Japan , Mrs. Sanger be receive with great cordiality by member of the Japanese Government. She be the first woman to address the Japanese Diet. She be also warmly receive by the late Jawarharlal Nehru of India. Her view on birth control be widely circulate throughout the Far East and in Africa. Mrs. Sanger be hear from in firm tone when , in September , 1958 , a controversy arose in New York over the refusal of Dr. Morris A. Jacobs , the city 's Commissioner of Hospitals , to sanction birth control therapy in the hospitals. Interviewed by telephone in her home in Tucson , Mrs. Sanger call the policy uphold by Dr. Jacobs `` disgraceful. '' Mrs. Sanger be then near her 75th year and be still active a president of the International Planned Parenthood Federation. Opposed Kennedy in 1960 From her Arizona home Mrs. Sanger keep up her fire of statement and letter to newspaper in behalf of birth control. Her disagreement with the Roman Catholic Church lead her to say in 1960 that if Senator John F. Kennedy be elect President she would leave the United States. She oppose Mr. Kennedy because of his religion. In an interview some week later Mrs. Sanger say that she have be inform that Senator and Mrs. Kennedy be both `` sympathetic and understanding toward the problem of world population. I will wait out the first year of Senator Kennedy 's Administration and see what happens. '' During her long career many institution honor her for her work. The degree of Doctor of Letters be confer upon her by Smith College in 1949. Mr. and Mrs. Sanger be divorce in 1921 after have be separate for several years. In 1922 , Mrs. Sanger be marry to Mr. Slee. The industrialist , who die in 1941 , contribute large sum to the birth control movement. During her marriage to Mr. Slee , she continue to use the name of Margaret Sanger .