February 21 , 1966 OBITUARY Adm. Nimitz Dead ; Built Pacific Fleet That Fought Japan By United Press International SAN FRANCISCO , Feb. 20 -- Admiral of the Fleet Chester W. Nimitz die today in his home here. He would have be 81 year old on Thursday. During World War II , he be in charge of assemble the Pacific force of two million men and 1,000 ship that drive the Japanese back to their homeland. The former commander-in-chief of the United States Pacific fleet suffer a cerebral thrombosis , or stroke , early last month. A graveside service and burial with military honor be schedule for Thursday afternoon at Golden Gate National Cemetery in nearby San Bruno. Earlier that day , the body will lie in state for 1 1/2 hour at the chapel of the Treasure Island Naval Base. Chosen After Disaster When Admiral Nimitz take over the Pacific Fleet on Dec. 31 , 1941 , many of it ship lay at the bottom of Pearl Harbor , sunk by the Japanese in the surprise attack of Dec. 7 on Hawaii. Without haste -- Admiral Nimitz always proceed with care -- he direct the deployment of such carrier and cruise a be leave , to hold the line until that moment perhaps two year away , when new battleship could be ready. With Adm. Ernest King , chief of naval operation , President Roosevelt and the Navy 's other strategy planner , Admiral Nimitz have to undergo the anguish of be unable to answer the cry of soldier trap on Bataan : `` Where 's the fleet ? '' When the new battleship , cruiser , carrier and destroyer do arrive , Admiral Nimitz and the Navy clear the sea of Japanese warship in a series of spectacular naval battles. Eight month after announce on New Year 's Day that 1945 would be a sad year for the Japanese , Admiral Nimitz sit at a table on the deck of the U.S.S. Missouri on Sept. 2 to sign the Japanese capitulation. Chester William Nimitz be bear on Feb. 24 , 1885 , in a gingerbread hotel in Fredericksburg , Tex. , build by his grandfather , Charles Nimitz , a retired sea captain. The captain have equip his hotel with a ship 's bridge and a pilot house from which he could scan the hill and prairies. Young Chester 's father die five month before he be born. In his young year , while stay on occasion with his grandfather , the future admiral heard many tall tale about the sea. Annapolis Second Choice But he dream of be a soldier , not a sailor , and while in high school try for an appointment to West Point. When none be available he take a competitive examination for Annapolis , and be accept when he be only 15 year old. He leave high school to enter the Naval Academy and be not award his high school diploma until many year later , when he have retire from active Navy duty. He probably be the only person ever to graduate from high school in the uniform of a fleet admiral. At the Naval Academy , Chester Nimitz excel in mathematics and in physical exercise. He be nickname `` Matty '' because his proficiency in setting-up exercise , be second only to that of Matty Strohm , the academy 's physical education instruction. Chester Nimitz stroke the crew in 1905 , the year he graduated. In `` The Lucky Bag , '' the Academy year book , he be describe a a man `` of cheerful yesterday and confident tomorrows. '' After the two year ' sea duty require by law , he become an ensign. He say later that he be not overly enthusiastic at his first experience with the sea. `` I get frightfully seasick , and must confess to some chilling of enthusiasm for the sea , '' he said. Ensign Nimitz be a handsome , self-assured young officer , who saw to it that he know the technical phase of his profession. In his early day in the Navy he command an assortment of obsolete minor vessel , and be much pleased when he receive command of the old destroyer Stephen Decatur. During a storm , the engineer of the destroyer telephone from the engine room that the vessel be take on water rapidly and soon would sink. Lieutenant Nimitz reply soothingly : `` Just look on page 84 of 'Barton 's Engineering Manual. ' It will tell you what to do. '' The vessel be saved. Won Life Saving Medal In 1912 , Lieutenant Nimitz be award the Navy 's Silver Life Saving Medal for save a shipmate from drowning. He wear this medal throughout the remainder of his career , along with the five Distinguished Service Medal award for wartime exploits. In 1913 , Lieutenant Nimitz write a friend : `` On April 9 , I have the good sense to marry Catherine Vance Freeman of Wollaston , Mass. '' Miss Freeman be the daughter of a shipping broker. By way of a honeymoon , the young officer be assign to study diesel engine in Germany and Belgium for a year. On his return to the United States , he build the Navy 's first diesel engine at the New York Naval Shipyard in Brooklyn. While he be demonstrate the engine his left hand be catch in the mechanism , and one of his finger be severed. During World War I , Lieutenant Commander Nimitz serve a Chief of Staff to Rear Admiral Samuel S. Robinson , commander of the submarine division of the Atlantic Fleet. He saw no battle action. Submarines at that time , he say , be still regard `` a a cross between a Jules Verne fantasy and a whale. '' Established Reserve Unit From 1926 to 1929 , he be assign to the University of California to establish the first Naval Reserve Officers ' training unit. The between-wars period include service on battleship and a a cruiser commander as well a study at various advanced naval schools. By 1938 he be a rear admiral. In 1940 , Admiral Nimitz 's name be one of two submit for the post of Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet. The other be that of Adm. Husband E. Kimmel , who get the assignment. Admiral Nimitz be in his home in Washington listen to a symphony on the radio when he hear the news that Pearl Harbor have be attacked. He pick up his hat and go down to the office of the Chief of Naval Operations for orders. A few day later , Admiral Kimmel be relieve and Admiral Nimitz be on his way to Pearl Harbor. Went to Post a Civilian Admiral Nimitz make the train trip to the West Coast in civilian clothes under an assumed name. Mrs. Nimitz miss her sewing bag , and it be not until many month later that she learn that her husband have use it to carry secret document deal with the extent of damage to the fleet in the Pearl Harbor attack. The 65 million square mile of the Pacific become well know to Admiral Nimitz a he contemplate the operation chart that be to carry the story of defeat and victory in the next few years. While wait for United States yard to turn out the ship he need , Admiral Nimitz build up his combat teams. These be command by Admirals William F. Halsey , Mare A. Mitschner , Richmond K. Turner , Raymond A. Spruance , and Thomas C. Kincaid. Admiral Nimitz handle these complex men with skill and insight , a he do everyone. He fly to Australia to call on General of the Army Douglas MacArthur , to avoid any protocol friction. Once when a sailor from Texas drop in on him at Pacific Fleet headquarters to chat , Admiral Nimitz send for a Navy photographer to take a picture. `` It seem that his shipmate bet him $ 20 he would n't get to see me , '' the admiral explained. `` I want him to have the evidence. '' When he take over command of the Pacific Fleet , Admiral Nimitz be quick to see that a great weakness lay in the lack of forward repair station and maintenance squadrons. When those squadron come into be at his insistence , the Navy be prepare to take the fight to the Japanese. The first major Pacific naval battle after Pearl Harbor come on May 8 , 1942 , in the Coral Sea. This be the world 's first naval battle fight entirely in the air , without the carrier even sight each other or a shot be exchange between surface vessels. It be adjudge an American success , although the Japanese shoot down many United States planes. Battle Saved Australia The aircraft carrier Lexington be lose to Japanese bomb , but the Coral Sea victory save Australia and New Zealand from invasion. A later victory at Midway remove the Japanese Navy a an immediate threat to Hawaii , the Panama Canal , and the United States. During the first half of 1944 , Admiral Nimitz employ the main fighting strength of the Pacific Navy in the central Pacific. The bloody victory at Tarawa be follow by the `` great turkey shoot '' in the Marianas , where United States aviator down 402 out of 545 Japanese plane sighted. At his headquarters at Pearl Harbor , Admiral Nimitz set an example to his staff by keep in the peak of physical condition. He swim and take long walks , his pet schnauzer dog trot along with him. Sometimes at night , he take a drink of bourbon whisky to relax. While wait for news of a Navy engagement , he would go to the firing range and grimly fire his pistol , or stand in his kitchen and make jelly from prickly pear he grow outside his quarters. Subordinates dutifully taste the jelly , which he make by a recipe from his boyhood days. In November , 1945 , with the war over , Admiral Nimitz become one of the senior naval officer elevate to the newly create rank of Admiral of the Fleet , a rank equivalent to that of General of the Army , or Field Marshal in the service of other countries. Honored by Many Nations After the war , Admiral Nimitz continue to be honor for his brilliant wartime service. He receive major decoration from 11 foreign country , include the British Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath. Fifteen university and college award him honorary degrees. In 1949 , Admiral Nimitz be name by the United Nations secretariat to supervise a propose plebiscite to determine whether Kashmir should become part of India or should be link to Pakistan. International complication keep the plebiscite commission from functioning. President Harry S. Truman appoint Admiral Nimitz to head a committee on Internal Security and Individual Rights. Because of opposition in Congress the committee never functioned. Although he have command 1,000 ship and two million men in World War II , Admiral Nimitz refuse to write memoirs. He allow others to organize birthday party for him in his late year , but not without grumbling. On his 75th birthday , he be ask if he be look forward to the celebration. `` I 'm look forward to the end of it , '' he said. `` I feel the same way about it a the man who buy himself a small boat. His two happy day be when he buy it and when he sell it. '' Besides his wife , he leave a son , Rear Adm. Chester W. Nimitz Jr. , retire , and three daughter , Mrs. Catherine Vance Lay of Newport , R.I. , Mary Monson Nimitz , a nun in the Dominican Convent at San Rafael , Calif. , and Miss Anne Elizabeth Nimitz of Topanga , Calif .