February 2 , 1966 OBITUARY Buster Keaton , 70 , Dies on Coast ; Poker-Faced Comedian of Films By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Hollywood , Feb. 1 -- Buster Keaton , the poker-faced comic whose study in exquisite frustration amuse two generation of movie audience , die of lung cancer today at his home in suburban Woodland Hills. His age be 70. Someone once remark of Buster Keaton that he look like the kind of man that dog kick. A mournful little fellow sad-faced a a basset , usually wear a saucer-brimmed porkpie hat , oversized suit and floppy bow tie , Joseph Francis Keaton stand with Charlie Chaplin and Harold Lloyd a one of the three great clown of the silent screen. In 30 or more film , mostly two-reelers , fill with pratfall and custard pie slapstick , Buster Keaton establish an unforgettable character -- the sad and silent loner who persevere stoically against a mechanized world. Unlike Mr. Chaplin , he be never sentimental and he never resort to maudlin pathos. He turn a granite face to the wildly comic and nightmarish cry that befall him -- and he always prevail over impending doom. His strength be his ability to survive. He display that perseverance not only in his comic characterization but also in his private activities. For his life be mark by period of triumph and frustration -- wealth , a descent into poverty and alcoholism , and then , in his twilight year , a return to rich , recognition and contentment. His period of great productivity be in the early and mid-1920's. In those light-tax day , Buster 's salary soar to $ 3,500 a week , and he build a $ 300,000 house in Beverly Hills. A great pantomimist , the equal of Mr. Chaplin in comic inventiveness , he be hold even superior to `` the little tramp '' in acrobatic grace. Mr. Keaton never use a double. His ability to take a violent fall without break a bone be the marvel of the day. Most of Mr. Keaton 's film be make without a script. `` Two or three writer and I would start with an idea and then we 'd work out a strong finish and let the middle take care of itself , a it always do , '' Mr. Keaton recall in an interview two year ago. `` Sometimes , we 'd work out a gag in advance ; other time , it would work itself out a we go along. In those day we do n't use miniature or process shots. The way a thing look on the screen be the way you 'd do it. '' When the movie begin talk , Buster Keaton drop out of sight. The public want voice , and Buster 's pantomime technique fail to hold up. Hard time and marital trouble pile up. After 11 year of marriage ( and two son ) , he and Natalie Talmadge , sister of the beautiful actress Norma and Constance , be divorce in 1932. His second marriage , to Mae Scribbens , end in divorce in 1935. In 1934 , file for bankruptcy , Buster list asset of $ 12,000 and liability of $ 303,832. Mr. Keaton be down but never quite out. Just when life seem as hostile a a paranoid 's nightmare , thing begin to look up. His third marriage , to Eleanor Norris , a 21-year-old dancer , in 1940 , bring stability. She survive him , a do his two sons. Video Star in Britain British television rescue him from obscurity in the early 1950's. It bring him fresh fame , a comfortable income and a new public. He appear on most major television show in London and be pay from $ 1,000 to $ 2,500 for each performance. In 1956 Paramount pay him $ 50,000 for the right to `` The Keaton Story , '' a film trace Mr. Keaton 's rise from vaudeville to Hollywood stardom , with Donald O'Connor play the title role. Mr. Keaton use the money to buy a ranch-type house and an acre and a half of farmland in the San Fernando Valley. He keep busy , make several film television show in Hollywood and appear in several act engagements. Reissued `` The General '' But it be his old silent movie that bring in the gold. Mr. Keaton have have his own produce company in the 1920 's and he retain ownership of his old films. He have the film quality restore and a sound track of music added. The pantomime remain intact and the old subtitle be kept. The first reissue be of `` The General '' -- a slapstick classic of a bumble Civil War spy -- in 1962. It play all over Europe. People laugh hard than they do in 1927 , when the film first come out. Mr. Keaton write the story and continuity of `` The General , '' direct it , cut it and play the lead role. It be shoot in 18 week at a cost of $ 330,000. It contain one of the great chase in movie history : Mr. Keaton 's attempt to tame a runaway train during the Civil War. Mr. Keaton 's renaissance reach an artistic peak last October at the Venice Film Festival , when `` Film , '' an arty 22-minute silent he make in New York in 1964 , be accord a five-minute standing ovation. Fighting back tear , Mr. Keaton tell a correspondent : `` This be the first time I 've be invite to a film festival , but I hope it wo n't be the last. '' Critics differ on `` Film , '' Samuel Beckett 's first screenplay , a story of an old , obsessed man who shut himself up in a room to thwart fate. But there be no dissension over the wonderfully comic image Mr. Keaton give the world in his old two-reelers such a : `` The Cameraman , '' `` Steamboat Bill Jr. , '' `` The Passionate Plumber , '' `` Sherlock Jr. '' and in a full-length classic , `` The Navigator. '' `` The Navigator '' contain the unforgettable scene of Mr. Keaton try to shuffle stuck- together cards. And then there be the memorable sequence when he launch a ship : he stand at attention on deck , resplendent in admiral 's uniform , rid it down the way , never blink or waver a it sink slowly out of sight. Early in his career Buster Keaton learn that a stoic countenance draw laughs. He be bear to the stage. His parent , Joseph and Myron Keaton , be appear in a tent show with Harry Houdini , the magician , when the future comedian arrive on October 4 , 1895 , while the show be play Piqua , Kan. It be Houdini who coin the nickname. `` What a buster ! '' Houdini be suppose to have exclaim when the six-month-old baby fell downstairs. That be only the first of countless pratfalls. In the family act , which become one of the rough knockabout low-comedy turn in vaudeville , Buster be toss around by Pop with murderous abandon while Mom , oblivious to the chaos , essay a saxophone solo downstage. It be around that time that Buster perfect his stoic mask while still a child performer. Hit on the face with a broom , he would wait five or six second without move a facial muscle , and then say `` Ouch. '' It always bring down the house. The Keatons do their last variety turn at the Palace in 1917. They be sign by the Schuberts for `` The Passing Show of 1917 '' but Buster be sidetrack by Roscoe ( Fatty ) Arbuckle , who talk young Keaton into take a support role in a two-reeler call `` The Butcher Boy. '' In this opus Buster be dump in molasses , bite by a dog and hit with an apple pie. Soon Buster become an expert on the composition of slapstick pies. `` First , you have to make it with a double crust on the bottom , so you could get a good hold on it without your finger go through , '' he once recalled. `` Then you make the filling of the pie out of flour and water uncooked , so it would be sticky and stringy , and you top it off with , say , blueberry and whip cream , or perhaps a nice meringue. I never throw a pie in any of my feature-length pictures. By then we think pie be pretty silly. '' In recent year Buster take great satisfaction in the knowledge that a new generation be find his old film funny than ever. And although he still refuse to smile when a camera be on him , he have to concede that life have n't be too bad. He be make good than $ 100,000 a year from commercial alone. `` I ca n't feel sorry for myself , '' he say in Venice last fall. `` It all go to show that if you stay on the merry-go-round long enough you 'll get another chance at the brass ring. Luckily , I stay on . ''