August 4 , 1966 OBITUARY Lenny Bruce , Uninhibited Comic , Found Dead in Hollywood Home Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES Hollywood , Aug. 3 ( AP ) -- Lenny Bruce , the controversial nightclub comedian whose act be sprinkle with four-letter word and pungent social satire , die tonight in his home on Hollywood Boulevard. He be 40 year old. The police say narcotic paraphernalia be find near his half-clad body , and the coroner 's office list an overdose of narcotic a probable cause of death. An autopsy will be perform tomorrow. Mr. Bruce 's real name be Leonard Alfred Schneider and he be bear in Mineola , L. I. His parent be divorce when he be 5 year old , and he go to live with relatives. He enter the Navy at the age of 16 , and be discharge in 1946. He then take on the various job that sustain him until he come to Hollywood to study act under the G.I. Bill. He land his first job a a comic in a Brooklyn nightspot. In Baltimore he meet and marry Honey Harlow , a striptease dancer. They be divorce in 1957. Meantime , he have appear on the Arthur Godfrey Show and gain something of a national reputation. He then return to Hollywood , where he work at nightclub and on a local television show. Last October the United States District Court in San Francisco , in support of a bankruptcy action , declare him a pauper. 'Radically Relevant' There be those who listen to Lenny Bruce 's series of staccato joke on religion , motherhood , politics and the law , carefully embellish with scatology , who agree with one estimate that he be `` the most radically relevant of all contemporary social satirists. '' There be others who say he be `` obscene. '' Whatever his significance , Lenny Bruce be controversial Since he first attract public attention about six year ago , he have anger and amuse people here and abroad with his biting , sardonic , introspective free-form patter that often be a form of shock therapy for his listeners. He be denounce in Sydney , Australia , for what be call a blasphemous account of the Crucifixion and a steady stream of dirty word , and his show close the day after it opened. He be arrest by the police in April , 1964 , after an appearance in a Greenwich Village nightclub and later convict for give an obscene performance. But nearly 100 person prominent in the art and other field , include Prof. Lionel Trilling of Columbia , Norman Mailer , James Jones , Robert Lowell , and Dr. Reinhold Neibuhr , rally to his defense and sign a statement that describe him a a social satirist `` in the tradition of Swift , Rabelais and Twain. '' His controversial stage performance at first attract big audience , but later his financial reward dwindled. He once note that in 1960 , before he be ever take to court , he have earn $ 108,000 , but in 1964 he expect to earn only $ 6,000. A lean , intense man , Mr. Bruce regard the nightclub stage a `` the last frontier '' of uninhibited entertainment. Although he seem to be do his utmost at time to antagonize his audience , he also display an air of morality beneath his brashness that some felt make his lapse in taste often forgiveable and sometimes necessary. He become know a one of the early `` sick '' comedian because he often carry his sharp comment to their naked and personal conclusion. Sanctity be hardly a word he knew. He even have an unkind word for Smoky the Bear. True , Smoky do n't set forest fire , Mr. Bruce say , but he eat Boy Scouts for their hats. He would express relief at what he say be a trend of `` people leave the church and go back to God. '' Always on familiar term with history and psychology , Mr. Bruce would illustrate his concern with integration with the example of the early Romans , who think there be `` something dirty '' about the Christians. He have one Roman ask another : `` Would you want your sister to marry one ? '' His concern with issue of the day be more than an onstage feeling. He once note : `` I be just think this morning that I 'd never sleep over at a colored person 's house. I 've never have dinner in a Negro home. There 's a big foreign country in my country that I know very little about. And more than that , when white talk about riot , we really lose our perspective completely. A man from Mars could see what 's really happening -- convict riot in a corrupt prison. '' His humor on the stage rarely evoke a comfortable belly laugh. It required concentration , and then often produce a wry smile and perhaps a fight gleam in the eye. There be also spell of total confusion a Mr. Bruce ramble in a stream-of- consciousness fashion. The many adult who find his humor obscene agree with two Criminal Court judge here who find in 1964 that Mr. Bruce 's performance be `` patently offensive to the average person in the community , a judge by present-day standards. '' In addition to his several arrest for narcotic and obscenity , the comedian be deport from Britain three year ago , get back in by way of Ireland and be deport again. His autobiography be publish in 1965. It be title , `` How to Talk Dirty and Influence People . ''