December 16 , 1966 OBITUARY Walt Disney , 65 , Dies on Coast ; Founded an Empire on a Mouse Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES Los Angeles , Dec. 15 -- Walt Disney , who build his whimsical cartoon world of Mickey Mouse , Donald Duck and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs into a $ 100-million-a-year entertainment empire , die in St. Joseph 's Hospital here this morning. He be 65 year old. His death , at 9:35 A.M. , be attribute to acute circulatory collapse. He have undergone surgery at the hospital a month ago for the removal of a lung tumor that be discover after he enter the hospital for treatment of an old neck injury receive in a polo match. On Nov. 30 he re-enter the hospital for a `` post-operative checkup. '' Just before his last illness , Mr. Disney be supervise the construction of a new Disneyland in Florida , a ski resort in Sequoia National Forest and the renovation of the 10-year-old Disneyland at Anaheim. His motion-picture studio be turn out six new production and several television show and he be spearhead the development of the vast University of the Arts , call Cal Art , now under construction here. Although Mr. Disney hold no formal title at Walt Disney Productions , he be in direct charge of the company and be deeply involve in all it operations. Indeed , with the recent decision of Jack L. Warner to sell his interest in the Warner Brothers studio , Mr. Disney be the last of Hollywood 's veteran moviemakers who remain in personal control of a major studio. Roy Disney , Walt Disney 's 74-year-old brother , who be president and chairman of Walt Disney Productions and who direct it financial operation , say : `` We will continue to operate Walt 's company in the way that he have establish and guide it. All of the plan for the future that Walt have begin will continue to move ahead. '' Besides his brother , Mr. Disney be survive by his widow , Lillian , two daughter , Mrs. Ron Miller and Mrs. Robert Brown. A private funeral service will be hold at a time to be announced. Weaver of Fantasies From his fertile imagination and industrious factory of draw board , Walt Elias Disney fashion the most popular movie star ever to come from Hollywood and create one of the most fantastic entertainment empire in history. In return for the happiness he supply , the world lavish wealth and tributes upon him. He be probably the only man in Hollywood to have be praise by both the American Legion and the Soviet Union. Where any other Hollywood producer would have be happy to get one Academy Award -- the high honor in American movie -- Mr. Disney smash all record by accumulate 29 Oscars. `` We 're sell corn , '' Mr. Disney once tell a reporter , `` and I like corn. '' David Low , the late British political cartoonist , call him `` the most significant figure in graphic art since Leonardo. '' Mr. Disney go from seven-minute animate cartoon to become the first man to mix animation with live action , and he pioneer in make feature-length cartoons. His nature film be almost as popular a his cartoon , and eventually he expand into feature-length movie use only live actors. The most successful of his non-animated production , `` Mary Poppins , '' release in 1964 , have already gross close to $ 50-million. It also win an Oscar for Julie Andrews in the title role. From a small garage-studio , the Disney enterprise grow into one of the most modern movie studio in the world , with four sound stage on 51 acres. Mr. Disney acquire a 420-acre ranch that be use for shoot exterior shot for his movie and television productions. Among the lucrative by- product of his output be many comic script and enormous royalty pay to him by toy-makers who use his characters. Mr. Disney 's restless mind create one of the nation 's great tourist attraction , Disneyland , a 300- acre tract of amusement ride , fantasy spectacle and re-created Americana that cost $ 50.1-million. By last year , when Disneyland observe it 10th birthday , it have be visit by some 50 million people. Its international fame be emphasize in 1959 by the then Soviet Premier , Nikita S. Khrushchev , who protest , when visit Hollywood , that he have be unable to see Disneyland. Security arrangement could not be make in time for Mr. Khruschev 's visit. Even after Disneyland have prove itself , Mr. Disney decline to consider suggestion that he have well leave well enough alone : `` Disneyland will never be complete as long a there be imagination left in the world. '' Ideas Met Skepticism Repeatedly , a Mr. Disney come up with new idea he encounter considerable skepticism. For Mickey Mouse , the foundation of his realm , Mr. Disney have to pawn and sell almost everything because most exhibitor look upon it a just another cartoon. But when the public have a chance to speak , the noble-hearted mouse with the high-pitched voice , red pant , yellow shoe and white glove become the most beloved of Hollywood stars. When Mr. Disney decide to make the first feature-length cartoon -- '' Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs '' -- many Hollywood expert scoff that no audience would sit through such a long animation. It become one of the big money-makers in movie history. Mr. Disney be think a fool when he become the first important movie producer to make film for television. His detractor , once again be prove wrong. Mr. Disney 's television fame be build on such show a `` Disneyland , '' `` The Mickey Mouse Club , '' `` Zorro , '' `` Davy Crockett '' and the current `` Walt Disney 's Wonderful World of Color. '' He be , however , the only major movie producer who refuse to release his movie to television. He contend , with a good deal of profitable evidence , that each seven year there would be another generation that would flock to the movie theater to see his old films. Mickey Mouse would have be fame enough for most men. In France he be know a Michel Souris ; in Italy , Topolino ; in Japan , Miki Kuchi ; in Spain , Miguel Ratoncito ; in Latin America , El Raton Miguelito ; in Sweden , Muse Pigg , and in Russia , Mikki Maus. On D-Day during World War II Mickey Mouse be the pass-word of Allied Supreme Headquarters in Europe. But Mickey Mouse be not enough for Mr. Disney. He create Donald Duck , Pluto and Goofy. He dig into book for Dumbo , Bambi , Peter Pan , The Three Little Pigs , Ferdinand the Bull , Cinderella , the Sleeping Beauty , Brer Rabbit , Pinocchio. In `` Fantasia , '' he blend cartoon story with classical music. Though Mr. Disney 's cartoon character differ markedly , they be all alike in two respect : they be lovable and unsophisticated. Most popular be big-eared Mickey of the piping voice ; choleric Donald Duck of the unintelligible quacking ; Pluto , that most amiable of clumsy dog , and the seven dwarf , who steal the show from Snow White : Dopey , Grumpy , Bashful , Sneezy , Happy , Sleepy and Doc. His cartoon creature be often surround with lovely songs. Thus , Snow White have `` Some Day My Prince Will Come '' and the dwarf have `` Whistle While You Work. '' From his version of `` The Three Little Pigs , '' his most successful cartoon short , come another international hit , `` Who 's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf ? '' Cliff Edwards a Jiminy Cricket sing `` When You Wish Upon a Star '' for `` Pinocchio. '' More recently , `` Mary Poppins '' introduce `` Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious. '' Exhibition at Museum Mr. Disney seem to have have an almost superstitious fear of consider his movie a art , though an exhibition of some of his leading cartoon character be once hold in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. `` I 've never call this art , '' he said. `` It 's show business. '' One day , when Mr. Disney be approach 60 and his black hair and neatly trim mustache be gray , he be ask to reduce his success to a formula. His brown eye become alternately intense and dreamy. He finger an ashtray a he gaze around an office so cluttered with trophy that it look like a pawn shop. `` I guess I 'm an optimist. I 'm not in business to make unhappy pictures. I love comedy too much. I 've always love comedy. Another thing. Maybe it 's because I can still be amaze at the wonder of the world. `` Sometimes I 've try to figure out why Mickey appeal to the whole world. Everybody 's try to figure it out. So far a I know , nobody has. He 's a pretty nice fellow who never do anybody any harm , who get into scrape through no fault of his own , but always manage to come out grinning. Why Mickey 's even be faithful to one girl , Minnie , all his life. Mickey be so simple and uncomplicated , so easy to understand that you ca n't help like him. '' But when Dwight D. Eisenhower be President , he find word for Mr. Disney. He call him a `` genius a a creator of folklore '' and say his `` sympathetic attitude toward life have help our child develop a clean and cheerful view of humanity , with all it frailty and possibility for good. '' Honored by Universities When France give to Mr. Disney it high artistic decoration a Officier d'Academie , he be cite for his `` contribution to education and knowledge '' with such nature-study film a `` Seal Island , '' `` Beaver Valley , '' `` Nature's Half Acre '' and `` The Living Desert. '' From Harvard and Yale , this stocky , industrious man who have never graduate from high school receive honorary degrees. He be honor by Yale the same day a it honor Thomas Mann , the Nobel Prize-winning novelist. Prof. William Lyon Phelps of Yale say of Mr. Disney : `` He have accomplish something that have defy all the effort and experiment of the laboratory in zoology and biology. He have give animal souls. '' By the end of his career , the list of 700 award and honor that Mr. Disney receive from many nation fill 29 typewritten page , and include 29 Oscars , four Emmys and the Presidential Freedom Medal. There be tribute of a different nature. Toys in the shape of Disney character sell by the many millions. Paris couturier and expensive jeweler both use Disney patterns. One of the most astounding exhibition of popular devotion come in the wake of Mr. Disney 's film about Davy Crockett. In a matter of month , youngster all over the country who would balk at wear a hat in winter , be adorn in 'coonskin cap in midsummer. In some way Mr. Disney resemble the movie pioneer of a generation before him. He be not afraid of risk. One day , when all the world thought of him a a fabulous success , he tell an acquaintance , `` I 'm in great shape , I now owe the bank only eight million. '' A friend of 20 year recall that he once say , `` A buck be something to be spend creating. '' Early in 1960 he declare , `` It 's not what you have , but how much you can borrow that 's important in business. '' Mr. Disney have no trouble borrow money in his late years. Bankers , in fact , seek him out. Last year Walt Disney Productions gross $ 110-million. His family own 38 per cent of this publicly hold corporation , and all of Retlaw , a company that control the use of Mr. Disney 's name. Mr. Disney 's contract with Walt Disney Productions give him a basic salary of $ 182,000 a year and a deferred salary of $ 2,500 a week , with option to buy up to 25 per cent interest in each of his live- action features. It be understood that he begin exercise these option in 1961 , but only up to 10 per cent. These interest alone would have make him a multimillionaire. Mr. Disney , like early movie executive , insist on absolute authority. He be savage in rebuke a subordinate. An associate of many year say the bos `` could make you feel one-inch tall , but he would n't let anybody else do it. That be his privilege. '' Once in a bargaining dispute with a union of artist , a strike at the Disney studio go on for two month and be settle only after Government mediation. Did Not Draw Mickey Mouse This attitude by Mr. Disney be one of the reason some artist disparage him. Another be that he do none of the drawing of his most famous cartoons. Mickey Mouse , for instance , be draw by Ubbe Iwerks , who be with Mr. Disney almost from the beginning. However , Mr. Iwerks insist that Disney could have do the drawing , but be too busy. Mr. Disney do , however , furnish Mickey 's voice for all cartoons. He also sit in on all story conferences. Although Mr. Disney 's power and wealth multiply with his achievement , his manner remain that of some prosperous , Midwestern storekeeper. Except when imbue with some new Disneyland project or movie idea , he be incline to be phlegmatic. His nasal speech , deliver slowly , be rarely accompany by gestures. His phlegmatic manner often mask his independence and tenacity. Walt Disney be bear in Chicago on Dec. 5 , 1901. His family move to Marceline , Mo. , when he be a child and he spend most of his boyhood on a farm. He recall that he enjoy sketch animal on the farm. Later , when his family move back to Chicago , he go to high school and study cartoon draw at night at the Academy of Fine Arts. He do illustration for the school paper. When the United States enter World War I he be turn down by the Army and Navy because he be too young. So he go to France a an ambulance driver for the Red Cross. He decorate the side of his ambulance with cartoon and have his work publish in Stars and Stripes. After the war the young man work a a cartoonist for advertising agencies. But he be always look for something better. When Mr. Disney get a job do cartoon for advertisement that be show in theater between movie , he be determine that that be to be his future. He would say to friend , `` This be the most marvelous thing that have ever happened. '' In 1920 he organize his own company to make cartoon about fairy tales. He make about a dozen but could not sell them. He be so determined to continue in this field that at time he have no money for food and live with Mr. Iwerks. In 1923 Mr. Disney decide to leave Kansas City. He go to Hollywood , where he form a small company and do a series of film cartoon call `` Alice in Cartoonland. '' After two year of `` Alice in Cartoonland , '' Mr. Disney drop it in favor of a series about `` Oswald the Rabbit. '' In 1928 most of his artist decide to break with him and do their own Oswald. Mr. Disney go to New York to try to keep the series but failed. When he return , he , his wife , his brother Roy and Mr. Iwerks try to think of a character for a new series , but failed. They decide on a mouse. Mrs. Disney name it Mickey. Added Sound to Cartoon The first Mickey Mouse cartoon , `` Plane Crazy , '' be take to New York by Mr. Disney. But the distributor be apathetic. `` Felix , the Cat '' be ruler of the cartoon field , and they saw nothing unusual in a mouse. When Mr. Disney return from New York he decide that sound have a future in movies. He make a second Mickey Mouse , this one with sound , call `` Steambot Bill. '' In October , 1928 , the cartoon open at the Colony Theater in New York. Success be immediate and the Disney empire begin .