February 18 , 1966 OBITUARY Alfred P. Sloan Jr. Dead at 90 ; G.M. Leader and Philanthropist By THE NEW YORK TIMES Alfred P. Sloan Jr. , who shape the General Motors Corporation into one of the world 's large manufacturing enterprise , die of a heart attack yesterday afternoon at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Center here. He be 90 year old. Mr. Sloan have be in excellent health until Tuesday , when he complain of not feel well. He be take to the hospital , which his philanthropy help to establish , on Wednesday afternoon from his home at 820 Fifth Avenue. He succumb yesterday at 2:35 P.M. With him at the hospital be his brother , Raymond P. , special lecturer in the School of Public Health and Hospital Administration of Columbia University. Mr. Sloan be acclaim last night a one of the great captain of industry of his age , not alone for his managerial skill but also for the pioneering automotive advance that he oversaw. These include four-wheel brake , ethyl gasoline , crankcase ventilation and knee-action front springs. In a joint statement Frederic G. Donner , chairman of General Motors , and James W. Roche , it president , say : `` His contribution to science and education and those of the foundation that bear his name be match only by his accomplishment in business and industry. '' Mr. Sloan make his mark , his associate say , `` a a planner , organizer and administrator. '' Roy Abernathy , president of the American Motors Corporation , call Mr. Sloan `` the most advanced practitioner of modern management of our time. '' A friend in the industry , Lynn A. Townsend , president of the Chrysler Corporation , say last night that Mr. Sloan 's `` service to our nation and our industry can not be measured. '' In Detroit , Henry Ford 2d , chairman of the Ford Motor Company , extol Mr. Sloan a `` one of the small handful of men who actually make automotive history. '' `` Under his leadership , '' Mr. Ford say , `` General Motors develop from a loosely organize group of company into the present highly efficient giant corporation. '' At his death Mr. Sloan be honorary chairman of General Motors , and in this capacity he have attend a board of director meet here last month. Associates who talk with him then say yesterday that he participate in the session with his usual acuity. Mr. Sloan head General Motors a president and then chairman from 1923 to 1956. His Work , His Hobby , His Love In the nineteen-thirties when Alfred Pritchard Sloan Jr. be chief executive officer of the General Motors Corporation a friend tell him that a man of his position ought to own a yacht. After some hesitation , the slim , dandily dress industrialist agree and buy a 236-footer for $ 1 million. He incorporate it , christen it Rene , hire a crew of 43 at an annual cost of $ 119,609 and embark on a few cruises. But life afloat quickly bore him , and the yacht be virtually lay up until he sell it in 1941 to the Maritime Commission for $ 175,000. This nautical flying be notable in Mr. Sloan 's life because it be one of the few venture that do not turn a handsome profit and because it be a leisure-time caper. Indeed , it be perhaps his only frivolity , for Mr. Sloan do not smoke , rarely drank , read little for pleasure and never engage in golf or any other sport. A functional , frill-less man , he be convince that sport be a waste of a man 's time. Such dissipation , moreover , interfere with his work , his hobby , his love -- the running of General Motors. Even in retirement , when Mr. Sloan be administer his multimillion dollar medical and educational benefaction , his sole relaxation be an evening 's television watching. When Mr. Sloan become vice president of operation of General Motors in 1920 the company account for less than 12 percent of motor vehicle sale in the nation ; when he step down a chairman in 1956 it share be 52 per cent. Moreover , General Motors have expand into one of the world 's large companies. It be also among the most profitable and , operationally , one of the smoothest. These accomplishment be credit to Mr. Sloan 's management policies. He centralize administration and decentralize operation , group together those that have a common relationship. He also realign the company 's product so that one brand of automobile do not conflict with another. Each product -- car , electric icebox or whatever -- be set apart in it own division. It be part of Mr. Sloan 's genius that he be familiar with every detail of each division. Along Staff Lines In his 14 year a president of General Motors ( 1923-37 ) and in almost 20 year a chairman of the board ( 1937-56 ) Mr. Sloan run the company on the staff principle , with himself a chief. But despite the eminence of his position he do not comport himself like an autocrat , nor do he hoot and holler. ( He be know throughout the organization a `` Silent Sloan. '' ) He also refrain from order underling about. `` I never give order , '' Mr. Sloan once said. `` I sell my idea to my associate if I can. I accept their judgment if they convince me , a they frequently do , that I be wrong. I prefer to appeal to the intelligence of a man rather than attempt to exercise authority over him. '' An associate liken him to a roller bearing -- '' self-lubricating , smooth , eliminate friction and carry the load. '' A typical workday bore out this portrayal. Mr. Sloan arrive at his office in the General Motors Building , 1775 Broadway ( at 57th Street ) at 9:30 A.M. ( In winter he drive from his 14-room apartment on Fifth Avenue ; in summer he commute to Pennsylvania Station from his 25 acre in Great Neck , L.I. , and ride the subway to West 59th Street. ) Father Was Well-to-Do With metronomic precision he tick off the day 's conferences. He be restless , squirm in his chair , gesture , put his small , well-shod foot on the table. When he talk , it be in a quiet voice that curl out of the side of his mouth with a trace of a Brooklyn accent. When he listen , it be with the extra intentness of the deaf. By 5:30 he be ready to depart for home with a briefcase under his arm ; and after dinner with his wife he usually work for a few hour and be in bed at 10 o'clock. Two week a month he spend in Detroit , where he rarely stir out of the gray G.M. building , not even to a hotel. Summarizing his recipe for success , Mr. Sloan say : `` Get the facts. Recognize the equity of all concerned. Realize the necessity of do a good job every day. Keep an open mind and work hard. The last be most important at all. There be no short cut. '' He be bear in New Haven on May 23 , 1875. His father be a well-to-do coffee and tea importer , and later a wholesale grocer. The Sloans move to 240 Garfield Place , Brooklyn , when Alfred Jr. , be 10. He attend public school until he be 11 , when he enter Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute where he establish a reputation a a prodigy in mechanic and engineering. At 17 he enrol in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge , and by grind away every possible minute he graduate in three years. With his father 's help Alfred get a draftsman 's job in the Hyatt Roller Bearing Company at Harrison , N. J. The company be not do very well , but Alfred have confidence that it could be make to show a profit. He persuade his father and another man to put up $ 5,000 and place him in control. In the first six month the business yield $ 12,000 in profits. It be the automotive industry , however , that make the company 's fortune. Automakers have be use a heavily grease wagon axle until Mr. Sloan persuade the Olds Motors Company to try his bearings. Henry Ford and the other manufacturer soon follow suit , and Hyatt Bearing start make money hand over fist. By 1916 the company be do a gross business of $ 10-million a year and make profit as high a $ 4-million. Of equal importance , Mr. Sloan have make a name for himself in Detroit a a knowledgeable and reliable business man with keen insight into the auto industry. His First $ 5-Million By that year General Motors , replace Ford , have become Mr. Sloan 's large customer , and there be some hint that it might make it own bearings. Instead , General Motors , which have be stitch together from several independent auto concern by the mercurial William Crapo Durant , buy Hyatt for $ 13.5-million. He promptly merge it with some other part and accessory company into the United Motors Corporation and instal Mr. Sloan a president. In the process Mr. Sloan pocket his first $ 5-million , a start on a fortune that be to rise to $ 250-million. Late in 1918 , through the initiative of John J. Raskob , General Motors take over United Motors a it own part division , and Mr. Sloan go along a it executive head. Successively , he be name a member of the G. M. board of director and a vice president. Meanwhile , Mr. Durant , his backer and sponsor , be sweep out of the company through stock purchase by the du Pont interests. Two and a half million share pass to them in a single day. Pierre S. du Pont thereupon become president of General Motors , but be unfamiliar with the motor-car business he lean on Mr. Sloan , who become vice president of operation in 1920. Three year later Mr. du Pont leave the presidency and put Mr. Sloan in the chair. The corporation 's net sale be then $ 698-million ; six year later there be $ 1.5- billion. In the process , General Motors ' Chevrolet displace Ford a sale leader in the low-price field , and the market price of it stock be up 480 per cent. This growth cost Mr. Sloan much leg work. `` It may surprise you to know , '' he say at the time , `` that I have personally visit , with many of my associate , practically every city in the United States , from the Atlantic to the Pacific and from Canada to Mexico. `` On these trip I visit from 5 to 10 dealer a day. I meet them in their own place of business , talk with them across their own desk and solicit from them suggestion and criticism a to their relation with the corporation. '' And a Sloan visit be not soon forget , for Mr. Sloan be 6 foot tall and weigh 130 pounds. He arrive dress in what be then the height of fashion -- a dark , double- breast suit , a high starch collar , conservative tie fix with a pearl stickpin , a handkerchief cascade out of his breast pocket and spats. It be enough to awe any dealer. When Franklin D. Roosevelt take office in 1933 Mr. Sloan at first cooperate with the New Administration , become a member of the Industrial Advisory Board of the National Recovery Administration. When the dollar be devalue , however , the New Deal lose a friend and gain a persistent critic. Early in 1937 Mr. Sloan encounter one of the major crisis of his business life when newly organize worker in General Motors plant stag a 44-day sitdown strike to obtain union recognition. The industrialist haughtily refuse to deal with the striker while they `` continue to hold our plant unlawfully. '' He join the chorus of those assail John L. Lewis , head of the Committee for Industrial Organization , a seek to dominate the motor industry. President Roosevelt rebuke him , public sympathy run against him and he beat a retreat , which be signalize when Gov. Frank Murphy of Michigan bring labor and management together. Mr. Sloan , however , do not carry on the negotiation personally. He remain in New York , delegate the distasteful job to William S. Knudsen , then vice president in charge of operation , and other executives. A few month later he turn over the company presidency to Mr. Knudsen and become chairman of the board. A month later , in June , 1937 , Mr. Sloan be in the headline again when Treasury expert report to a Congressional committee that he and his wife have avoid payment of $ 1,921,587 in income tax over a three-year period through personal hold companies. Although there be no Government charge that this mean of tax avoidance be illegal , the implication be so unpleasant that Mr. Sloan issue a statement denying that he ever seek to evade a just share of the tax burden. He say that he and his wife have receive in 1936 income total $ 2,876,310. Their Federal and state income tax , he assert , eat up $ 1,725,790 , and the remainder -- $ 1,150,520 -- be divide evenly between charity and themselves. Toward the end of the year Mr. Sloan make a substantial foray into philanthropy by endow the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation with $ 10-million. In announce the benefaction , he say : `` Having be connect with industry during my entire life , it seem eminently proper that I should turn back , in part , the proceeds of that activity with the hope of promote a broader as well a a good understanding of the economic principle and national policy which have characterize American enterprise down through the years. '' Up to 1966 the value of Mr. Sloan 's gift to the foundation and those of his wife , Irene , total $ 305-million , of which about $ 130-million have be give away. The gift have not be restrict to economic studies. One of the foundation 's first large benefaction be in 1945 -- provision of $ 2.56-million for the establishment of the Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research in New York , a component of the Memorial Cancer Center. Grants of $ 300,000 annually be also make at the same time to help finance research. Charles F. Kettering , the co-sponsor of the institute , be a close friend of Mr. Sloan 's and director of the General Motors Research Laboratory. Until his death he be an institute trustee. Additional fund be give the institute over the year , and it and the hospital be eventually reorganize a the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center , with a medical and scientific staff of 1,500 persons. Another recipient of Mr. Sloan 's benefaction be M.I.T. , his alma mater. These include a laboratory for study of automotive and aircraft engine and aeronautical engineering problems. In 1945 he give $ 350,000 for an industrial management professorship and four year later he donate $ 1-million for a metal process laboratory. In 1950 the Sloan Foundation give M.I.T. $ 5.25-million for a School of Industrial Management , subsequently name the Alfred P. Sloan School of Management. Mr. Sloan give the school $ 1-million for management research in 1952. The foundation also give M.I.T. $ 5-million to establish a Center for Advanced Engineering Study , whose student be practice engineer and professor of engineering. Two year ago Mr. Sloan establish the Alfred P. Sloan Fund for Basic Research in the Physical Sciences at M.I.T. The fund include a personal gift of $ 5-million from Mr. Sloan and an equal amount from his foundation. Last year a similar fund be establish at the California Institute of Technology. As a further venture into education , the Sloan Foundation in 1958 establish a program under which four-year scholarship be award to outstanding college students. Forty- five institution now participate in the project , in which 600 student be enrolled. In an official biographical sketch issue by Mr. Sloan 's office in 1966 , his attitude toward philanthropy be outlined. `` As chairman of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation , '' the sketch say , `` Mr. Sloan have the responsibility of establish the fact that every propose grant be a sound investment in some area of human need , and not in any sense of the word a 'giveaway ' ; far , that adequate responsibility exist to administer the program intelligently. Here be Mr. Sloan 's description of what a foundation should be -- a well- organize , efficiently manage business enterprise with a wholesome respect for every dollar at it disposal. '' A friend once put it more directly , say , `` He 's no Scrooge , but he still know the value of a dollar. '' In World War II General Motors , under Mr. Sloan 's direction , convert it automotive plant to the manufacture of armaments. A total of 102 plant be involve , and from February , 1942 , to September , 1945 , no automobile be produced. Reconversion be a back-breaking process , but it be accomplish more smoothly than many observer have predict , for virtually all G.M. line be back in civilian production by the end of 1945. After the war General Motors expand it activity in the household appliance field and in diesel motors. The company also develop overseas plant and outlets. In 1946 Mr. Sloan step down a the company 's chief executive officer after 25 year in that post. He remain a chairman of the board until 1956 , when he be elect honorary chairman , a position he hold until his death. Held Corporate Posts Although Mr. Sloan 's business life be center on General Motors , he be a director of E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co. , the Pullman Company , J. P. Morgan & Co. , the Kennecott Copper Corporation , the Johns Manville Corporation and the Braden Copper Company. In retirement , Mr. Sloan turn his mind to write a book. `` My Years With General Motors '' be publish in 1964 by Doubleday. A document insider 's story of the management of General Motors. It sell more than 50,000 hard-cover copies. In it , he tell why one management be successful and another be not. `` The cause of success or failure be deep and complex , '' he write , `` and chance play a part. Experience have convince me , however , that for those who be responsible for a business , two important factor be motivation and opportunity. The former be supply in good part by incentive compensation , the latter by decentralization. '' Mr. Sloan also take time to reply to critic of General Motors and it success. `` General Motors have become what it be because of it people and the way they work together , and because of the opportunity afford those people to participate in an enterprise which combine their activity efficiently. `` The field be open to all ; technical knowledge flow from a common storehouse of scientific progress ; the technique of production be an open book , and the related instrument of production be available to all. The market be world-wide , and there be no favorite except those choose by the customers. '' Also in retirement , Mr. Sloan devote himself to his foundation. He maintain daily hour at it office , 630 Fifth Avenue. On day when he have no luncheon engagement , he eat in his paneled office. His fare be a homemade sandwich , which he have bring with him , neatly wrap in paper , in his coat pocket. The office be always brighten by fresh flower and it contain a portrait of his wife , the former Irene Jackson , whom he marry in 1898. She die in 1956. They have no children. In addition to Raymond , Mr. Sloan be survive by two other brother , Harold S. and Clifford A. , both of New York , and sister , Mrs. Katherine Sloan Pratt of Syossett , L.I. A funeral service will be hold tomorrow at 11 A.M. in Christ Church Methodist , 520 Park Avenue. There will be no pallbearers. Until the funeral , his body will be at Frank E. Campbell 's , Madison Avenue at 81st Street. Burial will be private at St. John 's Cemetery , Cold Spring Harbor , L.I .