August 23 , 1967 OBITUARY Dr. Pincus , Developer of Birth-Control Pill , Dies Special to The New York Times BOSTON , Aug. 22 -- Dr. Gregory Goodwin Pincus , one of the three `` father '' of the birth-control pill , die here tonight at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital of myeloid metaplasia , a rare blood disease. He be 64 year old and live in Northboro. Expert on Reproduction With Dr. M. C. Chang , a senior scientist of the Worcester Foundation , and Dr. John Rock , head of the Rock Reproductive Clinic of Brookline , Mass. , Dr. Pincus develop a relatively safe and simple oral contraceptive that revolutionize family planning. The Pill , a it have come to be call , not only revolutionized method of birth control , but also introduce the previously taboo topic a a subject for worldwide debate on curb overpopulation. Women be cautious in accept it when it be first market in 1960 but today more than six million American woman -- nearly one-fifth of those of childbearing age -- be believe to be use it -- and the number be growing. Dr. Pincus be research director of the Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology , and his interest include many aspect of hormone studies. He be an authority in mammalian reproduction and a pioneer in cancer research. Studied Adrenal Hormone In the late nineteen-forties Dr. Pincus focus his attention on the role of hormone in his study of reproduction. With a grant from the National Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases of the Public Health Service in the fifty , he begin a study of the property of hydrocortisone , an adrenal hormone. These experiment involve the use of progesterone , a female hormone secretion that be trigger by ovulation. The hormone thicken the wall of the Fallopian tube and the womb in preparation for the fertilized egg. Progesterone also safeguard against overlap pregnancy by prevent further fertilization and thus serf a a natural birth-control agent. Dr. Pincus and Dr. Chang begin to discuss the possibility of a synthetic progesterone. They experiment with more than 200 substance before settle upon three steroid compound derive from the root of the wild Mexican yam. These seem to prevent ovulation in laboratory animals. It be at this time that the two biologist team up with Dr. Rock , a Roman Catholic gynecologist and obstetrician , who be also work with progesterone to cure infertility in his childless patients. Dr. Chang make the basic experimental observation , while Dr. Pincus work the finding into the over-all research scheme. `` Pincus can interrupt a critical problem to take 10 phone call and then switch his mind back to the problem in a second , '' an associate said. `` Recognizing people and human frailty a they exist , he have free himself from emotional turbulence. '' Tested in 3 Areas In 1956 , Dr. Pincus begin experiment in Brookline , Mass. , Puerto Rico and Haiti with the steroid in pill form on hundred of women. Again success be reported. In 1957 the Food and Drug Administration authorize the marketing of the steroid for miscarriage and certain menstrual disorder , and in 1960 , the Federal agency license Enovid , a contraceptive pill. The pill be believe to be 100 per cent effective , and the very few pregnancy that have be report among pill-users be believe to be error in negligence in remember to take the pill. The pill be take daily for 20 day , during which time ovulation be impossible. The egg , instead of be release and pass into the Fallopian tube , where fertilization could take place , be simply reabsorb within the ovary. Within five day after the pill be stop the woman begin to menstruate again. On the fifth day of menstruation , the next 20-day pill cycle be begun. Dr. Chang and Dr. Pincus have be work recently on a new pill , know popularly a the `` morning-after '' pill. It affect the egg after ovulation. During the seven day or more require for the fertilized egg to become implanted in the uterus , the pill expel the egg from the Fallopian tube and uterus before implantation can occur. Dr. Pincus be also credit with the development of Estrone , a hormone use in the treatment of breast cancer and pregnancy complications. Dr. Pincus , a bushy-haired man with a gray mustache and dark , burn eye , be bear in Woodbine , N. J. , on April 9 , 1903 , and later credit two uncle , both agricultural scientist , a responsible for his early interest in research. `` As long a I can remember , I know I be go to be a scientist , '' he once recalled. He go to Cornell and receive a bachelor 's degree in agriculture in 1924. Then he go to Harvard where he be an instructor in zoology while also work toward his master 's and doctorate degrees. From 1927 to 1930 he move from Harvard to Cambridge University in England to the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin , conduct research. He become an instructor in general physiology at Harvard in 1930 and be promote a year later to assistant professor. By 1938 , at the age of 35 , he be already an international authority on the sex of mammal and sex hormone , and more than 70 of his research paper have be published. Dr. Pincus become know to the general public when newspaper print article about his experiment and research with `` fatherless '' rabbits. In 1939 , while a professor of experimental zoology at Clark University in Worchester , Mass. , he bring about the first fatherless mammalian birth in history by induce parthenogenesis in a female rabbit. He use high temperature , hormone treatment and salt solution to fertilize the ovum in a test tube. He then implant the develop egg in the reproductive tract of the female rabbit , where the egg mature through the normal stages. But the research also cause him prolonged embarrassment. In May of that year , he go to Toronto to report on his experiment to a meeting of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology. He say emphatically that he be not plan to carry on his experiment with rabbit to see if human baby could be make by test-tube method. But a report of his remark omit the word `` not , '' and he be thereafter call upon frequently , both here and abroad , to deny that he be try `` to create human life in the laboratory. '' The Worcester Foundation have be create the previous year , and Dr. Pincus and Dr. Hoagland interested local businessmen and professional in raise fund to purchase a 12-acre estate at Shrewsbury , Mass. , where the foundation 's main building be now located. The foundation be formally incorporate in 1944 , with Dr. Pincus a a co-director. The 20th anniversary report indicate some of the scope of the foundation 's activity : research in the field of steroid , cancer research , study of the human age process , possible chemical cause of schizophrenia and other mental disease and the relationship of hormone to heart disease. In 1940 , he be ask what he saw in the future on the basis of his early experiments. `` I ca n't tell , '' he reply , `` but there be no big step , there be all little steps. We have to follow process systematically. The big question be : why do an egg start to develop and why do it continue to develop. '' Concurrent with his work at the foundation , Dr. Pincus serve a research professor at the Tufts College Medical School from 1946 to 1950 and a research professor in biology at Boston University from 1950 until his death. The work of the foundation attract eminent scientist from all part of the world. More than 300 scientist from 40 country be currently involve in foundation research. Cited Many Times Dr. Pincus be a member or chairman of many important research committee of the National Institute of Health of the United States Public Health Service and also of the National Research Council. He be the recipient of numerous prize and award , include the Albert D. Lasker Award in Planned Parenthood , 1960 ; the Modern Medicine Award for Distinguished Achievement in 1964 ; and the American Medical Association Scientific Achievement Award in 1967. His book include `` The Eggs of Mammals , '' publish in 1936 , and `` The Control of Fertility , '' publish in 1965. Dr. Pincus be survive by his widow , the former Elizabeth Notkin , whom he marry in 1924 ; a son , John ; a daughter , Mrs. Laura Bernard ; three brother , Lee , Maurice , and Alexis ; a sister , Mrs. Charles O. Dutton , and four grandchildren. A funeral service will be hold on Friday at 11 A.M. at Temple Emanuel , Chandler Street , Worcester. Burial will be private .