March 1 , 1967 OBITUARY Henry R. Luce , Creator of Time-Life Magazine Empire , Dies in Phoenix at 68 by ALDEN WHITMAN A man of missionary zeal and limitless curiosity , Henry Robinson Luce deeply influence American journalism between 1923 , when he and the late Briton Hadden found Time The Weekly Newsmagazine , and 1964 , when he retire a head of one of the world 's large and richest publishing empires. Mr. Luce create the modern news magazine , foster the development of group journalism , restyled pictorial reporting , encourage a crisp and adjective-studded style of writing and initiate the concept of cover business a a continue magazine story. In the process , the tall , lean man with heavy eyebrow grow to be one of the nation 's wealthy men , rise to a position of vast and pervasive economic , political and social influence and help shape the reading habit , political attitude and cultural taste of millions. Nonetheless , he try to remain inconspicuous a a public figure. In private his manner of living be notably inconspicuous. `` We tell the truth a we see it , '' Mr. Luce once explain when his magazine take side on controversies. And he be accustom to urge his editor to make a judgment. He believe that objectivity be impossible. `` Show me a man who claim he be objective , '' he tell an interviewer , `` and I 'll show you a man with illusions. '' To a remarkable extent during the peak of his total involvement with his magazine -- Time , Fortune , Life and Sports Illustrated -- the judgment and opinion that be print reflect the focus of Mr. Luce 's own view -- and these encompass virtually every facet of human endeavor. He be a stanch Republican , a defender of big business and free enterprise , a foe of big labor , a steadfast supporter of Chiang Kai-shek , an advocate of aggressive opposition to world Communism. He be also an Anglophile , but he believe that `` the 20th century must be to a significant degree the American century. '' Admired and Criticized As with many who achieve eminence , Mr. Luce be laud by those he benefit ; he be curse by those who felt injure by him and , sometimes , even by those men whose career he have made. Virtually no one view him temperately , yet admirer and critic respect his business accomplishment , his ingenious brain , his insatiable curiosity , his editorial prescience. For example , he anticipate an American appetite for tersely package news , for the photojournalism of Life magazine and for the easy-to-grasp pictorial essay on such topic a `` The World We Live In , '' `` The World 's Great Religions '' and `` The Human Body. '' Mr. Luce be not gregarious , especially convivial or give to mix with those he consider his intellectual inferiors. `` He live well above the tree line on Olympus , '' one of his editor remarked. After his formal retirement , however , Mr. Luce try hard to unbend , but his fund of small talk be usually exhaust after a few moment of pleasantries. Attempting to explain the difference between the dour Mr. Luce and the puckish Time magazine , a friend say : `` Time be a side of Luce call forth by the magic of the write word. '' The Luce enterprise , which have an annual revenue of $ 503-million in 1966 , be start on an $ 86,000 shoestring in 1923 by Mr. Luce and Mr. Hadden. The two , schoolmate at Hotchkiss and Yale , have for a long time discuss the idea of get out a weekly magazine capsulize the news for reader who want a condensed account of events. Vision of Evangel `` People in America be , for the most part , poorly inform , '' the prospectus for Time declared. This attitude , and it implication that something ought to be do about it , be one of the key to Mr. Luce 's conception of himself a an evangel. It be an attitude ingrain from early childhood , a be his tendency to evaluate many issue in moral terms. He be bear April 3 , 1898 , in Tengchow , China , the son of the Rev. Dr. Henry Winters Luce , a poor but socially well-connected Presbyterian clergyman and teacher , and Elizabeth Root Luce , a former Young Women 's Christian Association worker. Harry , a the boy be know throughout his life , be the first of four children. Serious mind and precocious , Harry Luce learn Chinese before he speak English and compose sermon for boyhood diversion. The household be run on Spartan line , even though Mrs. Cyrus H. McCormick , widow of the millionaire inventor , be a family friend and benefactor. The son adore the father , a filial piety to which student of the editor-publisher trace his religious impulse , him morality and his zealous approach to life. The son also develop a vigorous attachment to thing Chinese , and all his life he regard himself a an expert on China. After attend a strict British boarding school at Chefoo , where caning be the practice , Harry come to the United States at 15 to attend Hotchkiss School in Lakeville , Conn. , on a scholarship. He amass a top academic record , write verse , edit the school 's literary monthly and become assistant manage editor of the weekly paper. Most fateful of all , he become friendly with young Briton Hadden , the paper 's manage editor. Shared Journalistic Interest The youth share a deep interest in journalism and a judgment that too many people be ignorant of the world about them and ought to be enlightened. The young men go to Yale , where both be editor of The Daily News. They graduate in 1920 , with time out for military service in World War I. Mr. Luce , a Phi Beta Kappa , be vote `` most brilliant '' '' in the class and Mr. Hadden `` most likely to succeed. '' After brief study at Oxford , Mr. Luce return to the United States and go to work for The Chicago Daily News a a legman for Ben Hecht. He migrate from Chicago to Baltimore for a reporter 's job on The News , where he be reunite with Mr. Hadden. In their spare time , the youthful reporter , develop plan for a weekly news magazine , at first to be title Facts , but then call Time , and put together the prospectus , which pledge that the publication would have `` a prejudice against the rise cost of government ; faith in the thing which money can not buy , a respect for the old , particularly in manners. '' The prospectus also tell how the new magazine would differ from Literary Digest , then the reign newslike weekly. `` The Digest , in give both side of a question , give little or no hint a to which side it consider to be right , '' Mr. Luce and Mr. Hadden said. `` Time give both side , but clearly indicate which side it believe to have the strong position. '' Mr. Luce and Mr. Hadden quit their Baltimore job in early 1922 to sell stock and get their publication under way. The task take a year , with 72 investor , mostly from Wall Street , chip in $ 86,000 toward their $ 100,000 goal. The first issue , date March 3 , 1923 , divide the week 's news into 22 department in 28 pages. Eighteen person be list on the first masthead , 11 of them Yale alumni. The circulation manager be a Harvard man , Roy E. Larsen , who be now chairman of the executive committee of Time , Inc. He and Mr. Luce and Mr. Hadden pay themselves $ 40 a week. Ran Business Side The article in the first issue be recast chiefly from The New York Times by nimble writers. By the flip of a coin , it be decide at the outset of Time that Mr. Luce would manage it business affair while Mr. Hadden would run the editorial side. It be Mr. Hadden who father the idiosyncratic style by which the magazine become famous. Two element of that style -- the inverted sentence and the double epithet -- be borrow from `` The Iliad , '' `` The Odyssey '' and `` The Aeneid. '' Homer and Virgil , however , might have be awe-struck by the license Mr. Hadden and his writer take : `` fleet-footed Achilles '' become `` beady-eyed , '' or `` jut-jawed , '' or `` snaggle-toothed '' or `` haystack-haired. '' The Homeric sentence , `` Brazen be the wall which run this way and that from the threshold to the inmost chamber , '' be transform into the Hadden-Luce-Time sentence , `` To Swanscott come a lank , stern Senator , gray-haired , level-browed. '' Time 's carly motto be `` Curt , Clear and Complete. '' It contain an abundance of telescoped word , such a `` GOPolitics , '' `` cinemaddict , '' `` socialite , '' `` Freudulent '' and such an archaicism a `` moppet '' for child. `` Tycoon , '' from the Japanese taikun , mean prince , be liberally apply to men of success. Action verb be the mode , and the dictionary be ransack for alternative to the verb `` said. '' The saucy style be considerably tone down after Wolcott Gibbs write a merciless parody of it in a Profile of Mr. Luce for The New Yorker magazine in 1936. The sketch contain two sentence that have become a part of the literary folklore : `` Backward run sentence until reel the mind '' and `` Where it will all end , know God ! '' Planned Business Journal When Time begin to show a profit in 1927 , Mr. Luce and Mr. Hadden start Tide , a magazine for the advertising business , which they sell in 1930. Meantime , in 1929 , Mr. Luce devote himself to plan Fortune , which be to exemplify the thesis that `` business be obviously the great single denominator of interest among the active leading citizen of the USA. . .the distinctive expression of the American genius. '' Also in 1929 , Mr. Hadden die of a streptococcus infection , and the editorial and business aspect of Time , Inc. , shift to Mr. Luce. The two men , oddly , be never intimate social friend , although they always rally to each other 's support. Publication of Fortune begin in 1930. The magazine look luxurious , cost the then high price of $ 1 a copy and contain excellent art. In it first year it print article critical of some large corporation , include the United States Steel Corporation , but it eventually win acceptance for it perceptive reporting and for it major story on technological change and life in the executive suite. Writers for Time and Fortune have include such note social critic a Archibald MacLeish , John O'Hara , Stephen Vincent Benet , James Agee and Dwight Macdonald. Not all of Mr. Luce 's writer agree with him or with his principle , but they find his generous pay scale and his early friendly attitude toward the American Newspaper Guild irresistible. Bought Architectural Forum In 1932 Mr. Luce purchase a trade publication , Architectural Forum , a reflection of his own interest at the time in architecture. Twenty year later it give rise to House & Home , which specialize in home building. The Forum , the large magazine in it field but an economic loser , be discontinue in 1964. House & Home be sell that year to McGraw-Hill , Inc. The most spectacularly popular of all Luce publication be Life magazine , start in 1936. Its announce purpose be : `` To see life ; to see the world ; to eyewitness great event ; to watch the face of the poor and the gesture of the proud. '' It brashly and splashily publish photograph of statesman in unguarded moment , soldier fight to the death , baby be bear , policeman club striker and model in the almost- nude. There be gaudy layout of surgical procedure and panorama of nature. Later , there be essay and memoir , heavily pictorialized , and editorial on what be call `` the American Purpose. '' Life magazine be a wedding gift of sort to Mr. Luce 's second wife. His first marriage , to Lila Ross Hotz of Chicago , in 1923 , end in divorce in 1935. They have two son , Henry 3d , a vice president of Time , Inc. , and chief of the magazine's London bureau and Peter Paul , a management consultant. Shortly after his divorce , Mr. Luce marry Mrs. Clare Boothe Brokaw , daughter of a vaudeville couple and the divorced wife of George Tuttle Brokaw. According to an article by John Kobler in The Saturday Evening Post in 1965 , Mr. Luce propose to Mrs. Brokaw , then an editor of Vanity Fair and a fledging playwright , at virtually their first meeting by ask her how it felt to know that `` you 're the only woman in a man 's life. '' Purchased Title for $ 85,000 The new Mrs. Luce `` have be advocate photojournalism ever since she know Luce , '' the account state , `` and he have tell her , 'I do n't really want more magazine , but if it please you we 'll go ahead. ' '' On their honeymoon , it be say , the couple shape the magazine , whose title be purchase for $ 85,000 from the fade humor weekly. Because Mrs. Luce have such a germinal role in the founding of Life , it be widely assume that she exercise a great deal of direct influence over it policy and those of her husband 's other periodicals. Initially , it be say , Mrs. Luce do play an open part , but she limit herself to write bylined article for Life after an argument with Ralph Ingersoll , a Life editor , in the magazine 's early years. Mrs. Luce 's indirect influence , however , be report to have be considerable. Her husband , it be say , listen to her suggestion for article and propose them under his own name. In the begin Life magazine be overly successful. Its circulation outraced it advertising revenue , although it be not until 1969 that it operate in the black. Started 'March of Time' Mr. Luce 's final magazine venture be Sports Illustrated ( the title be also purchase ) start in 1954 , to capitalize on what he call `` the wonderful world of sport '' and a more abundant leisure available to Americans after World War II. The magazine 's appeal be primarily to family in the suburb and small towns. Mr. Luce , previously ignorant of most sport except golf and swimming , undertake an intensive cram course in baseball , box and horse racing to equip himself intellectually a publisher. Mr. Luce also have an early association with radio , start in 1928 with promotional broadcast from Time 's articles. This develop into `` The March of Time. '' It run for 15 year , and it narrator , Westbrook van Voorhis , achieve fame for the solemn manner in which he intone , `` Time Marches On ! '' the program 's catch phrase. The series be also adapt for a period for the movies. At his retirement in 1964 a editor in chief of all Time , Inc. , publication , Mr. Luce be the company 's principal owner , with a stock interest of 16.2 per cent. The market value of his holding then exceed $ 42-million and his annual dividend income be $ 1,263,888. All tell in 1964 , Luce magazine publish 13 edition , weekly or monthly , with a world circulation of 13 million copy an issue. Mr. Luce 's influence in communication , however , go far beyond magazines. It include production of television program here and abroad ; the operation of five radio and six television station , and the creation of a series of popular book on science and history. ( Time , Inc. 's book division be say to have gross $ 40-million in 1964. ) The company also own a 45 per cent interest in the 48-story , $ 70-million Time & Life Building at the Avenue of the Americas and 50th Street. The man who nurture the Time , Inc. , enterprise from one-room simplicity to global complexity be a tall , lean man with a large head of the sort that his baldness , which begin in middle life , enhanced. His eye be light blue , narrow and sharp under dark brows. His mouth be thin , his jaw firm. Almost from the start of Time magazine , Mr. Luce communicate with his underling by memorandum , of which he be a prolific composer. When he return from trip -- and he travel incessantly -- he dispatch memo that be obviously the work of a sharp-eyed observer and that often contain directive on whatever strike his agile mind a important. When Mr. Luce step down as editor in chief , George P. Hunt , Life 's managing editor , write that it have be `` a rigorous and reward experience '' to have have `` Harry Luce a a boss. '' He also describe the Lucean memo : `` This come in two forms. The long one be neatly typewritten. The others consist of pencil scrawl on yellow pad paper , often with a newspaper clip attach by mean of an ordinary straight pin. The subject of these memo be broad -- a proposal to do a series on Greece , a critique of the late issue of Life , a question about the late teen-age fad , a philosophical comment on United States politics. '' In politics , Mr. Luce back Republican candidate for President in every campaign except 1928 , when he support Alfred E. Smith. He apparently also have some qualm about the Republican candidate in 1964 , for Life , that year carry an editorial critical of Barry Goldwater , the party nominee. Mr. Luce vote for Mr. Goldwater , however. Mr. Luce sometimes like to talk with his editor in person , T.S. Matthews , formerly one of his principal editor , recall in his book , `` Name and Address. '' Faulted on Fairness Mr. Matthew 's 1960 autobiography find Mr. Luce secretive , not always aware of other people , yet a good editor and a man who could be answer back. Nonetheless , Mr. Matthews fault Mr. Luce on the question of fairness , assert that `` the Presidential campaign of 1940 be the last one that Time even try to report fairly. '' `` In 1952 , when it sniff victory in the air at long last , '' Mr. Matthews write , `` there be no hold Time. The distortion , suppression and slanting of it political 'news ' seem to me to pass the bound of politics and to commit and offense against the ethic of journalism. The climax be a cover story on Adlai Stevenson , the Democratic candidate , which be a clumsy but malign and murderously meant attack. '' Mr. Matthews report that he have not resign over this incident. He leave the organization in the mid-fifties and subsequently write his autobiography. Mr. Luce 's curiosity be legendary. Correspondents who drive with him from an airport to the center of a city have to be prepare for all manner of detailed question about the sights. Some , to anticipate the cross-examination , make dry run from the airfield to town. Once , one story have it , Mr. Luce , spot a large excavation , ask his correspondent what it was. `` That , Mr. Luce , '' the man reply `` be a hole in the ground. '' In addition to these impression of Mr. Luce , there be a thinly distinguished portrait of him in `` Death of Kings , '' a novel by Charles Wertenbaker , once a high-ranking Time editor. Many of Mr. Luce 's associate think the portrayal unflattering. Was Seldom Quoted Mr. Luce write little about himself for publication and be seldom quote in his own publications. In his travel he talk to president , premier , pope , cardinal , ambassador , banker , political leader , industrialist , general and admirals. Many in Time , Inc. , close to Mr. Luce be impress by his range interests. Hedley Donovan , who succeed Mr. Luce a editor in chief , recall that his superior have `` an extraordinary zeal for new idea , not only a inspiration for new mode and vehicle of journalism but a a subject matter for journalism. '' `` Far from be pain by new idea , '' Mr. Donovan say , `` Harry Luce rejoices in them. He welcome argument so ardently that it take a certain amount of intellectual courage to agree with him when he be right , a be bind to happen from time to time. '' This be also the impression of Gilbert Cant , a Time editor for many year , who say : `` His decision may have be unidirectional but , by God , he think a hell of a lot. Conversation with him be utterly madden because he be always aware of the other side of any proposition he be state , and he frequently try to express both side at once. '' A belief in a Christian God animate much of Mr. Luce 's thinking. A man who attend church regularly and pray before he go to bed , he contend that the United States have a `` constitutional dependency on God. '' He often use the word `` righteousness '' to describe the cause he espoused. Mr. Luce , however , be not a dogmatic Protestant. He concur in his wife 's right to convert to Roman Catholicism in 1946 , and he be say to respect her view of the world without adopt it for his own. After a career a a playwright ( `` The Women , '' `` Kiss the Boys Goodbye '' and `` Margin for Error '' ) Mrs. Luce , also an ardent Republican , serve two term in the House of Representatives from Connecticut , from 1943 to 1947. She be appoint Ambassador to Italy by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1953. Mr. Luce be in Rome with her during most of her three-year term. Mrs. Luce be nominate a Ambassador to Brazil in 1959 but she resign before go to her post after a public quarrel with Senator Wayne Morse , Democrat of Oregon. Mr. and Mrs. Luce maintain an apartment in New York and home in Ridgefield , Conn. , and Phoenix .