February 19 , 1967 OBITUARY J. Robert Oppenheimer , Atom Bomb Pioneer , Dies Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES PRINCETON , N. J. , Feb. 18 -- Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer , the nuclear physicist , die here tonight at the age of 62. A spokesman for the family say Dr. Oppenheimer die at 8 o'clock in his home on the ground of the Institute for Advanced Study. He have be ail since early last year with cancer of the throat. The physicist take part in the development of the first atomic bomb. In 1954 he be strip of security clearance by the Atomic Energy Commission because of alleged association with Communists. The same agency nine year later award Dr. Oppenheimer the $ 50,000 Fermi award for `` his outstanding contribution to theoretical physic and his scientific and administrative leadership. '' A Perplexing Scientist Starting precisely at 5:30 A.M. , Mountain War Time , July 16 , 1945 , J. ( for nothing ) Robert Oppenheimer live the remainder of his life in the blinding light and the crepusculine shadow of the world 's first manmade atomic explosion , an event for which he be largely responsible. That sunlike flash illuminate him a a scientific genius , the technocrat of a new age for mankind. At the same time it lead to his public disgrace when , in 1954 , he be officially describe a a security risk to his country and a man with `` fundamental defect in his character. '' Publicly rehabilitate in 1963 by a singular Government honor , this bafflingly complex man nonetheless never fully succeed in dispel doubt about his conduct during a crucial period of his life. The perplexity center on a story of attempted atomic espionage that he tell Army Counter- Intelligence officer in 1943 and that he later repudiate a a fabrication. His sole explanation for what he call `` a cock-and-bull story '' be that he have be `` an idiot. '' Misgivings also spring from the manner in which he implicate a close friend in his asserted concoction. A Cultivated Scholar A brilliant nuclear physicist , with a comprehensive grasp of his field , Dr. Oppenheimer be also a cultivated scholar , a humanist , a linguist of eight tongue and a brooding searcher for ultimate spiritual values. And , from the moment that the test bomb explode at Alamogordo , N.M. , he be haunt by the implication for man in the unleashing of the basic force of the universe. As he cling to one of the upright in the desert control room that July morning and saw the mushroom cloud rise in the explosion , a passage from the Bhagavad-Gita , the Hindu sacred epic , flash through his mind. He relate it later a : `` If the radiance of a thousand sun be to burst into the sky , that would be like the splendor of the Mighty One. '' And a the black , then gray , atomic cloud push high above Point Zero , another line -- '' I be become Death , the shatterer of world '' -- come to him from the same scripture. Two year later , he be still beset by the moral consequence of the bomb , which , he tell fellow physicist , have `` dramatize so mercilessly the inhumanity and evil of modern war. '' `` In some sort of crude sense which no vulgarity , no humor , no overstatement can quite extinguish , '' he go on , `` the physicist have know sin ; and this be a knowledge which they can not lose. '' Apogee of Career In later year , he seem to indicate that `` sin '' be not to be take personally. `` I carry no weight on my conscience , '' he say in 1961 in reference to the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. `` Scientists be not delinquent , '' he added. `` Our work have change the condition in which men live , but the use make of these change be the problem of government , not of scientists. '' With the detonation of the first three atomic bomb and the immediate Allied victory in World War II , Dr. Oppenheimer , at the age of 41 , reach the apogee of his career. Acclaimed a `` the father of the atomic bomb , '' he be officially credit by the War Department `` with achieve the implementation of atomic energy for military purposes. '' Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson lead a chorus of national praise when he say of the scientist : `` The development of the bomb itself have be largely due to his genius and the inspiration and leadership he have give to his colleagues. '' Shortly thereafter , in 1946 , Dr. Oppenheimer receive a Presidential Citation and a Medal of Merit for his direction of the Los Alamos Laboratory , where the bomb have be developed. Headed Advisory Unit In the year from 1945 to 1952 , Dr. Oppenheimer be one of the foremost Government adviser on key phase of United States atomic policy. He be the dominant author of the Acheson- Lilienthal Report [ name for Secretary of State Dean Acheson and David Lilienthal , first chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission ] , which offer a plan for international control of atomic energy. He be also the virtual author of the Baruch Plan , which be base on the Acheson-Lilienthal Report , call for United Nations supervision of nuclear power. He be consultant to Bernard M. Baruch at the United Nations and to Frederick H. Osborn , his successor , in futile United Nations negotiation over the plan , which be balk by the Soviet Union. Furthermore , from 1947 to 1952 , Dr. Oppenheimer head the Atomic Energy Commission 's General Advisory Committee of top nuclear scientist , and for the following two year he be it consultant. He also serve on the atomic committee of the Research and Development Board to advise the military , the science advisory committee of the Office of Defense Mobilization and study group by the dozen. He have a desk in the President 's Executive Offices , across the street from the White House. This eminence end abruptly in December , 1953 , when President Dwight D. Eisenhower order that a `` blank wall be place between Dr. Oppenheimer and any secret data '' pending a security hearing. The following June he be strip of his security clearance by the Atomic Energy Commission. It be never restore to him. Up to 1954 Dr. Oppenheimer 's big-brimmed brown porkpie hat , size 6 7/8 , be a frequent ( and telltale ) sight in Washington and the capital of Western Europe , where he travel to lecture or consult. ( The trademark hat be also in evidence at Princeton , N. J. , where he head the Institute for Advanced Study from 1947 to 1966. ) He be Oppy , Oppie or Opje to hundred of person who be captivate by his charm , eloquence and sharp , subtle humor and who be awe by the scope of his erudition , the incisiveness of his mind , the chill of his sarcasm and his arrogance toward those he think be slow or shoddy thinkers. Six foot tall and a bit stooped , he be as thin a the wisp from his chain-smoked cigarette or pipes. Blue-eyed , with close-cropped hair ( it be dark in 1943 , gray by 1954 and white a few year later ) , he have a mobile , expressive face that become lined and haggard after his security hearings. He be extremely fidgety when he sit , and he constantly shift himself in his chair , bite his knuckle , scratch his head and crossed and uncross his legs. When he speak on his foot , he pace and stalk , smoke incessantly and jerk a cigarette or pipe out of his mouth almost violently when he want to emphasize a word or phrase with a gesture. A Gracious Host He be an energetic man at party , where he be usually the center of attention. He be gracious a a host and the maker of fine and potent martinis. He be full of droll stories. What impress people first about Dr. Oppenheimer be his intellect. `` Robert be the only authentic genius I know , '' Mr. Lilienthal say of him. Echoing this appraisal , Charles Lauritsen , a former colleague at the California Institute of Technology , once remark : `` The man be unbelievable ! He always give you the right answer before you formulate the question. '' Knowledge come easily to Dr. Oppenheimer. As a young man he learn enough Dutch in six week to deliver a technical lecture while on a visit to the Netherlands. At the age of 30 he learn Sanskrit , and he use to enjoy pass note to other savant in that language. On a train trip from San Francisco to the East Coast he read Edward Gibbon 's seven-volume `` The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. '' On another such trip he read the four volume of Karl Marx 's `` Das Kapital '' in German. On a short summer holiday in Corsica he read in French Marcel Proust 's massive `` A La Recherche du Temps Perdu , '' which he later say be one of the great experience of his life. This almost compulsive avidity for learn be not sterile , for he invariably make some use of what he read. He be , moreover , an authority , if not an expert , in baroque and classical music , to which he like to listen. In the word of a friend , Dr. Oppenheimer be a `` culture hound. '' Even a a child , J. Robert Oppenheimer be make much of for his ability to absorb knowledge. He be bear in New York on April 22 , 1904 , the son of Julius and Ella Freedman ( or Friedman ) Oppenheimer. Julius Oppenheimer be a prosperous textile importer who have emigrate from Germany and his wife be a Baltimore artist , who die when her elder son be 10. ( The young son , Frank Friedman Oppenheimer , also become a physicist. ) The family live in comfort , with a private art collection that include three Van Goghs. Robert be encourage to delve into rock after start a collection at the age of 5 , and he be admit to the Mineralogical Club of New York when he be 11. He be a shy , delicate boy ( he be once think to have tuberculosis ) , who be more concerned with his homework and with poetry and architecture than with mix with other youngsters. After attend the Ethical Culture School ( `` It be characteristic that I do n't remember any of my classmate , he say ) he enter Harvard College in 1922 , intend to become a chemist. He be a solitary student with an astonishing appetite for work. `` I have a real chance to learn , '' he say later. `` I love it. I almost come alive. I take more course than I be suppose to , live in the [ library ] stack , just raid the place intellectually. '' Typical of his absorption be this note that he write about himself : `` It be so hot today the only thing I could do be lie on my bed and read Jeans 's 'Dynamical Theory of Gases. ' '' In addition to study physic and other science , he learn Latin and Greek and be graduate summa cum laude in 1925 , have complete four year ' work in three. From Harvard , Robert Oppenheimer go to the University of Cambridge , in England , where he work in atomics under Lord Rutherford , the eminent physicist. Thence he go to the Georg- August-Universitat in Gottingen , Germany , at the invitation of Dr. Max Born , also a celebrated scientist interested in the quantum theory of atomic systems. He receive his doctorate there in 1927 , along with a reputation for be pushy. In 1927-28 he be a National Research Fellow at Harvard and Caltech , and the following year he be an International Education Board Fellow at the University of Leyden , in the Netherlands , and the Technische Hochschule in Zurich , Switzerland. Returning to the United States in 1929 , Dr. Oppenheimer join the faculty of Caltech at Pasadena , Calif. , and the University of California at Berkeley. He be attach to both school until 1947 and rise to the rank of professor. He prove an outstanding teacher. Magnetic , lucid , always accessible , he develop hundred of young physicist , some of whom be so devote to him that they migrate with him back and forth from Berkeley to Pasadena and even copy his mannerisms. Describing to his security hearing his ivory-tower life up to late 1936 , he say : `` I be not interested in and do not read about economics or politics. I be almost wholly divorce from the contemporary scene in this country. I never read a newspaper or a current magazine like Time or Harper 's ; I have no radio , no telephone ; I learn of the stockmarket crash in the fall of 1929 only long after the event ; the first time I ever vote be in the Presidential election of 1936. '' Noted for Teaching In this period and subsequently , Dr. Oppenheimer be note more for his inspirational teaching and his over-all grasp of nuclear physic than for any major discovery or theories. However , in the nineteen-thirties Dr. Oppenheimer greatly influence American physic a leader of a dynamic school of theoretician in California. His influence continue in his recent year at the Institute for Advanced Study. In the word of one Nobel laureate in physic : `` No one in his age group have be a familiar with all aspect of current development in theoretical physics. '' One of his early contribution be in 1926-27 while he be work with Dr. Born , then a professor at Gottingen. Together they help lay the foundation of modern theory for the quantum behavior of molecules. In 1935 he and Melba Phillips make another basic contribution to quantum theory , discover what be know a the Oppenheimer-Phillips process. It involve the break-up of deuteron in collision that have be think far too weak for such an effect. The deuteron consist of a proton and neutron bound into a single particle. The two physicist find that , when a deuteron be fire into an atom even weakly , the neutron be strip off the proton and penetrate the nucleus of the atom. It have be assume that , since the deuteron and nucleus be both positively charge , each would repel the other except in high-energy collisions. Another theoretical study by Dr. Oppenheimer have figure prominently in recent effort to explain the astronomical object , know a quasar , that radiate light and radio wave of extraordinary intensity. One possibility be that the quasar be a cloud of material be draw together by it own gravity. 'Collapse ' Analyzed In 1938-39 Dr. Oppenheimer , with Dr. George M. Volkoff and others , have analyze such a `` gravitational collapse '' in term of the general theory of relativity. Their calculation be now cite in effort to explain the quasars. Beginning in late 1936 , Dr. Oppenheimer 's life undergo a change of direction that involve him in numerous Communist , trade union and liberal cause to which he devote time and money and that add to his circle of acquaintance many Communist and liberal , some of whom become intimate friends. These commitment and association , which be to be recall with sinister overtone at his security hearing , end about 1940 , accord to the scientist or , in the version of some others , they persist until the end of 1942 , when he be about to go to Los Alamos. One precipitate factor in Dr. Oppenheimer 's awaken to the world about him be a love affair , start in 1936 , with a woman Communist , now dead. ( In 1940 he marry the former Miss Katherine Puening , who have be a Communist during her marriage to Joseph Dallet , a Communist who die fight for the Spanish Republican Government. ) Apart from the influence exert by his fiancee in 1936 there be other compelling element in Dr. Oppenheimer 's transformation from cloistered academician to social activist. He describe them this way : `` I have have a continue smoldering fury about the treatment of Jews in Germany. I have relative there , and be later to help in extricate them and bring them to this country. I saw what the Depression be do to my students. Often they could get no job , or job which be wholly inadequate. And through them , I begin to understand how deeply political and economic event could affect men 's lives. I begin to feel the need to participate more fully in the life of the community. '' Dr. Oppenheimer 's activism be far-ranging , but he consistently deny that he be ever a member of the Communist party ( `` I never accept Communist dogma or theory '' ) and no substantial evidence be ever adduce to refute him. Dr. Arthur H. Compton , the Nobel Prize-wining scientist , bring Dr. Oppenheimer informally into the atomic project in 1941. Within a year he have convince Dr. Compton and military authority that , to build a bomb , it be essential to concentrate qualified scientist and their equipment in a single community under a unified command. He also impress Maj. Gen. Leslie R. Groves , in charge of the $ 2-billion Manhattan Engineer District , a the bomb project be code-named , who select him for the post of director and who order him clear for the job despite Army Counter-Intelligence qualm over his past associations. With General Groves , Dr. Oppenheimer select the Los Alamos site for the laboratory. `` To recruit staff , '' he say later , `` I travel all over the country talk with people who have be work on one or another aspect of the atomic-energy enterprise , and people in radar work , for example , and underwater sound , tell them about the job , the place that we be go to , and enlist their enthusiasm. '' Dr. Oppenheimer 's persuasiveness and his new-found quality of leadership be such that he gather a top-notch scientific staff that number nearly 4,000 by 1945 and that live , often amid frustration and under quasi-military rule , in the hastily build house of Los Alamos. Among the staff be Dr. Enrico Fermi and Dr. Niels Bohr , two physicist of immense world standing. In the two tension-filled year it take to construct the bomb , Dr. Oppenheimer display a special genius for administration , for handle the sensitive prima-donna scientific staff ( often he spend as much time on personal a on professional problem ) and for coordinate it work. He drive himself at breakneck speed , and at one time his weight drop under the whiplash of the war to 115 pounds. But he always manage to surmount whatever problem arose , and it be for this enormous all-around task that he be acclaim a `` the father of the atomic bomb. '' Watched by Army Agents Dr. Oppenheimer 's security trouble have their genesis while he be director at Los Alamos. Because a security-risk potential be impute to him on account of past association , Dr. Oppenheimer be dog by Army agent , his phone call be monitor , his mail be open and his every footstep be watched. In these circumstance his overnight visit with his former fiancee -- by then no longer a Communist -- on a trip to San Francisco in June 1943 , arouse the Counter-Intelligence Corps. The following August , for reason that still remain obscure , Dr. Oppenheimer volunteer to a C.I.C. agent that the Russians have try to get information about the Los Alamos project. George Eltenton a Briton and a slight acquaintance of Dr. Oppenheimer , have ask a third party to get in touch with some project scientists. In three subsequent interrogation Dr. Oppenheimer embroider this story , but he decline to name the third party who have approach him or to identify the scientists. ( In one interrogation , however , he give the C.I.C. , a long list of person he say be Communists or Communist sympathizer in the San Francisco area , and he offer to dig up information a to former Communists at Los Alamos. ) Finally , in December , 1943 , Dr. Oppenheimer , at General Groves 's direct order , vouchsafe the third party 's name a Prof. Haakon Chevalier , a French teacher at Berkeley and a longtime close and devote friend of the Oppenheimer family. At the security hearing in 1954 , the scientist recant his espionage account a a `` cock-and-bull story , '' say only that he be `` an idiot '' to have tell it. Dr. Oppenheimer never give a further explanation. There be some basis for Oppenheimer 's original story , accord to him and Professor Chevalier. The professor say that Mr. Eltenton have indeed approach him in late 1942 or early 1943 with a nebulous notion about get scientific information and have be quickly rebuffed. Professor Chevalier say that he have recount the episode to Dr. Oppenheimer and that both have dismiss the matter. This part of the incident be corroborate by Dr. Oppenheimer in his testimony at his security hearings. ( Just how much of Dr. Oppenheimer 's spy-attempt story the C.I.C. believe be difficult to judge in the light of the fact that neither Professor Chevalier nor Mr. Eltenton be interrogate until May , 1946. Neither be prosecuted. Indeed , Professor Chevalier be an interpreter on the United States staff at the Nuremberg war crime trial in 1945. Twenty year later he write `` Oppenheimer : The Story of a Friendship , '' in which he charge that Dr. Oppenheimer have betray him out of ambition for fame and to stay in C.I.C. 's good graces. ( A C.I.C. operative who have question Dr. Oppenheimer in 1943 suggest to his Army superior that an unimpeachable assistant be assign to the scientist. The operative 's memo include this sentence : ( `` It be the opinion of this office that subject 's [ Dr. Oppenheimer 's ] personal inclination would be to protect his own future and reputation and the high degree of honor which would be his if his present work be successful , and , consequently , it be felt that he would lend every effort to cooperation with the Government in any plan which would leave him in charge. '' ) With the end of World War II and Dr. Oppenheimer 's return to full civilian life , he cause some disquiet in the scientific community by support the May-Johnson bill for military control of further atomic experiments. This be counter , however , when he later support the McMahon bill , which create the Atomic Energy Commission , a civilian agency. Another of the charge press against Dr. Oppenheimer in 1954 also have it origin at Los Alamos , and it involve the hydrogen , or fusion , bomb and his relation with Dr. Edward Teller over that superweapon , of which the Hungarian scientist be a vociferous proponent. At Los Alamos Dr. Teller be pass over for Dr. Hans Bethe a head of the important Theoretical Physics Division. Dr. Teller , meantime , work on problem of fusion. At the war 's end , when most of the Los Alamos scientist return to their campus , hydrogen bomb work be generally suspended. In 1949 , however , when the Soviet Union explode it first fission bomb , the United States consider press forward immediately with building and test a fusion device. The matter come to the Atomic Energy Commission 's General Advisory Committee , head by Dr. Oppenheimer. On the ground that manufacture a hydrogen bomb be not technically feasible at the moment , the committee unanimously recommend that thermonuclear research be maintain at a theoretical level only. Dr. Oppenheimer , who also think a hydrogen bomb morally dubious , play a leading role in this proposal , and it do not endear him to Dr. Teller. Committed Overruled In 1950 President Harry S. Truman overrule Dr. Oppenheimer 's committee and order work push on the fusion bomb. Dr. Teller be give his own laboratory and within a few month the hydrogen bomb be perfect with the aid of a technical ( and still secret ) devise suggest by Dr. Teller. It be charge at the security hearing that Dr. Oppenheimer be not sufficiently diligent himself in further the hydrogen bomb and that he influence other scientist against participate in work on it. Dr. Teller testify that , apart from give him a list of name , Dr. Oppenheimer have not assist him `` in the slight '' in recruit scientist for the project. Dr. Teller , moreover , go on record a be oppose to restore Dr. Oppenheimer 's security clearance , say : `` In a great number of case I have see Dr. Oppenheimer act -- I understand that Dr. Oppenheimer act -- in a way which for me be exceedingly hard to understand. I thoroughly disagree with him in numerous issue and his action frankly appear to me confused and complicated. To this extent I feel that I would like to see the vital interest of this country in hand which I understand well , and therefore trust more. `` In this very limited sense I would like to express a feeling that I would personally feel more secure if public matter would rest in other hands. '' Dr. Oppenheimer , for his part , vigorously deny that he have be dilatory or neglectful in support the hydrogen bomb , once President Truman have acted. `` I never urge anyone not to work on the hydrogen bomb project , '' he declared. He insist , too , that his board have materially assist Dr. Teller 's work. If Dr. Oppenheimer have stir Dr. Teller 's displeasure in 1949 , he have also arouse strong feeling in Dr. Edward U. Condon of the National Bureau of Standards for different reasons. In an appearance before an executive session of the House Un-American Activities Committee , Dr. Oppenheimer describe a fellow atomic scientist a a former German Communist. When quotation from the testimony be print in the newspaper , Dr. Condon and a number of other scientist be shock on the ground that Dr. Oppenheimer have act a an informer. `` It appear that he [ Dr. Oppenheimer ] be try to buy personal immunity from attack by turn informer , '' Dr. Condon wrote. Subsequently , Dr. Oppenheimer write a public letter in which he attest the atomic scientist 's patriotism , but the incident perplex a number of Dr. Oppenheimer 's friends. The security hearing for Dr. Oppenheimer be trigger late in 1953 , when William L. Borden , former executive director of the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy , write an unsolicited letter to J. Edgar Hoover , director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Mr. Borden give it a his opinion that the scientist have be `` a hardened Communist '' and that `` more probably than not he have since be function a an espionage agent. '' Mr. Hoover waste little time in send the letter and an F.B.I. report to the White House and other agencies. It be then that President Eisenhower cut Dr. Oppenheimer off from access to secret material. Lewis L. Strauss ( pronounced straw ) , then chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission , give Dr. Oppenheimer the option of resign his consultantship with the commission or ask for a hearing. He choose a hearing. Action Dismayed Many The action against Dr. Oppenheimer dismay the scientific community and many other Americans. He be widely picture a a victim of McCarthyism who be be penalize for hold honest , if unpopular , opinions. The A.E.C. , Mr. Strauss and the Eisenhower Administration be accuse of carry out a witch hunt in an attempt to account for Soviet atomic success and to fee a public hysteria about Communists. The Personnel Security Board of the A.E.C. , consist of Gordon Gray , an educator , chairman ; Thomas A. Morgan , a businessman , and Dr. Ward V. Evans , a chemist , hold hearing in Washington from April 12 to May 6 , 1954. They consider a long list of specific charge , one batch deal with Dr. Oppenheimer 's past association , another with the Haakon Chevalier incident and another with the hydrogen bomb. Dr. Oppenheimer testify in his own behalf , and 40 great name in American science and education offer evidence of his loyalty. However , by a vote of 2 to 1 ( Dr. Evans dissent ) , the board decline to reinstate it consultant 's security clearance. After assert a `` a clear conclusion '' that Dr. Oppenheimer be `` a loyal citizen , '' the majority report say it have `` be unable to arrive at the conclusion that it would be clearly consistent with the security interest of the United States to reinstate Dr. Oppenheimer 's clearance. . . . '' The report list the following a control it decision. : `` 1. We find that Dr. Oppenheimer 's continue conduct and association have reflect a serious disregard for the requirement of the security system. `` 2. We have find a susceptibility to influence which could have serious implication for the security interest of the country. `` 3. We find his conduct in the hydrogen-bomb program sufficiently disturb a to raise a doubt a to whether his future participation , if characterize by the same attitude in a Government program relating to the national defense , would be clearly consistent with the best interest of security. `` 4. We have regretfully conclude that Dr. Oppenheimer have be less than candid in several instance in his testimony before this board. '' On appeal to the commission , Dr. Oppenheimer lose by a vote of 4 to 1. After declare that Dr. Oppenheimer have `` fundamental defect in his character , '' the majority say that `` his association with person know to him to be Communists have extend far beyond the limit of prudence and self-restraint. '' With the commission ruling , Dr. Oppenheimer return to Princeton and the institute he headed. There he live in quiet obscurity until April 1962 , when President John F. Kennedy invite him to a White House dinner of Nobel Prize winners. Highest Award of A.E.C. In December 1963 , a a further evidence of a rapprochement , President Johnson hand Dr. Oppenheimer the high award of the Atomic Energy Commission , the $ 50,000 tax-free Fermi Award , which be name for Dr. Enrico Fermi , the late distinguished nuclear pioneer. In his acceptance remark Dr. Oppenheimer advert to his security hearing , say : `` I think it be just possible , Mr. President , that it have take some charity and some courage for you to make this award today. '' Dr. Oppenheimer be the author of several book : `` Science and the Common Understanding '' ( 1954 ) , `` The Open Mind '' ( 1955 ) , `` Some Reflections on Science and Culture '' ( 1960 ) . Ailing , he retire a director of the institute , a research facility for some 200 postdoctoral fellow in many field , in early 1966. He be succeed by Dr. Carl Kaysen of Harvard. In addition to the Medal of Merit for his work in Los Alamos and an assortment of honorary doctorate , Dr. Oppenheimer be a fellow of the National Academy of Arts and Sciences , the American Physical Society and Britain 's Royal Society. He be also a member of the National Academy of Sciences , the American Philosophical Society and several foreign academies. Dr. and Mrs. Oppenheimer have two child , Peter and Katherine .