June 6 , 1968 OBITUARY Robert Francis Kennedy : Attorney General , Senator and Heir of the New Frontier By ALDEN WHITMAN In his brief but extraordinary political career , the 42-year-old , Massachusetts-born Robert Francis Kennedy be Attorney General of the United States under two Presidents and Senator from New York. In those high office he exert an enormous influence on the nation 's domestic and foreign affair , first a the close confidant of his brother , President John F. Kennedy , and then , after Mr. Kennedy 's assassination in 1963 , a the immediate heir to his New Frontier policies. The Kennedy name , which John have make magical , devolve on Robert , enable him to win a Senate seat from a state in which he have little or no previous association. The Kennedy aura also permit him to campaign this year for the Democratic Presidential nomination and to gain important victory in the preference primaries. Wherever he go he draw crowd by evoke , through his Boston accent , his gesture and his physical appearance , a remarkable and nostalgic likeness to his elder brother. At the same time Mr. Kennedy call forth sharply opposed evaluation of himself. For those who find him charm , brilliant and sincerely devote to the welfare of his country there be others who vehemently assert that he be calculate , overly ambitious and ruthless. Those who praise him regard his candidacy for his party 's Presidential nomination this year a proof of his selflessness. They quote with approval his announcement on March 16 , in which he say : `` I do not run for the Presidency merely to oppose any man but to propose new policies. I run because I be convince that this country be on a perilous course and because I have such strong feeling about what must be do , and I feel that I 'm oblige to do all I can. '' On the other hand , those who question his motif point out that his candidacy be pose only four day after the New Hampshire primary , in which Senator Eugene J. McCarthy have demonstrate the political vulnerability of President Johnson. Further , Mr. Kennedy 's critic say , he have declare only as recently a Jan. 30 : `` I have tell friend and supporter who be urge me to run that I would not oppose President Johnson under any foreseeable circumstances. '' Sure He 'd Do 'the Right Thing' Mr. Kennedy 's partisan tend to ignore his inconsistency or to belittle them. And even many voter who express reservation about him be certain that , in public office , he would do `` the right thing. '' This belief be underlined , especially among Negroes and the poor , because of the earnestness with which he plead their cause. Describing the reaction of one ghetto throng in California , Tom Wicker write in The New York Times of June 2 : `` The crowd surge in alarmingly , child leap and shriek and grow men risk the wheel of Kennedy 's car just to pound his arm or grasp his hand. Moving through the sleazy back street of Oakland , he repeatedly stop traffic ; for six block along East 14th Street , his car could barely creep along. '' Contrasting with such frenzied warmth be what Fortune magazine call last March `` the implacable hostility toward him in the business community. '' The magazine quote one Dallas businessman , a lead Democrat , a say : `` I have great respect for his brother Jack , but I would not vote for Bobby. '' The business community , accord to Fortune , condemn Mr. Kennedy a immature and irresponsible. Business , it be say , be disquiet `` by the reputation for radicalism that he have developed. '' To criticism he could respond with asperity or angry chilliness. To the fervor and adulation of his supporter he seem curiously aloof , exhibit neither pleasure nor fright. Those close to Mr. Kennedy notice that his eye rarely sparkle , but , instead , be sad and withdrawn and that his manner , despite a grin , be unemotional. Mr. Kennedy 's campaign speech ( as well a those he deliver in the Senate ) be , for the most part , devoid of oratorical fire and flourish. He speak in an even baritone ; there be no crescendo and little outward expansiveness. His only gesture be to chop the air with his right hand for emphasis or to brush back his shaggy forelock when it slip down over his forehead. His campaign humor be self-deprecating , an effort to divert criticism to his account. For example , he recently ask a rally in Fort Wayne , Ind. , whether the city would vote for him. Otherwise , he go on , he and Ethel and all of their child would have to go on relief. `` It 'll be less expensive , '' he continue , deadpan , `` just to send u to the White House. We 'll arrange it so all 10 kid wo n't be there at once , and we wo n't need to expand the place. I 'll send some of them away to school -- and I 'll make one of them Attorney General. '' Mr. Kennedy be an indefatigable campaigner , able to put in a 16-hour day of stress and tension and then sleep briefly before go through another equally strenuous day. Indeed , he seldom seem to relax , whether he be campaign or not , for he play with a much concentration a he worked. He be , for instance , a vigorous touch football participant , a hardy skier , a pace-setting mountain climber and a swimmer who do not mind plunge into the cold Pacific surf on an Oregon beach , an exploit few in that state ever attempted. Mr. Kennedy be so constantly in motion that he prompt some observer to say that he flee introspection , that he do not sit down with himself and figure out what he truly be and what he want to achieve. Commenting on this public and private extroversion in `` The Heir Apparent , '' William V. Shannon write in 1967 : `` In his compulsive athleticism , his reckless risk-taking , his aggressiveness , he seem to be drive by something not account for by the reality which engage him and not compatible with the high seriousness of his public ambitions. '' 'You Have to Struggle' Mr. Kennedy be , of course , aware of what be say about him , for he not only read omnivorously but he also employ a large staff of expert and adviser to brief and counsel him. He often concede that he be aggressive , explain semihumorously : `` I be the seventh of nine children. And when you come from that far down , you have to struggle to survive. '' Robert Kennedy be bear Nov. 20 , 1925 , in Brookline , Mass. , a fashionable suburb of Boston , the son of Joseph and Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy. His father , the son of poor South Boston parent , be then already amass a fortune in the stock market and associate speculative enterprises. Home only at interval ( the family move in 1926 to Riverdale and then to Bronxville , N.Y. ) , he leave the day-to-day management of the family to his capable wife , who be the daughter of John F. ( Honey Fitz ) Fitzgerald , who serve three term in the House of Representatives and be Mayor of Boston. When Robert be bear , his brother Joseph Jr. be 10 and John be 8. ( Edward be bear in 1932. ) Thus Robert pass his early year a the little brother , with two old brother and five young sister -- Rosemary , Kathleen , Eunice , Patricia and Jean. `` He be the small and thinnest , and we fear he might grow up puny and girlish , '' his mother recall , add : `` We soon realize there be no fear of that. '' Not only be Robert 's sister tomboyish , but he be also prod to competitiveness by his father and by Joseph Jr. , who serve a a surrogate father to his siblings. `` Joe teach me to sail , to swim , to play football and baseball , '' he remembered. Moreover , Robert 's father lay down strict rule of conduct : Never take second best ; when the go get tough , the tough get go ; passivity be intolerable. Although Robert a a youth be overshadow by his old brother , he display grim determination to succeed. A classmate at Milton Academy , where he prepare for Harvard , say : `` It be much tough in school for him than the others -- socially , in football , with studies. '' Nonetheless , Robert keep up. He be a Harvard sophomore when Joseph Jr. , on whom the family have pin it political hope , be kill in a Navy plane over the English Channel in 1944. Deeply affect , Robert travel to Washington on his own several month later and persuade Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal to assign him a a seaman to a destroyer newly name for his brother. Robert spend the remainder of the war in the Caribbean , return to Harvard in 1946. There his tenacity gain him a place a end on the football team , although he weigh only 160 pound and stand 5 foot 9 inch tall. After graduation in 1948 , he go to law school at the University of Virginia , where he take his degree in 1951. That same year , after admission to the Massachusetts bar , he join the criminal division of the Department of Justice in Washington and spend two year prosecute a somewhat dreary succession of graft and income tax evasion case without notable splash. Resigned to Run Campaign He resign in 1952 to manage the campaign of his brother John for United States Senator from Massachusetts. The most impressive feature of that race be the Kennedy organization 's painstaking attention to detail and the vast amount of money it spent. Both later become hallmark of Robert Kennedy 's campaign methods. Mr. Kennedy 's first ( and ultimately most controversial ) venture into the public limelight occur in 1953 , when he be name one of 15 assistant counsel to the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. His immediate superior be Roy M. Cohn , the group 's chief counsel. Above them both be Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , Republican of Wisconsin , whose name be soon attach to the committee. It rapidly acquire a malodorous reputation among liberal , intellectual and civil libertarian for it chivvying of witness in it investigation of asserted Communist conspiracy and plot in the Government. Robert have obtain his job through his father , who have contribute money to Senator McCarthy 's anti-Communist campaign. He get along well with the Senator , a circumstance that plague Mr. Kennedy when he become , year later , a professing liberal. After a dispute with Mr. Cohn over the committee staff , Mr. Kennedy resign his post in mid-1953 , but rejoin it in February , 1954 , a counsel to the Democratic minority. The following year -- after the Army-McCarthy hearing -- he succeed Mr. Cohn a chief counsel and staff director when Senator John L. McClellan , Democrat of Arkansas , become committee chairman. In that post he pursue investigation into alleged Communist influence and help develop some of the conflict-of-interest case involve personality in the Eisenhower Administration. Senator McClellan like him , for he be a persistent questioner of witness and a resolute investigator. One result be that the Senator choose Mr. Kennedy a chief counsel of the Senate Select committee on Improper Activities in the Labor or Management Field when it be organize in January , 1957. Mr. Kennedy immediately begin a headline-making inquiry into the affair of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters , then under the presidency of Dave Beck. Beck be later imprison for file false income tax returns. Accused of Antilabor Views Mr. Kennedy 's sharp questioning of Beck before the Senate Rackets Committee , a the McClellan group be generally know , draw down on him the accusation that he be antilabor at bad and unsympathetic to the work man at best. This charge be compound when he investigate James R. Hoffa , Beck 's successor , in 1958. Hoffa , who be eventually convict and jail for jury tampering and misuse of union fund , dislike Mr. Kennedy , call him `` a young , dim-witted , curly-headed smart-aleck '' and `` a ruthless monster. '' Calm and polite a the committee 's counsel , Mr. Kennedy nevertheless do not conceal his disdain for Hoffa. His reaction to an involve and obscure answer be often a sarcastic and disbelieving : `` Oh. '' Later , when he be Attorney General , Mr. Kennedy continue his investigation of the 1,700,000-member teamster union , cause Hoffa to charge that he be engage in vendetta. Officials of other union be also prosecute by Mr. Kennedy , generate a coolness of organize labor toward him that be still evident when he be campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1968. The attitude of the trade union hierarchy , however , do not permeate to the rank and file , who generally vote for him. Mr. Kennedy leave the racket committee in 1959 to manage his brother 's campaign for the Presidency. Describing the primary race of 1960 , Lawrence J. Quirk , in `` Robert Francis Kennedy , '' write : `` Bobby keep his card file constantly replenish with information on every local leader , every county VIP , every 'bit ' player in every key town. And he bore down most heavily on the state where the primary battle look hot : New Hampshire , Indiana , West Virginia and Wisconsin ( already mark for the kill ) , Oregon and Nebraska. `` But Bobby 's strong-arm method be not just limit to the state where the primary be crucial. Gov. [ Michael ] Di Salle of Ohio , who have hop to run a a favorite-son candidate , be soon find himself unremittingly pressure by Bobby to endorse Jack Kennedy. The two little fight word 'or else ' hung in the air. With a primary fight against the Kennedys -- a fight he stand to lose -- a distinct possibility , Di Salle finally capitulated. 'The Kennedys play rough and they play for keep , ' he later said. '' As his brother 's vizier , Robert Kennedy never bother to hide his political muscle in 1960. Answering one politician 's complaint , he say blandly : `` I 'm not run a popularity contest. It do n't matter if they [ the politician ] like me or not. Jack can be nice to them. I do n't try to antagonize people but somebody have to be able to say no. If people be not get off their behind and work enough , how do you say that nicely ? Every time you make a decision in this business you make somebody mad. '' In the election campaign that follow , against Richard M. Nixon , the Republican candidate , Mr. Kennedy prove a drivingly perfectionist a he have be during the primary races. He travel the country , tighten up the party organization , settle squabble and dismiss incompetents. He even silence Frank Sinatra , the singer , and Walter Reuther , head of the United Auto Workers , whom he consider liability to his brother. In addition to these task , Mr. Kennedy advise his brother on tactics. He be also responsible , accord to Mr. Quirk 's book , for John Kennedy 's intervention in the Martin Luther King case. As Mr. Quirk relate it , this be what happen : `` The Rev. Martin Luther King be arrest for stag a sit-in at a department store in Atlanta , and be forthwith sentence to four month of hard labor in a Georgia penitentiary. This event occur a scant week before the election. Prompted Call to Mrs. King `` Bobby saw to it that J.F.K. call Mrs. King to offer comfort. Then Bobby call the judge who have sentence Dr. King. Shortly afterward , the Negro leader be free on bail , and a member of the King family declare , 'I 've get a suitcase of vote , and I 'm go to take them to Mr. Kennedy and dump them in his lap. ' '' After John Kennedy defeat Mr. Nixon -- the popular vote margin be 119,000 out of 68 million cast -- he appoint his brother Attorney General. Robert Kennedy be reluctant at first , say , `` Everything I do will rub off on the President. '' He be also sensitive to the likely charge that the appointment be nepotic. John Kennedy , however , want his brother in the Cabinet a an absolutely loyal and dependable confidant. In public , when criticism of the appointment mount , the President explain his choice almost flippantly. `` I ca n't see that it 's wrong to give him a little legal experience before he go out to practice law , '' he said. Mr. Kennedy 's term a Attorney General touch many sensitive area of the nation 's life -- civil right , immigration , crime , labor legislation , defense of the poor , pardon , economic monopoly , juvenile delinquency and the Federal judiciary. In the opinion of his staff -- and he recruit a brilliant group that include Byron R. White , now a Supreme Court justice , and Nicholas deB. Katzenbach , now Deputy Secretary of State -- Mr. Kennedy be imaginative and inspiring. His relationship with J. Edgar Hoover , director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation , be reportedly more formal than cordial after Mr. Kennedy make it know that he be Mr. Hoover 's superior in fact as well a in theory. Conspicuously active in civil right , Mr. Kennedy , among other achievement , exert the Federal force that permit James H. Meredith , a black student , to enroll in the University of Mississippi in 1962. And owe to his relationship with the President , he have a hand in virtually every phase of the Administration. `` Call Bobby , get together with him and come back with an idea on this , '' be a frequent White House order. In foreign affair , he be an especially close adviser. He investigate the Central Intelligence Agency after the Cuban Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961. In the Cuban missile crisis the next year he oppose a pre-emptive air strike on Cuba and advocate the policy of restrained toughness that allow the Soviet Union to retreat gracefully. Mr. Kennedy be lunch at his home in McLean , Va. , on Nov. 22 , 1963 , when he be inform of his brother 's assassination in Dallas. Stunned , his shoulder droop , his face solemn , he be at the airport when the Presidential plane land in Washington with the President 's body , his widow , Jacqueline , and the new President , Lyndon B. Johnson. During the public rites that precede the funeral , he never leave his sister-in-law 's side. In the long , slow procession from the White House to St. Matthew 's Cathedral , he and his brother Edward , a Senator from Massachusetts , walk on either side of her. And at Arlington National Cemetery , both brother help her light an eternal flame over the grace. Plunged Into Deep Grief The assassination plunge Mr. Kennedy into a deep grief that amount virtually to melancholy. His face be a mask ; sadness envelop his eye ; he seem to have shrink physically , and he often walk alone , his hand dug into his jacket pockets. And for the remainder of his life he live with thought of his dead brother never far from the surface of his mind. When Dr. King be assassinate earlier this year , Mr. Kennedy be speak at a political rally. Almost by reflex action he offer the family his condolence and remark that he could understand their feeling of sudden loss because he himself have undergone a similar shock over his brother. When his lassitude lift , he set out to replan his political life. For a time in 1964 there be speculation that he might be President Johnson 's running mate that fall. Whatever hop he have , however , be dispel when Mr. Johnson rule out all Cabinet member a Vice- Presidential material. Displeased , Mr. Kennedy resign to run for the Senate from New York ; and , establish residence , he put into operation the political structure he have erect for his brother in 1960 and win the nomination without difficulty. His opponent be Senator Kenneth B. Keating , the incumbent Republican , who seek to picture Mr. Kennedy a a grasping carpetbagger. `` Is n't the basic question 'Who can best represent the State of New York ? ' '' Mr. Kennedy retorted. And to the charge of be sinister , he reply : `` I like to be involve in politics. I like to be involve in government. I 've be in politics all my life. I would like to remain in government. I do n't think that 's so sinister. '' He defeat Mr. Keating by 800,000 vote in a campaign that demonstrate the visceral appeal he have for voters. In the Senate ( and a national figure in his own right ) he forge a position slightly to the left of Mr. Johnson on the problem of the poor and the cities. He also seek to develop moderately `` dovish '' view on the war in Vietnam , but his opposition to Mr. Johnson on this issue always remain cautious. It be so restrained , indeed , that he hold back from contest for the Presidential nomination of 1968 until after the New Hampshire primary on March 12 show the extent of voter disaffection with the war. Thereafter , however , he fight keenly for the nomination , win major primary in Indiana , Nebraska and California. Campaigning with him be his wife , the former Miss Ethel Skakel of Greenwich , Conn. , to whom he be marry in 1950. Mrs. Kennedy be expect their 11th child in January. Their other child be Kathleen Harrington , 16 ; Joseph Patrick , 15 ; Robert Francis , 15 ; David Anthony , 12 ; Mary Courtney , 11 ; Michael Lemoyne , 10 ; Mary Kerry , 6 ; Christopher George , 4 ; Matthew Maxwell , 3 , and Douglas Harriman 14 month .