June 2 , 1968 OBITUARY Helen Keller , 87 , Dies Special to The New York Times WESTPORT , Conn. , June 1 -- Helen Keller , who overcome blindness and deafness to become a symbol of the indomitable human spirit , die this afternoon in her home here. She be 87 year old. `` She drift off in her sleep , '' say Mrs. Winifred Corbally , Miss Keller 's companion for the last 11 year , who be at her bedside. `` She die gently. '' Death come at 3:35 P.M. She be survive by a brother , Phillips B. Keller of Dallas , and a sister , Mrs. Mildred Tyson of Montgomery , Ala. After private cremation , a funeral service will be hold at the National Cathedral in Washington. No date have yet be set. Triumph Out of Tragedy By ALDEN WHITMAN For the first 18 month of her life Helen Keller be a normal infant who coo and cry , learn to recognize the voice of her father and mother and take joy in look at their face and at object about her home. `` Then '' a she recall later , `` come the illness which close my eye and ear and plunge me into the unconsciousness of a newborn baby. '' The illness , perhaps scarlet fever , vanish as quickly a it strike , but it erase not only the child 's vision and hearing but also , a a result , her power of articulate speech. Her life thereafter , a a girl and a a woman , become a triumph over crush adversity and shatter affliction. In time , Miss Keller learn to circumvent her blindness , deafness and muteness ; she could `` see '' and `` hear '' with exceptional acuity ; she even learn to talk passably and to dance in time to a fox trot or a waltz. Her remarkable mind unfolded , and she be in and of the world , a full and happy participant in life. What set Miss Keller apart be that no similarly afflict person before have do more than acquire the simple skills. But she be graduate from Radcliffe ; she become an artful and subtle writer ; she lead a vigorous life ; she develop into a crusading humanitarian who espouse Socialism ; and she energize movement that revolutionize help for the blind and the deaf. Teacher 's Devotion Her tremendous accomplishment and the force of assertive personality that underlay them be release through the devotion and skill of Anne Sullivan Macy , her teacher through whom in large degree she express herself. Mrs. Macy be succeed , at her death in 1936 , by Polly Thomson , who die in 1960. Since then Miss Keller 's companion have be Mrs. Winifred Corbally. Miss Keller 's life be so long and so crowded with improbable feat -- from rid horseback to learn Greek -- and she be so serene yet so determined in her advocacy of beneficent cause that she become a great legend. She always seem to be stand before the world a an example of unquenchable will. Many who observe her -- and to some she be a curiosity and a publicity-seeker -- find it difficult to believe that a person so handicap could acquire the profound knowledge and the sensitive perception and write talent that she exhibit when she be mature. Yet no substantial proof be ever adduce that Miss Keller be anything less than she appear -- a person whose character impel her to perform the seemingly impossible. With the year , the skepticism , once overt , dwindle a her stature a a heroic woman increased. Miss Keller always insist that there be nothing mysterious or miraculous about her achievements. All that she be and do , she say , could be explain directly and without reference to a `` sixth sense. '' Her dark and silent world be hold in her hand and shape with her mind. Concededly , her sense of smell be exceedingly keen , and she could orient herself by the aroma from many objects. On the other hand , her sense of touch be less finely develop than in many other blind people. Tall , handsome , gracious , poise , Miss Keller have a sparkling humor and a warm handclasp that win her friend easily. She exude vitality and optimism. `` My life have be happy because I have have wonderful friend and plenty of interest work to do , '' she once remark , add : `` I seldom think about my limitation , and they never make me sad. Perhaps there be just a touch of yearning at time , but it be vague , like a breeze among flowers. The wind pass , and the flower be content. '' This equanimity be scarcely foreshadow , in her early years. Helen Adams Keller be bear on June 27 , 1880 , on a farm near Tuscumbia , Ala. Her father be Arthur Keller , an intermittently prosperous country gentleman who have serve in the Confederate Army. Her mother be the former Kate Adams. After Helen 's illness , her infancy and early childhood be a succession of day of frustration , manifest by outburst of anger and fractious behavior. `` A wild , unruly child '' who kick , scratch and scream be how she afterward describe herself. Her distract parent be without hope until Mrs. Keller come across a passage in Charles Dickens 's `` American Notes '' describe the training of the blind Laura Bridgman , who have be teach to be a sew teacher by Dr. Samuel Gridley Howe of the Perkins Institution in Boston. Dr. Howe , husband of the author of `` The Battle Hymn of the Republic , '' be a pioneer teacher of the blind and the mute. Examined by Bell Shortly thereafter the Kellers heard of a Baltimore eye physician who be interested in the blind , and they take their daughter to him. He say that Helen could be educate and put her parent in touch with Alexander Graham Bell , the inventor of the telephone and an authority on teach speech to the deaf. After examine the child , Bell advise the Kellers to ask his son-in-law , Michael Anagnos , director of the Perkins Institution , about obtain a teacher for Helen. The teacher Mr. Anagnos select be 20-year-old Anne Mansfield Sullivan , who be call Annie. Partly blind , Miss Sullivan have learn at Perkins how to communicate with the deaf and blind through a hand alphabet signal by touch into the patient 's palm. `` The most important day I remember in all my life be the one on which my teacher come to me , '' Miss Keller write later. `` It be the third of March , 1887 , three month before I be 7 year old. `` I stand on the porch , dumb , expectant. I guess vaguely from my mother 's sign and from the hurrying to and fro in the house that something unusual be about to happen , so I go to the door and wait on the steps. '' Helen , her brown hair tumble , her pinafore soil , her black shoe tie with white string , jerk Miss Sullivan 's bag away from her , rummage in it for candy and , find none , fly into a rage. Of her savage pupil , Miss Sullivan write : `` She have a fine head , and it be set on her shoulder just right. Her face be hard to describe. It be intelligent , but it lack mobility , or soul , or something. Her mouth be large and finely shaped. You can see at a glance that she be blind. One eye be large than the other and protrudes noticeably. She rarely smiles. '' It be day before Miss Sullivan , whom Miss Keller throughout her life call `` Teacher , '' could calm the rage and fear of the child and begin to spell word into her hand. The problem be of associate word and object or action : What be a doll , what be water ? Miss Sullivan 's solution be a stroke of genius. Recounting it , Miss Keller write : `` We walk down the path to the well-house , attract by the fragrance of the honeysuckle with which it be covered. Someone be draw water and my teacher place my hand under the spout. `` As the cool stream gush over one hand she spell into the other the word water , first slowly , then rapidly. I stand still , my whole attention fix upon the motion of her fingers. Suddenly I felt a misty consciousness a of something forgotten -- a thrill of return think ; and somehow the mystery of language be reveal to me. `` I know then that 'w-a-t-e-r ' mean the wonderful cool something that be flow over my hand. That living word awaken my soul , give it light , hope , joy , set it free. There be barrier still , it be true , but barrier that in time could be sweep away. '' Miss Sullivan have be tell at Perkins that if she wish to teach Helen she must not spoil her. As a result , she be soon lock in physical combat with her pupil. This struggle be to thrill theater and film audience later when it be portray in `` The Miracle Worker '' by Anne Bancroft a Annie Sullivan and Patty Duke a Helen. The play be by William Gibson , who base it on `` Anne Sullivan Macy : The Story Behind Helen Keller '' by Nella Braddy , a friend of Miss Keller. Opening in New York in October , 1959 , it run 702 performances. Typical of the battle between child and teacher be a dinner table struggle in which Helen , utter eerie scream , try to jerk Miss Sullivan 's chair from under her. `` She pinch me and I slap her face every time she do , '' Miss Sullivan wrote. `` I give her a spoon which she throw on the floor. I force her out of the chair and make her pick it up. Then we have another tussle over fold her napkin. It be another hour before I succeed in get her napkin folded. Then I let her out into the warm sunshine and go to my room and throw myself on the bed , exhausted. '' Once Helen become more socialized and once she begin to learn , her hunger for knowledge be insatiable. In a few hour one April day she add 30 word to her vocabulary. Abstractions -- the meaning of the word `` love , '' for example -- prove difficult , but her teacher 's patience and ingenuity prevailed. Learning to Read Helen 's next opening into the world be learn to read. `` As soon a I could spell a few word my teacher give me slip of cardboard on which be print word in raised letter , '' she recalled. `` I quickly learn that each print word stood for an object , an act or a quality. `` I have a frame in which I could arrange the word in little sentence ; but before I ever put sentence in the frame I use to make them in objects. I find the slip of paper which represent , for example , 'doll , ' 'is , ' 'on , ' 'bed ' and place each name on it object ; then I put my doll on the bed with the word be , on , bed arrange beside the doll , thus make a sentence of the word , and at the same time carry out the idea of the sentence with the thing themselves. '' Helen read her first connected story in May , 1887 , and from that time `` devour everything in the shape of a printed page that have come within the reach of my hungry fingertips. '' After three month with her pupil , Miss Sullivan write to Mr. Anagnos : `` Something tell me that I be go to succeed beyond all my dreams. '' Helen 's progress be so rapid that in May , 1888 , she make her first trip to the Perkins Institution in Boston , where she learn to read Braille and to mix with other afflicted children. For several year she spend the winter in the North and the summer with her family. It be in the spring of 1890 that Helen be teach to speak by Sarah Fuller of the Horace Mann School. 'Eager to Imitate ' `` Miss Fuller 's method be this , '' Miss Keller recalled. `` She pass my hand lightly over her face , and let me feel the position of her tongue and lip when she make a sound. I be eager to imitate every motion and in an hour have learn six element of speech : M , P , A , S , T , I. I shall never forget the surprise and delight I felt when I utter my first connect sentence : 'It be warm. ' '' Even so , it take a long time for the child to put her rush thought into words. Most often Miss Sullivan or Miss Thomson be oblige to translate the sound , for it take a trained ear to distinguish them accurately. When Miss Keller speak very slowly and employed monosyllabic word , she be fairly readily understandable. At the same time the child learn to lip-read by place her finger on the lip and throat of those who talk with her. But one have to talk slowly with her , articulate each word carefully. Nonetheless , her crude speech and her lip-reading facility far open her mind and enlarge her experience. Each of the young girl 's advance bring pressure on her from her elder for new wonder and this inevitably feed public skepticism. This be intensify when , in 1892 , a story appear under her name that be easily identify a similar in thought and language to an already publish fable. Although she deny the charge of plagiarism , the episode hurt Miss Keller for many years. In that period , she be also exploit through such incident a publicize trip to Niagara Falls and visit to the Worlds Fair of 1893 in the company of Bell. When she be 14 , in 1894 , Miss Keller undertook formal schooling , first at the Wright- Humason School for the Deaf in New York and then at the Cambridge ( Mass. ) School for Young Ladies. With Miss Sullivan at her side and spell into her hand , Miss Keller prepare herself for admission to Radcliffe , which she enter in the fall of 1900. It be indeed an amazing feat , for the examination she take be those give to unhandicapped applicant , but no more astonishing than her graduation cum laude in 1904 , with honor in German and English. Miss Sullivan be with her when she receive her diploma , which she obtain by sheer stubbornness and determination. `` I slip back many time , : '' she write of her college years. `` I fall , I stand still. I run against the edge of hidden obstacles. I lose my temper and find it again , and keep it better. I trudge on , I gain a little. I feel encouraged. I get more eager and climb high and begin to see widen horizons. '' While still in Radcliffe , Miss Keller write , on her Hammond typewriter , her first autobiography. `` The Story of My Life '' be publish serially in The Ladies Home Journal and , in 1902 , a a book. It consist largely of theme write for an English composition course conduct by Prof. Charles Townsend Copeland , Harvard 's celebrate `` Copey. '' Most reviewer find the book well write , but some critic , include that of The Nation , scoffed. `` All of her knowledge be hearsay knowledge , '' The Nation say , `` her very sensation be for the most part vicarious and she write of thing beyond her power of perception and with the assurance of one who have verify every word. '' Miss Keller 's defender reply that she have way of know thing not reckon by others. When she write of the New York subway that it `` open it jaw like a great beast , '' it be point out that she have stroke a lion 's mouth and know whereof she spoke. At a circus zoo she have also shake hand with a bear , pat a leopard and let a snake curl itself around her. `` I have always felt I be use the five sens within me , that be why my life have be so full and complete , '' Miss Keller say at the time. She add that it be quite natural for her to use the word `` look , '' `` see '' and `` hear '' a if she be see and hear in the full physical sense. After college Miss Keller continue to write , publish `` The World I Live In '' in 1908 , `` The Song of the Stone Wall '' in 1910 and `` Out of the Dark '' in 1913. Her writing , mostly inspirational article , also appear in national magazine of the time. And with Miss Sullivan at her side she take to the lecture platform. After her formal talk -- these be interpret sentence by sentence by Miss Sullivan -- Miss Keller answer question , such a `` Do you close your eye when you go to sleep ? '' Her stock response be , `` I never stay awake to see. '' Meantime , Miss Keller be develop a largeness of spirit on social issue , partly a a result of walk through industrial slum , partly because of her special interest in the high incidence of blindness among the poor and partly because of her conversation with John Macy , Miss Sullivan 's husband , a social critic. She be far impelled toward Socialism in 1908 when she read H. G. Well 's `` New Worlds for Old. '' Joined Socialist Party These influence , in turn , lead her to read Marx and Engels in German Braille , and in 1909 she join the Socialist party in Massachusetts. For many year she be an active member , write incisive article in defense of Socialism , lecture for the party , support trade union and strike and oppose American entry into World War I. She be among those Socialists who welcome the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia in 1917. Although Miss Keller 's Socialist activity diminish after 1921 , when she decide that her chief life work be to raise fund for the American Foundation for the Blind , she be always responsive to Socialist and Communist appeal for help in cause involve oppression or exploitation of labor. As late a 1957 she send a warm greeting to Elizabeth Gurley Flynn , the Communist leader , then in jail on charge of violate the Smith Act. When literary taste change after World War I , Miss Keller 's income from her writing dwindle , and , to make money , she venture into vaudeville. She , with Miss Sullivan , be astonishingly successful ; no Radcliffe graduate ever do well in variety than she. Harry and Herman Weber , the variety entrepreneur , present her in a 20-minute act that tour the country between 1920 and 1924. ( Although some of her friend be scandalize , Miss Keller enjoy herself enormously and argue that her appearance help the cause of the blind. ) In the Keller-Sullivan act , the rise curtain show a drawing room with a garden see through French windows. Miss Sullivan come on stage to the strain of Mendelssohn 's `` Spring Song '' and tell a little about Miss Keller 's life. Then the star part a curtain , enter and speak for a few minutes. The Times review of her debut at the Palace say : `` Helen Keller have conquer again , and the Monday afternoon audience at the Palace , one of the most critical and cynical in the world , be hers. '' On the vaudeville tour , Miss Keller , who have already meet score of famous people , form friendship with such celebrity a Sophie Tucker , Charlie Chaplin , Enrico Caruso , Jascha Heifetz and Harpo Marx. In the twenty , Miss Keller , Miss Sullivan and her husband and Miss Thomson ( who have join the household in 1914 ) move from Wrentham , Mass. , to Forest Hills , Queens , in New York. Miss Keller use this home a a base for her extensive fund-raising tour for the American Foundation for the Blind , of which she be counselor until her death. In this effort she talk in church , synagogue and town halls. She not only collected money , but also seek to alleviate the living and work condition of the blind. In those year the blind be frequently ill-educated and maintain in asylum ; her endeavor be a major factor in change these conditions. A tireless traveler , Miss Keller tour the world with Miss Sullivan and Miss Thomson in the year before World War II. Everywhere she go she lecture in behalf of the blind and the deaf ; and , inevitably , she meet everyone of consequence. She also find time for writing : `` My Religion '' in 1927 ; `` Midstream -- My Later Life '' in 1930 ; `` Peace at Eventide '' in 1932 ; `` Helen Keller 's Journal '' in 1938 ; and `` Teacher '' in 1955. The `` Journal , '' one of her most luminous book , disclose the acuity and range of Miss Keller 's mind in the thirties. In her comment on political , social and literary matter , she condemn Hitlerism , cheer the sitdown strike of John L. Lewis 's Committee for Industrial Organization and criticize Margaret Mitchell 's `` Gone With the Wind '' a overlook the brutality of Southern slavery. Although she do not refer to it conspicuously Miss Keller be religious , but not a churchgoer. While quite young she be convert to the mystic New Church doctrine of Emanuel Swedenborg. The object of his doctrine be to make Christianity a living reality on earth through divine love , a theology that fit Miss Keller 's sense of social mission. Frustrated Romance Although Miss Keller 's serenity be buttress by her religious faith , she be subject in adulthood to criticisms and crisis that sometimes unsettle her. Other people , she discover , be attempt to run her life , and she be helpless to counter them. The most frustrating such episode occur in 1916 during an illness of Miss Sullivan. Miss Keller , then 36 , fell in love with Peter Fagan , a 29-year-old Socialist and newspaperman who be her temporary secretary. The couple take out a marriage license , intend a secret wedding. But a Boston reporter find out about the license , and his witless article on the romance horrify the stern Mrs. Keller , who order Mr. Fagan out of the house and break up the love affair. `` The love which have come , unseen and unexpected , depart with tempest on his wing , '' Miss Keller write in sadness , add that the love remain with her a `` a little island of joy surround by dark waters. '' For year her spinsterhood be a chief disappointment. `` If I could see , '' she say bitterly , `` I would marry first of all. '' With Miss Sullivan 's death in 1936 , Miss Keller and Miss Thomson move from New York to Westport , Conn. , Miss Keller 's home for the rest of her life. At Westport she make friend with it artist ( Jo Davidson execute a sculpture of her ) and it writer ( Van Wyck Brooks write a biographical sketch ) . With Mr. and Mrs. Davidson , Miss Keller and Miss Thomson tour France and Italy in 1950 , where Miss Keller saw great sculpture with her finger under Mr. Davidson 's tutelage. `` What a privilege it have be , '' Mrs. Davidson remark to a friend , `` to live with Helen and Polly. Every day Helen delight u more and more -- her noble simplicity , her ability to drink in the feel of thing , and that spring of joyousness that bubble up to the surface at the slight pressure. '' Royalties and Stipend In her middle and late year Miss Keller 's income be derive from her book royalty and a stipend from the Foundation for the Blind. After Miss Thomson 's death in 1960 , a trustee conduct most of her affairs. For her work in behalf of the blind and the deaf , in which she be actively engage up to 1962 , Miss Keller be honor by university and institution throughout the world -- the university of Harvard , Glasgow , Berlin and Delhi , among them. She be receive in the White House by every president from Grover Cleveland to John F. Kennedy. In 1964 she be one of 30 Americans on whom President Johnson confer the nation 's high civilian recognition , the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Despite the celebrity that accrue to her and the air of awesomeness with which she be surround in her late year , Miss Keller retain an unaffected personality and a certainty that her optimistic attitude toward life be justified. `` I believe that all through these dark and silent year , God have be use my life for a purpose I do not know , '' she say recently , add : `` But one day I shall understand and then I will be satisfy . ''