November 26 , 1968 OBITUARY Upton Sinclair , Author , Dead ; Crusader for Social Justice , 90 Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES BOUND BROOK , N.J. , Nov. 25 -- Upton Sinclair , who crusade against the nation 's social and economic ill in 90 book , die in his sleep tonight at the Somerset Valley Nursing Home. He be 90 year old. He be survive by a son , Dr. David Sinclair , a physicist with the Atomic Energy Commission , and a granddaughter , Diana Sinclair. A funeral service will be hold Saturday at 11 A.M. at St. Paul 's Episcopal Church here. Rebel With a Cause By ALDEN WHITMAN Upton Beall Sinclair be a rebel with a cause ; indeed , a multitude of cause : clean meat , strong trade union , abolition of child labor , birth control , Prohibition , utopian Socialism , an honest press , morality in business and industry , vegetarianism , mental telepathy and spiritualism , educational reform and civil liberties. A gracious and benign although spirited and assiduous crusader , he promote these cause through his book , score of pamphlet and thousand of speech and lecture and through campaign for public office , one of which , his exhilarating and vigorous race for the governorship of California , all but succeeded. In a moment of proud self-assessment toward the close of his life , he sum up his multiform striving by say : `` The English Queen Mary , who fail to hold the French port of Calais , say that when she die the word 'Calais ' would be find write on her heart. I do n't know whether anyone will care to examine my heart , but if they do they will find two word there -- 'Social Justice. ' For that be what I have believe in and fought for. '' Mr. Sinclair 's weapon be his pen , and few writer wield it so tellingly in battle against the social and economic ill of the United States. Although he be not a memorable stylist , his book be graphic , pungent and direct , arouse strong emotion in their reader , many of whom felt impel to join his struggle against the wrong he portrayed. A roll-call of his principal agitational book reflect the major concern of American social protester in the first 40 year of this century , when the bulk of his writing be done. Books Led to Food Act There be `` The Jungle , '' print in 1906. The most famous of his work , it expose not only the grossly unsanitary practice in the Chicago meatpacking industry , but also the sweatshop condition in which it worker toiled. Arousing the public , the book lead to the passage of the first Food and Drug Act. There be `` King Coal '' in 1917 , recount the tragedy of a strike at the Rockefeller- control Colorado Coal and Iron Company. `` The Profits of Religion , '' issue in 1918 , depict clergyman more concerned with money than religion. The following year there be `` The Brass Check , '' Mr. Sinclair 's expose of the venality of a subsidized press. `` The Goose- Step , '' in 1923 , dealt with defect in the educational system. `` Oil ! , '' which come out in 1927 , attack exploitation of the California oilfields. It be follow by `` Boston , '' one of the best of his social novel , which tell the story of the Sacco- Vanzetti case. Finally , there be `` The Flivver King , '' a caustic account of Henry Ford , which be widely use in the union organize campaign at the Ford Motor Company in 1937. At the age of 60 Mr. Sinclair turn from straightforward protest and propaganda to historical fiction. And for 10 year , start in 1939 , he write the 11 volume of the Lanny Budd series -- a total of 7,364 page and four million words. It be a prodigious feat , for it retold world history , with an accent on the United States , from 1913 to 1949. The improbable hero be Lanny Budd , journalist , through whose activity Mr. Sinclair recount the great event of those years. Won 1943 Pulitzer One book in the series , `` Dragon 's Teeth , '' which deal with the rise of Hitlerism in Germany , win for the writer his only major literary award , the Pulitzer Prize for 1943. Other prize elude him , although he never cease to hope for the Nobel Prize , for which he say he have once be propose by George Bernard Shaw. As a writer , Mr. Sinclair be dismiss by many American critics. He be `` mire in melodrama and sentiment , '' they say , a man who belabor the obvious with `` increasingly irrelevant prejudices. '' But in Europe he be more generously acclaim , usually a an `` American Ibsen of fiction , '' a reference to the Norwegian realist of the theater. Mr. Sinclair 's work be translate into every major language , and they be sell in the millions. Indeed , he be among the most widely read of American writer abroad. Paradoxically , his book be well regard in the Soviet Union , toward whose Communist ideology Mr. Sinclair be hostile. One clue to his enormous popularity be his unabashed devotion to the underdog. Another be his extensive documentation. And a third be a primness that lead him to consider sexual scene and four-letter word a `` vileness. '' Although Mr. Sinclair 's yearly earnings sometimes amount to only a few hundred dollar , his lifetime total be impressive. `` I 've earn about a million dollar in my life , '' he estimate recently , `` and I 've spend nearly all of it -- on cause , on book I think should be publish and on book I think would sell and didn't. '' Mr. Sinclair often declare that he be a Socialist. In fact , he be a member of that party from 1902 to 1934 , with an interruption for World War I , which he support and later condemned. He leave the party in 1934 to become a Democrat , but continue to regard himself a a Socialist in spirit. His Socialism , however , be mild and genteel. He envision a cooperative commonwealth for the United States , to be achieve gradually and through the electoral process. He be primarily a moralist ; his concern be social injustice , not social analysis. There be no evidence that he be a Marxist , much less an advocate of Communism. Nonetheless , Mr. Sinclair be frequently picture a a violent revolutionary , a believer in free love and a social incendiary of the most insidious sort. Yet in speech and think he be a temperate man , who regret , a he say , that `` I 've be lie about. '' His voice be soft and slightly Southern , and his face be placid. His blue-gray eye , behind spectacle , be good-humored. He be an agile 5-foot-7-inches , who play a fair game of tennis into his 70 's and who subsist largely on a diet of brown rice , fresh fruit and celery. Tea , coffee , spirituous liquor and tobacco he shun a injurious. In his productive year Mr. Sinclair know many of the famous people of his time -- Albert Einstein , Charles Chapman , Bertrand Russell , Theodore Dreiser , Douglas Fairbanks and Luther Burbank , among score of others. One of the others be H. L. Mencken , the earthy editor of The American Mercury , with whose political conservatism and defense of drink Mr. Sinclair often argued. Born in Baltimore What attract these opposite be a sentimental affection for Baltimore , where Mr. Sinclair be bear Sept. 20 , 1878. He be the only child of Upton Beall Sinclair , the scion of a distinguished Southern family , and Priscilla Harden Sinclair. The father be , in succession , a salesman of whisky , straw hat and men 's clothing , who , his son recall , `` could never get away from drink. '' His mother 's married life `` be poison by alcohol '' a his father drank himself to death. `` It make an indelible impression upon my childish soul , '' Mr. Sinclair write in his autobiography , `` and be the reason why I be a Prohibitionist. '' The family alternate between poverty and moderate wealth. Explaining the effect of this on his career , Mr. Sinclair once remark : `` Readers of my novel know that I have one favorite theme , the contrast between the social class ; there be character from both world , the rich and the poor , and the plot be contrive to carry you from one to the other. The explanation be that a far back a I can remember , my life be a series of Cinderella transformation ; one night I would be sleep on a vermin-ridden sofa in a lodging house , and the next night under silken coverlet in a fashionable home. It all depend on whether my father have the money for that week 's board. '' Shy , precocious and introspective , Upton teach himself to read at the age of 5 , and his mother supervise his education until he be 10 and enter school. `` I know everything but arithmetic , '' he said. Lived in New York By that time the Sinclairs be live in New York , and the boy go to grammar school , complete eight grade in less than two years. He have to repeat the last grade to mark time for admission to City College , then chiefly a high school , which he enter a few day before his 14th birthday. While there he make his debut a a professional writer. `` I write a story about a pet bird , '' he recall , `` make it serve to prove the innocence of a colored boy accuse of arson. '' Argosy magazine pay him $ 25 for the yarn. He go on from that to sell joke to Life , Judge and Puck , and when he graduate from City College after five year he be a full-fledged pulp writer. At one point he be produce story simultaneously about life at West Point and at Annapolis for $ 40 a story. Each story be about 30,000 word long. Then , a later , he have an awesome fecundity. When he be attend lecture at Columbia after his City College day , he write 8,000 word a day , Sundays included. `` I keep two secretary work all the time , take dictation one day and transcribe the next , '' he said. Mr. Sinclair be equally frenzied a a reader. Over one Christmas holiday of two week he read all of Shakespeare and all the poetry of Milton. In addition , at Columbia , he teach himself to read French in six week , and gallop through Musset , Daudet , Hugo , Flaubert , Balzac and Zola. He also teach himself Italian and , later , Esperanto and German. Mr. Sinclair 's introduction to practical politics occur in his student day when he help campaign for William Travers Jerome , the anti-Tammany Hall reformer. `` I learn very quickly , '' he write in disillusion , `` for my knight-hero , Jerome , be elect triumphantly and do absolutely nothing , and all form of graft go on in New York City just a they always had. '' Wherever Mr. Sinclair look he saw corruption triumphant and virtue a dauntless but batter cause. `` The vision of life that have come to me must be make know to the world , in order that men and woman might be win from their stupid and wasteful way of life , '' he thought. `` Long ago my friend Mike Gold write me a letter , scold me severely for what he call my 'Jesus complex ' ; I answer that the world need a Jesus more than it need anything else. '' Gave Up Potboilers But before Mr. Sinclair embark upon his mission he decide to give up potboiler for more substantial literature. His first effort , `` Springtime and Harvest , '' be a callow novel about a woman redeem by high and noble love. It be privately publish in 1901 and then reissue a `` King Midas '' by Funk & Wagnalls. On the strength of it middling success he marry Miss Meta H. Fuller. The union , beset by poverty and naivete , end in 1911 in a blaze of scandal. Mrs. Sinclair fell in love with Harry Kemp , the poet , and Mr. Sinclair , then in the Netherlands , obtain a divorce. In refer to this marriage in late writing , the author call himself Thyrsis and his wife Corydon , the appellation of two rustic in Virgin 's `` Eclogues. '' Mr. Sinclair 's formal introduction to Socialism be effect in 1902 by Leonard D. Abbott , also a writer , who give him party pamphlet to read. He then meet George D. Herron , an influential Socialist , and Gaylord Wilshire , who run a Socialist periodical for which Mr. Sinclair wrote. His broadside also appear in Appeal to Reason , a Socialist weekly with more than a half-million circulation. Meantime , Upton and Meta Sinclair and their infant son David move to a shack near Princeton , N. J. , where Mr. Sinclair write a Civil War novel that impress the editor of Appeal to Reason , who urge him to write a novel about wage slavery. Thus encourage , he go to Chicago in 1904 for seven week of research in the packinghouse district. 'Tears and Anguish' The result be `` The Jungle , '' a novel centering on the life of a Lithuanian immigrant family , which he write `` with tear and anguish '' in three months. Five publisher reject it before Doubleday , Page & Co. take it. Published in February , 1906 , the book 's description of the filthy condition in the meat plant stir the country. `` I aim at the public 's heart , '' the author say , `` and by accident I hit it in the stomach. '' Within a month or so , President Theodore Roosevelt be receive 100 letter a day demand a Federal cleanup of the meat industry. Roosevelt call Mr. Sinclair to the White House for a firsthand account of his finding , and order an investigation that culminate in the first Federal pure-food statute. `` The Jungle '' bring it author instant fame. Photographed and interview , he keep up a drumfire of charge about what be then call the Beef Trust. The prodding be intense enough to annoy Roosevelt , who send a message to Mr. Sinclair 's publisher. `` Tell Sinclair to go home and let me run the country for a while , '' it said. ( Fame from `` The Jungle '' endure into 1967 , when the age writer be again invite to the White House , this time to witness the singing of a new pure-food law. ) With some of his earnings from `` The Jungle , '' Mr. Sinclair help organize the Helicon Home Colony , an experiment in high-minded communal living that borrow it name from the legendary home of the Greek Muses. The professor , writer , poet and critic establish their Parnassian colony on the Palisades , near Fort Lee , N. J. , and it last from November , 1906 , to the following March , when it be destroy by fire. Often depict a a Bohemian colony , Helicon Hall , a it be know , be actually an exercise in the austere life. After a trip to California and far writing , Mr. Sinclair repair to Bernarr Macfadden 's health institute at Battle Creek , Mich. , for attention to his digestive processes. He have be bother by stomach ailment for some time until he find his guru in Mr. Macfadden , a self-styled body culturist and a diet faddist. Mr. Macfadden convince his patient of the merit of periodic fasting and of such gastronomic combination a sour milk and dates. The grateful writer never cease his public enthusiasm for nutritional oddities. With the breakup of his marriage , Mr. Sinclair travel in Europe , to whose Socialist- orient literary light he be a hero to be feted. Returning home after his divorce , he marry Miss Mary Craig Kimbrough , a gentle Mississippian , with whom he live in contentment until her death in 1961. His third wife be the former Mrs. Mary Elizabeth Willis , who die in 1967. The writer forsake his desk briefly in 1912 to engage in the celebrate strike of silkworkers in Paterson , N. J. In this he be join by the lead radical of the day , who include Big Bill Haywood of the Industrial Workers of the World ; Elizabeth Gurley Flynn , later a leading Communist ; Carlo Tresca , the anarchist ; and John Reed , the future Communist. About that time he also meet Walter Lippmann , the columnist , who a a Harvard student have belong to the Intercollegiate Socialist Society , which Mr. Sinclair have found with Jack London in 1905. Supported Role in War Mr. Sinclair 's devotion to the Socialist party be suspend when the United States enter World War I in 1917. Not only do he resign , but he also put out a magazine , Upon Sinclair 's , to support American entry into the conflict. Lasting 10 issue , it attain a circulation of 10,000 copy a month until it be discontinue in 1919. The author later regret his support of the war , and he be bitterly disappoint by the peace settlement. Nonetheless , the incident embitter many Socialists , to whom Mr. Sinclair become a renegade. He subsequently be readmitted to the party , which edge to the right in the postwar year , but his activity in it be minimal. Mr. Sinclair 's fame , which have dwindle during the war , be rehabilitate by `` The Brass Check , '' his book about the suppression and distortion of news by what he call `` the big- business press '' and by the news agencies. The title be an allusion to prostitution , since a brothel customer at that time buy a brass marker from the madam and give it to the prostitute a evidence that he have pay in advance for her favors. Turned down by commercial publisher , Mr. Sinclair serialize his documented indictment in Appeal to Reason and publish it in book form at his own expense , include one printing on brown wrapping paper. `` The Brass Check , '' it author recall , `` create a tremendous sensation , '' and it sham many newspaper into raise their ethical standards. In the nineteen-twenties Mr. Sinclair be one of the first board member of the American Civil Liberties Union and a founder of it branch in Southern California , where he have go to live and to write. He produce two book advocate educational reform , another analyze world literature , and another on the oil industry. `` Oil ! , '' which contain some chapter about Hollywood , have the distinction of be ban in Boston because a character in it mention the phrase `` birth control. '' The author visit that city to cash in on the publicity and come to meet Bartolomeo Vanzetti ( `` one of the wise and kind person I ever know '' ) who , with Nicola Sacco , be execute in 1927 for a payroll robbery that many historian believe they do not commit. The Sacco-Vanzetti case , the cause celebre of the twenty , be retell in `` Boston , '' one of Mr. Sinclair 's fine novels. In the early thirty , Mr. Sinclair be convert to a belief in psychic phenomenon and write a book about them , `` Mental Radio , '' that he felt important enough to reprint in 1962. At the same time he write `` The Wet Parade , '' an impassioned plea for Prohibition. And from material furnish by William Fox , the motion picture tycoon , he write `` Upton Sinclair Presents William Fox , '' a partisan exposition of Mr. Fox 's many business trouble in Hollywood. As a spin-off of his interest in the movie , Mr. Sinclair , in 1933 , be a sponsor of Sergei Eisenstein 's classic documentary , `` Thunder Over Mexico. '' Although Mr. Sinclair have often seek office a a Socialist -- the House in 1906 and 1920 , the Senate in 1922 and Governor of California in 1926 , 1930 and 1934 -- his race in 1934 be his most dazzling. Of a population of seven million in that year , California have a million out of work , it public relief fund be exhaust and it industry be all but stilled. `` To me the remedy be obvious , '' Mr. Sinclair said. `` The factory be idle and the worker have no money. Let them be put to work on the state 's credit and produce good for their own use , and set up a system of exchange by which the good could be distributed. Politicians Astonished This be the essence of EPIC -- End Poverty in California -- the platform on which Mr. Sinclair run in the Democratic primary. To the astonishment and shock of professional politician , he win by 436,000 votes. When Mr. Sinclair face Frank E. Merriam , the incumbent Republican , in the general election , it seem obvious to many observer that `` Uppie , '' a the Democrat be affectionately call , be go to win. The conservative Los Angeles Times , however , be instrumental in bring about his defeat by conduct an inflammatory campaign that picture him a a man who would not only `` sovietize '' the state but also introduce free love and the nationalization of children. That newspaper and others succeed in frighten substantial number of conventional voters. The movie industry , moreover , threaten it employes with dismissal if they vote for Mr. Sinclair. In addition , the national Democratic party quietly work to scuttle the EPIC movement. In the face of these factor , Mr. Sinclair 's zealous campaign with an amateur organization roll up a remarkable total of 879,000 vote , about 200,000 short of victory. Writing Pace Slackened Retiring from electoral politics for good , he devote his time to far writing -- a one-act play about his cousin , Wallis Warfield , now the Dutchess of Windsor ; a novel about Henry Ford ; and the Lanny Budd series. His pace slacken in the nineteen-fifties to only eight book -- one a temperance plea -- in 10 years. In 1960 he publish some of his letter , and his autobiography appear in 1962. Looking back on his life a couple of year ago , Mr. Sinclair conclude it have be one of accomplishment. Indeed , he specify 10 achievement : clean meat ; good newspaper ; the end of `` wage slavery '' in the Rocky Mountain mining camp ; spur an interest in psychic phenomenon ; help to organize the American Civil Liberties Union ; his EPIC campaign ; his democratic influence in Japan , where his book be widely circulate ; his campaign against drinking ; his founding of the college Socialist society , and the Lanny Budd books. `` In politics and economics , '' he sum up , `` I believe what I have believe ever since I discover the Socialist movement at the beginning of this century. I have incorporate those belief in a hundred book and pamphlet and numberless articles. My book have be translate into 40 language , and million of people have read them. `` What those million have find be not only a defense of social justice but an unwavering conviction that true social justice can be achieve and maintain only through the democratic process . ''