April 5 , 1968 OBITUARY Martin Luther King Jr. : Leader of Millions in Nonviolent Drive for Racial Justice By MURRAY SCHUMACH To many million of American Negroes , the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. be the prophet of their crusade for racial equality. He be their voice of anguish , their eloquence in humiliation , their battle cry for human dignity. He forge for them the weapon of nonviolence that withstood and blunt the ferocity of segregation. And to many million of American white , he be one of a group of Negroes who preserve the bridge of communication between race when racial warfare threaten the United States in the nineteen-sixties , a Negroes seek the full emancipation pledge to them a century before by Abraham Lincoln. To the world Dr. King have the stature that accrue to a winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , a man with access to the White House and the Vatican ; a veritable hero in the African state that be just emerge from colonialism. Between Extremes In his dedication to non-violence , Dr. King be catch between white and Negro extremist a racial tension erupt into arson , gunfire and loot in many of the nation 's city during the summer of 1967. Militant Negroes , with the cry of , `` burn , baby burn , '' argue that only by violence and segregation could the Negro attain self-respect , dignity and real equality in the United States. Floyd B. McKissick , when director of the Congress of Racial Equality , declare in August of that year that it be a `` foolish assumption to try to sell nonviolence to the ghettos. '' And white extremist , not bother to make distinction between degree of Negro militancy , look upon Dr. King a one of their chief enemies. At time in recent month , effort by Dr. King to utilize nonviolent method explode into violence. Violence in Memphis Last week , when he lead a protest march through downtown Memphis , Tenn. , in support of the city 's striking sanitation worker , a group of Negro youth suddenly begin break store window and looting , and one Negro be shoot to death. Two day later , however , Dr. King say he would stage another demonstration and attribute the violence to his own `` miscalculation. '' At the time he be assassinate in Memphis , Dr. King be involve in one of his great plan to dramatize the plight of the poor and stir Congress to help Negroes. He call this venture the `` Poor People 's Campaign. '' It be to be a huge `` camp-in '' either in Washington or in Chicago during the Democratic National Convention. In one of his last public announcement before the shooting , Dr. King tell an audience in a Harlem church on March 26 : `` We need an alternative to riot and to timid supplication. Nonviolence be our most potent weapon. '' His strong belief in civil right and nonviolence make him one of the lead opponent of American participation in the war in Vietnam. To him the war be unjust , divert vast sum away from program to alleviate the condition of the Negro poor in this country. He call the conflict `` one of history 's most cruel and senseless wars. '' Last January he say : `` We need to make clear in this political year , to Congressmen on both side of the aisle and to the President of the United States that we will no longer vote for men who continue to see the killing of Vietnamese and Americans a the best way of advance the goal of freedom and self- determination in Southeast Asia. '' Object of Many Attacks Inevitably , a a symbol of integration , he become the object of unrelenting attack and vilification. His home be bombed. He be spat upon and mocked. He be strike and kicked. He be stab , almost fatally , by a deranged Negro woman. He be frequently throw into jail. Threats become so commonplace that his wife could ignore burn cross on the lawn and ominous phone calls. Through it all he adhere to the creed of passive disobedience that infuriate segregationists. The adulation that be heap upon him eventually irritate some Negroes in the civil right movement who work hard , but in relative obscurity. They point out -- and Dr. King admit -- that he be a poor administrator. Sometimes , with sarcasm , they refer to him , privately , a `` De Lawd. '' They note that Dr. King 's success be build on the labor of may who have go before him , the noncom and private of the civil right army who fight without benefit of headline and television cameras. The Negro extremists he criticize be contemptuous of Dr. King. They dismiss his passion for nonviolence a another form of servility to white people. They call him an `` Uncle Tom , '' and charge that he be hinder the Negro struggle for equality. Dr. King 's belief in nonviolence be subject to intense pressure in 1966 , when some Negro group adopt the slogan `` black power '' in the aftermath of civil right march into Mississippi and race riot in Northern cities. He reject the idea , say : `` The Negro need the white man to free him from his fears. The white man need the Negro to free him from his guilt. A doctrine of black supremacy be as evil a a doctrine of white supremacy. '' The doctrine of `` black power '' threaten to split the Negro civil right movement and antagonize white liberal who have be support Negro cause , and Dr. King suggest `` militant nonviolence '' a a formula for progress with peace. At the root of his civil right conviction be an even more profound faith in the basic goodness of man and the great potential of American democracy. These belief give to his speech a fervor that could not be still by criticism. Scores of million of Americans -- white be well a Negro -- who sit before television set in the summer of 1963 to watch the awesome march of some 200,000 Negroes on Washington be deeply stir when Dr. King , in the shadow of the Lincoln Memorial , say : `` Even though we face the difficulty of today and tomorrow , I still have a dream. I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of it creed : 'We hold these truth to be self-evident that all men be create equal. ' '' And all over the world , men be move a they read his word of Dec. 10 , 1964 , when he become the third member of his race to receive the Nobel Peace Prize. Insistent on Man 's Destiny `` I refuse to accept the idea that man be mere flotsam and jetsam in the river of life which surround him , '' he said. `` I refuse to accept the view that mankind be so tragically bind to the starless midnight of racism and war that the bright daybreak of peace and brotherhood can never become a reality. `` I refuse to accept the cynical notion that nation after nation must spiral down a militaristic stairway into the hell of thermonuclear destruction. I believe that unarmed truth and unconditional love will have the final word in reality. This be why right , temporarily defeat , be strong than evil triumphant. '' For the poor and unlettered of his own race , Dr. King speak differently. There he embrace the rhythm and passion of the revivalist and evangelist. Some observer of Dr. King 's technique say that others in the movement be more effective in this respect. But Dr. King have the touch , a he illustrate in a church in Albany , Ga. , in 1962 : `` So listen to me , child : Put on your marching shoe ; don'cha get weary ; though the path ahead may be dark and dreary ; we 're walk for freedom , children. '' Or there be the meeting in Gadsen , Ala. , late in 1963 , when he display another side of his ability before an audience of poor Negroes. It go a follow : King : I hear they be beat you. Audience : Yes , yes. King : I hear they be curse you. Audience : Yes , yes. King : I hear they be go into your home and do nasty thing and beat you. Audience : Yes , yes. King : Some of you have knife , and I ask you to put them up. Some of you have arm , and I ask you to put them up. Get the weapon of non-violence , the breastplate of righteousness , the armor of truth , and just keep marching. '' It be say that so devote be his vast following that even among illiterate he could , by calm discussion of Platonic dogma , evoke deep cry of `` Amen. '' Dr. King also have a way of reduce complex issue to term that anyone could understand. Thus , in the summer of 1965 , when there be widespread discontent among Negroes about their struggle for equality of employment , he declare : `` What good do it do to be able to eat at a lunch counter if you ca n't buy a hamburger. '' The enormous impact of Dr. King 's word be one of the reason he be in the President 's Room in the Capitol on Aug. 6 , 1965 , when President Johnson sign the Voting Rights Act that strike down literacy test , provide Federal registrar to assure the ballot to unregistered Negroes and mark the growth of the Negro a a political force in the South. Backed by Organization Dr. King 's effectiveness be enhance and give continuity by the fact that he have an organization behind him. Formed in 1960 , with headquarters in Atlanta , it be call the Southern Christian Leadership Conference , familiarly know a SLICK. Allied with it be another organization form under Dr. King 's sponsorship the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee , often refer to a SNICK. These two organization reach the country , though their basic strength be in the South. They bring together Negro clergyman , businessmen , professional men and students. They raise the money and plan the sit-in , the campaign for Negro vote registration , the demonstration by which Negroes hack away at segregationist resistance , lower the barrier against Negroes in the political , economic and social life of the nation. This minister , who become the most famous spokesman for Negro right since Booker T. Washington , be not particularly impressive in appearance. About 5 foot 8 inch tall , he have an oval face with almond-shaped eye that look almost dreamy when he be off the platform. His neck and shoulder where heavily muscle , but his hand be almost delicate. Speaker of Few Gestures There be little of the rabblerouser in his oratory. He be not prone to extravagant gesture or loud peroration. His baritone voice , though vibrant , be not that of a spellbinder. Occasionally , after a particular telling sentence , he would tilt his head a bit and fall silent a though wait for the echo of his thought to spread through the hall , church or street. In private gathering , Dr. King lack that laugh gregariousness that often make for popularity. Some think he be without a sense of humor. He be not a gifted raconteur. He do not have the flamboyance of a Representative Adam Clayton Powell Jr. or the cool strategic brilliance of Roy Wilkins , head of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. What Dr. King do have be an instinct for the right moment to make his moves. Some critic look upon this a pure opportunism. Nevertheless , it be this sense of timing that raise him in 1955 , from a newly arrive minister in Montgomery , Ala. , with his first church , to a figure of national prominence. Bus Boycott in Progress Negroes in that city have begin a boycott of bus to win the right to sit where they please instead of be force to move to the rear of bus , in Southern tradition or to surrender seat to white people when a bus be crowded. The 381-day boycott by Negroes be already under way when the young pastor be place in charge of the campaign. It have be say that one of the reason he get the job be because he be so new in the area he have not antagonize any of the Negro factions. Even while the boycott be under way , a board of director handle the bulk of administrative work. However , it be Dr. King who dramatize the boycott with his decision to make it the test ground , before the eye of the nation , of his belief in the civil disobedience teaching of Thoreau and Gandhi. When he be arrest during the Montgomery boycott , he say : `` If we be arrest every day , if we be exploited every day , if we be trample over every day , do n't ever let anyone pull you so low a to hate them. We must use the weapon of love. We must have compassion and understanding for those who hate us. We must realize so many people be teach to hate u that they be not totally responsible for their hate. But we stand in life at midnight ; we be always on the threshold of a new dawn. '' Home Bombed in Absence Even more dramatic , in some way , be his reaction to the bombing of his home during the boycott. He be away at the time and rush back fearful for his wife and children. They be not injured. But when he reach the modest house , more than a thousand Negroes have already gather and be in an ugly mood , seek revenge against the white people. The police be jittery. Quickly , Dr. King pacify the crowd and there be no trouble. Dr. King be even more impressive during the `` big push '' in Birmingham , which begin in April , 1963. With the minister at the limelight , Negroes there begin a campaign of sit-in at lunch counter , picket and protest marches. Hundreds of child , use in the campaign , be jailed. The entire world be stir when the police turn dog on the demonstrators. Dr. King be jail for five days. While he be in prison he issue a 9,000-word letter that create considerable controversy among white people , alienate some sympathizer who think Dr. King be be too aggressive. Moderates Called Obstacles In the letter he write : `` I have almost reach the regrettable conclusion that the Negro 's great stumbling block in the stride toward freedom be not the White Citizens Counciler or the Ku Klux Klanner , but the white moderate who be more devoted to order than to justice ; who prefer a negative peace , which be the absence of tension , to a positive peace , which be the presence of justice. '' Some critic of Dr. King say that one reason for this letter be to answer Negro intellectual , such a the wrier James Baldwin , who be impatient with Dr. King 's belief in brotherhood. Whatever the reason , the role of Dr. King in Birmingham add to his stature and show that his enormous following be deeply devote to him. He demonstrate this in a threatening situation in Albany , Ga. , after four Negro girl be kill in the bombing of a church. Dr. King say at the funeral : `` In spite of the darkness of this hour , we must not despair. We must not lose faith in our white brothers. '' As Dr. King 's word grow more potent and he be invite to the White House by President Kennedy and Johnson , some critic -- Negroes as well a white -- note that sometimes , despite all the publicity he attract , he leave campaigns unfinished or else fail to attain his goals. Dr. King be aware of this. But he point out , in 1964 , in St Augustine , Fla. , one of the tough civil right battleground , that there be important intangibles. `` Even if we do not get all we should , '' he say , `` movement such a this tend more and more to give a Negro the sense of self-respect that he needs. It tend to generate courage in Negroes outside the movement. It bring intangible result outside the community where it be carry out. There be a hardening of attitude in situation like this. But other city see and say : `` We do n't want to be another Albany or Birmingham , ' and they make changes. Some community , like this one , have to bear the cross. '' It be in this city that Negroes march into the fist of the mob singing : `` We love everybody. '' Conscious of Leading Role There be no false modesty in Dr. King 's self appraisal of his role in the civil right movement. `` History , '' he say , `` have thrust me into this position. It would be both immoral and a sign of ingratitude if I do not face my moral responsibility to do what I can in this struggle. '' Another time he compare himself to Socrates a one of `` the creative gadfly of society. '' At time he address himself deliberately to the white people of the nations. Once , he say : `` We will match your capacity to inflict suffer with our capacity to endure suffering. We will meet your physical force with soul force. We will not hate you , but we can not in all good conscience obey your unjust laws. . .We will soon be you down by our capacity to suffer. And in win our freedom we will so appeal to your heart and conscience that we will win you in the process. '' The enormous influence of Dr. King 's voice in the turbulent racial conflict reach into New York in 1964. In the summer of that year racial rioting explode in New York and in other Northern city with large Negro populations. There be widespread fear that the disorder , particularly in Harlem , might set of unprecedented racial violence. At this point Dr. King become one of the major intermediary in restore order. He confer with Mayor Robert F. Wagner and with Negro leaders. A statement be issue , of which he be one of the signer , call for `` a broad curtailment if not total moratorium on mass demonstration until after Presidential elections. '' The following year , Dr. King be once more in the headline and on television -- this time lead a drive for Negro voter registration in Selma , Ala. Negroes be arrest by the hundreds. Dr. King be punch and kick by a white man when , during this period of protest , he become the first Negro to register at a century-old hotel in Selma. Martin Luther King Jr. be bear Jan. 15 , 1929 , in Atlanta on Auburn Avenue. As a child his name be Michael Luther King and so be his father's. His father change both their name legally to Martin Luther King in honor of the Protestant reformer. Auburn Avenue be one of the nation 's most widely know Negro sections. Many successful Negro business or professional men have live there. The Rev. Martin Luther King Sr. be pastor of the Ebenezer Baptist Church at Jackson Street and Auburn Avenue. Young Martin go to Atlanta 's Morehouse College , a Negro institution whose student acquire what be sometimes call the `` Morehouse swank. '' The president of Morehouse , Dr. B. E. Mays , take a special interest in Martin , who have decide , in his junior year , to be a clergyman. He be ordain a minister in his father 's church in 1947. It be in this church he be to say , some year later : `` America , you 're stray away. You 've trample over 19 million of your brethren. All men be create equal. Not some men. Not white men. All men. America , rise up and come home. '' Before Dr. King have his own church he pursue his study in the integrate Crozier Theological Seminary , in Chester , Pa. He be one of six Negroes in a student body of about a hundred. He become the first Negro class president. He be name the outstanding student and win a fellowship to study for a doctorate at the school of his choice. The young man enrol at Boston College in 1951. For his doctoral thesis he seek to resolve the difference between the Harvard theologian Paul Tillich and the neo-naturalist philosopher Henry Nelson Wieman. During this period he take course at Harvard , a well. While he be work on his doctorate he meet Coretta Scott , a graduate of Antioch College , who be do graduate work in music. He marry the singer in 1953. They have four child , Yolanda , Martin Luther King 3d , Dexter Scott and Bernice. In 1954 , Dr. King become pastor of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery , Ala. At that time few of Montgomery 's white resident saw any reason for a major dispute with the city 's 50,000 Negroes. They do not seem to realize how deeply the Negroes resent segregated seating on bus , for instance. Revolt Begun by Woman On Dec. 1 , 1955 , they learn , almost by accident. Mrs. Rosa Parks , a Negro seamstress , refuse to comply with a bus driver 's order to give up her seat to a white passenger. She be tire , she said. Her foot hurt from a day of shopping. Mrs. Parks have be a local secretary for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. She be arrest , convict of refuse to obey the bust conductor and fin $ 10 and cost , a total of $ 14. Almost as spontaneous a Mrs. Parks 's act be the rallying of many Negro leader in the city to help her. From a protest begin over a Negro woman 's tired foot Dr. King begin his public career. In 1959 , Dr. King and his family move back to Atlanta , where he become a co-pastor , with his father , of the Ebenezer Baptist Church. As his fame increase , public interest in his belief lead him to write books. It be while he be autograph one of these book , `` Stride Toward Freedom , '' in a Harlem department store that he be stab by a Negro woman. It be in these book that he summarize , in detail , his belief as well a his career. Thus , in `` Why We Ca n't Wait , '' he write : `` The Negro know he be right. He have not organize for conquest or to gain spoil or to enslave those who have injure him. His goal be not to capture that which belong to someone else. He merely want , and will have , what be honorably his. '' The possibility that he might someday be assassinate be consider by Dr. King on June 5 , 1964 , when he report , in St. Augustine , Fla. , that his life have be threatened. He say : `` Well , if physical death be the price that I must pay to free my white brother and sister from a permanent death of the spirit , then nothing can be more redemptive . ''