March 28 , 1968 OBITUARY Yuri Gagarin Killed As Test Plane Falls By The Associated Press MOSCOW , Thursday , March 28 -- Yuri A. Gagarin , the world 's first man in space , be kill yesterday in an air accident , the Moscow radio announce today. The announcement say the crash occur during a training flight and also kill Col. Vladimir S. Seryogin , describe a chief of the detachment. Both victim will be bury in the Kremlin wall , the radio bulletin added. The radio say the cosmonaut , who be 34 year old , die while test-flying a new aircraft. The official announcement a carry by Tass , the Soviet press agency , say : `` It be officially announce here that Hero of the Soviet Union Yuri Gagarin , the world 's first cosmonaut , have perish during an air crash. '' Colonel Gagarin make man 's first flight in space on April 12 , 1961 , a one-orbit trip last 108 minutes. Tass say the announcement of Colonel Gagarin 's death have be make by the Communist party 's Central Committee , the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet ( Parliament ) , and the Soviet Council of Ministers. From Obscurity to Renown Until the morning of April 12 , 1961 , Yuri Alekseyevich Gagarin be no good know than any of the other 1,200 or so Gagarins living in the Moscow area. But that morning , Yuri Gagarin , then 27 year old , sit cramp in the cockpit of a Vostok space capsule a it be launch from a pad at Baykonur , in Kazakhstan. At 9:07 A.M. , the capsule go into orbit around the earth and Yuri Gagarin become the world 's first man in space. His flight represent an epochal scientific and technological achievement for the Russians. In both the Soviet Union and the West , it be realize that Cosmonaut Gagarin have begin a new chapter in history , one in which man have dare cross the threshold of the universe. Setback for U.S. The Gagarin flight be a blow to those involve in that United States space program as well a a political and diplomatic setback , a fact underline by the Soviet Union 's trumpeting of the feat a evidence of `` the genius of the Soviet people and the powerful force of socialism. '' The formerly unknown test pilot be transform into an international hero. Streets be name for him in many Soviet city , monument be erect , and Government official pin medal on his tunic. Premier Nikita Krushchev publicly smother him with kiss , compare him to Christopher Columbus , and name him a Hero of the Soviet Union. Yuri Gagarin be a rather quiet man , mild-spoken almost to a fault. He have intelligent , dark eye and bushy eyebrows. His forehead be broad and his nose snubbed , and person who know him say he have the appearance and demeanor of `` a typical Muskovite. '' He be bear March 9 , 1934 on a collective farm near Gzhatsk , in the state of Smolenskaya , about 100 mile from Moscow. His father , Aleksei , be a carpenter , and his mother , Anna , work in the fields. The name Gagarin , which derive from the Russian word for `` wild duck , '' be that of an ancient princely family that hold vast estate in the Smolensk area before the Bolshevik revolution. But the cosmonaut angrily deny any connection with that aristocratic lineage. In Invaders ' Path The first seven year of the boy 's life be spend peacefully on the collective farm , but the peace be shatter when the Germans attack Russia in June , 1941. Gzhatsk be directly on the historic invasion path to Moscow , and by late September Nazi Panzer tank have overrun it. The elder Gagarin be believe to have go into the Army , while his wife and three child flee eastward ahead of the Nazis. The family return to Ghatsk from exile in the Urals when the war end , and Yuri be send to an industrial school in a Moscow suburb. The boy fell in love with airplane and go to every air show , over a period of five year , hold in nearby Tushino. He be graduate with distinction from the industrial school and while work a a molder attend night school for worker and complete secondary school studies. While study for a technical degree at Saratov , he learn to fly with the local aero club. Met Wife at School In 1957 , Colonel Gagarin graduate from an air force cadet school at Orenburg , where he meet his wife , Valentina , a graduate of the Orenburg Medical school. Soon after his marriage , he begin a tour of duty a a fighter pilot. As a senior lieutenant , he be in the first group of pilot to be train for space flights. On the eve of the Vostok flight , he be promote to major , and at the time of his death be a full colonel. After his great leap forward into space , he do not make a second space flight , but it be understood he play a major part in train pilot for future flights. Colonel Gagarin 's space vehicle be a rocket-propelled , five-ton satellite. After attain the first escape velocity and the separation of the last stage of the carrier rocket , the spaceship go into free flight that circle the earth only once. The ship make the trip in 89.1 minute and then return to earth safely after a total flight time of 108 minutes. The cosmonaut bail out before the capsule hit the ground in the wasteland of Baikonur. Since that flight both Russian and American astronaut have go on to great achievement , include multimanned multiple-orbit flights. But Gagarin 's be man 's first flight in space , and history will remember him for it. His heroism be applaud on an international tour and he rise in the rank of the Communist Party , which he have join in 1949. Colonel Gagarin serve a chairman of the Soviet-Cuban Friendship Society , and a a delegate to the 22d Congress of the Communist Party. Since 1962 he have serve a a deputy in the Supreme Soviet. He be survive by his wife and two daughter .