August 19 , 1969 OBITUARY Mies van der Rohe Dies at 83 ; Leader of Modern Architecture Special to The New York Times CHICAGO , Aug. 18 -- Mies van der Rohe , one of the great figure of 20th-century architecture , die in Wesley Memorial Hospital here late last night. He be 83 year old. Mr. van der Rohe have enter the hospital two week ago. He be survive by two daughter , Mrs. Georgia van der Rohe and Mrs. Marianne Lohan ; five grandchild and six great-grandchildren. Expressed Industrial Spirit By ALDEN WHITMAN Ludwig Mies van der Rohe , a man without any academic architectural training , be one of the great artist-architect-philosophers of his age , acclaim a a genius for his uncompromisingly spare design , his fastidiousness and his innovations. Along with Frank Lloyd Wright and Le Corbusier , the German-born master builder who be universally know a Mies ( pronounced mees ) fashion score of impose structure express the spirit of the industrial 20th century. `` Architecture be the will of an epoch translate into space , '' he remark in a talkative moment. Pressed to explain his own role a a model for others -- a matter on which he be shy , a he be on most others -- he say : `` I have try to make an architecture for a technological society. I have want to keep everything reasonable and clear -- to have an architecture that anybody can do. '' A building , he be convince , should be `` a clear and true statement of it time '' -- cathedral for an age of pathos , glass and metal cage for an age of advanced industrialism. He think the George Washington Bridge in New York an outstanding example of a structure express it period , and he use to go to admire it whenever he visit the city. `` It be the most modern building in the city , '' he remark in 1963. He be fond of the bridge because he consider it beautifully proportion and because it do not conceal it structure. Mies like to see the steel , the brick , the concrete of building show themselves rather than be conceal by ornamentation. A 20th-centrury industry building have to be pithy , he believed. Influence on Colleagues Mies 's stature rest not only on his lean yet sensuous business and residential building , but also on the profound influence he exert on his colleague and on public taste. As the number of his structure multiply in the year since World War II and a their stunning individuality become apparent , critical appreciation flow to him in torrent , and his design and model draw throng to museum where they be exhibited. It become a status symbol to live in a Mies house , to work in a Mies building , or even to visit one. The Mies name have already be establish among architect long before he come to the United States in 1937. In 1919 and 1921 in Berlin he design two steel skyscraper sheathe in glass from street to roof. Although the building be never erect , the design be now accept a the original of today 's glass-and-metal skyscrapers. Ribbon Windows In 1922 Mies introduce the concept of ribbon window , uninterrupted band of glass between the finished face of concrete slab , in a design for a German office building. That have since become the basis for many commercial structures. Mies , in 1924 , produce plan for a concrete villa that be now regard a the forerunner of the California ranch house. He be also say to have foreshadow the return of the inner patio of Roman time in an exhibition house build in 1931 ; to have start the idea of space divider , the use of cabinet or screen instead of wall to break up interior ; and to have originate the glass house , with window and glass sliding panel extend from floor to ceiling to permit outside greenery to form the visual boundary of a room. Apart from simplicity of form , what strike student of Mies 's building be their painstaking craftsmanship , their attention to detail. `` God be in the detail , '' Mies like to say. In this respect the building reflect the man , for Mies be fussy about himself. A large , lusty man with a massive head top a 5-foot , 10-inch frame , he dress in exquisitely hand-stitched suit of conservative hue , din extravagantly well on haute cuisine , sip the correct wine from the proper goblet , and chained-smoked hand-rolled cigars. Gold Chain for Watch For a man so modern in his conception , he have more than a touch of old-fashionedness. It show up in such thing a the gold chain across his waistcoat , to which be attach his pocket timepiece. Rather than live in a contemporary building or one of his own house -- he briefly contemplate move to a Mies apartment but fear fellow tenant might badger him -- he make his home in a high-ceilinged , five-room suite on the third floor of an old-fashioned apartment house on Chicago 's North Side. The thick-walled room be large and they include , predictably , a full kitchen with an ancient gas range for his cook. The apartment contain armless chair and furniture of his own design as well a sofa and wing chair -- in which he prefer to sit. The wall be stark white ; but the apartment have a glowing warmth , give off by the Klees , Braques and Schwitterses that dot it walls. Paul Klee be a close friend , and Mies 's collection of Klees be among the fine in private hands. Mies 's chair be almost as well know a his building , and they be just as spare. He design his first chair , know a the MR chair in 1926. It have a caned seat and back and it frame be tubular steel. There follow the Barcelona chair , an elegant armless leather and steel design of which the leg form an X ; the Tugendhat chair , an armless affair of leather and steel that resemble a square S ; and the Brno chair , with a steel frame and leather upholstery that look like a curve S. The bottom of all these chair be uniformly wide , a circumstance that puzzle furniture expert until one of them ask Mies for an explanation. It be simple , he say ; he have design them with his own comfort in mind. Recognition After 50 Mies do not receive wide public recognition in the United States until he be over 50 year old. Up to 1937 he live in Germany , where he be bear , at Aachen , on March 27 , 1886. Emigrating to Chicago , he have to wait for the postwar building boom before many of his design be translate into actuality. At his death , example of his work be in Chicago , Pittsburgh , Des Moines , Baltimore , Detroit , Newark , New York , Houston , Washington , Sao Paulo , Mexico City , Montreal , Toronto and Berlin. All his building be dissimilar , although the same basic principle be employ in each. The principle center in a gothic demand for order , logic and clarity. `` The long path through function to creative work have only a single goal , '' he say , `` to create order out of the desperate confusion of our time. '' One Mies structure , account among his outstanding one , be the 38-story dark bronze and pinkish-gray glass Seagram Building on Park Avenue between 52d and 53d Streets. The building , which be design in association with Philip C. Johnson , have be call by appreciative critic the city 's most tranquil tower and `` the most beautiful curtain-wall building in America. '' It emphasize pure line , fine material and exact detail outside and in. Special attention be pay to the room number , doorknob , elevator button , bathroom fixture and mail chute , as well a the furniture. The building 's grace be enhance by it be set in a half-acre fountained plaza of pink granite. It be begin in 1956 and complete two year later at a cost of $ 35-million. It be , at the time , the city 's most costly office building. Not everyone who gaze upon it or watch it extruded bronze age be convince of it beauty. Acerbic nonarchitectural critic point out that the tower rise 520 foot without setback and that it be unornamented. It be too spare , they said. One liken it to an upended glass coffin. The Seagram Building rank third in Mies 's offhand list of his six favorite , choose to illustrate his most notable concept -- '' Less be more. '' ( By this Delphic utterance he mean achieve the maximum effect with the minimum of means. ) First on the list be the Illinois Institute of Technology 's Crown Hall. This be a single glass- wall room measure 120 foot by 220 foot and span by four huge trusses. The structure appear to do no more than to enclose space , a feeling reinforce by it interior movable partitions. It be one of 20 building that Mies design for the school 's 100-acre campus on Chicago 's South Side. Crown Hall be as good an example a any of Mies 's `` skin-and-bones architecture , '' a phrase that he once use to describe his point of view. The Chicago Federal Center , Mies 's large complex of high- and low-rise building , be his second favorite. He consider it symmetry symbolic of his lifelong battle against disorder. Another Chicago creation be fourth -- two 26-story apartment house tower at 860 and 880 Lake Shore Drive that overlook Lake Michigan. The facade be all glass. Tenants have to accept the neutral gray curtain that be uniform throughout the building and that provide the only mean of seek privacy and exclude light. No other curtain or blind be permit l they mar the external appearance. ( He be also the architect of the Promontory Apartments in Chicago , in which he use brick and glass in an exposed concrete frame. ) Mies 's fifth favorite be a project for a Chicago convention hall , a place for 50,000 people to gather in unobstructed space under a trussed roof 720 foot square. The project never materialized. The final pet on the architect 's list be the since-destroyed German Pavilion at the 1929 International Exposition at Barcelona. It be , one critic say , `` a jewel-case structure employ the open planning first develop by Frank Lloyd Wright that combine the richness of bronze , chrome , steel and glass with free-standing walls. '' In addition to the Seagram Building , the architect be represent in the New York area by the Pavilion and Colonnade Apartments , both in Colonnade Park , Newark. He also devise a master plan for a 21-acre development in New Haven. Mies 's most recent building , the National Gallery in Berlin , open last September. It be a templelike glass box set on top of a large semibasement , and serve a a museum. Although many accolade be bestow on Mies for these and other work , there be also brickbats. `` Unsparing , '' `` grim , '' the work of `` barren intellectualism '' and `` brutal in it destruction of individual possession and the individual '' be some of the term his detractor used. `` Less be less , '' they say , turn his aphorism against him. Taught by Mason Father Ludwig Mies , who add the `` van der Rohe '' from his mother 's name because of it sonority , learn the element of architecture from his father , a German master mason and stonecutter , and from study the medieval church in Aachen. At time , friend recall , he would describe with unrestrained enthusiasm the quality of brick and stone , it texture , pattern and color. `` Now a brick , that 's really something , '' he once said. `` That 's really building , not paper architecture. '' For him the material be always the beginning. He use to talk of primitive building method , where he saw the `` wisdom of whole generation '' store in every stroke of an ax , every bite of a chisel. His student in the United States and Germany have to learn the fundamental of build before they could start to consider question of design. He teach them how to build , first with wood , then stone , then brick and finally with concrete and steel. `` New material be not necessarily superior , '' he would say. `` Each material be only what we make it. '' At Aachen Mies attend trade school and become a draftsman 's apprentice before set off for Berlin at the age of 19 to become an apprentice to Bruno Paul , Germany 's leading furniture designer. Two year later he build his first house , a wooden structure on a slop site in suburban Berlin. Its style be 18th century. In 1909 Mies apprentice himself to Peter Behrens , then the foremost progressive architect in Germany , who have teach Le Corbusier , and Walter Gropius. Mies be put in charge of Behrens 's German Embassy in St. Petersburg , Russia. House Never Built Going to the Netherlands in 1912 , Mies design a house for Mrs. H. E. L. J. Kroller , owner of the renowned Kroller Muller collection of modern painting , near The Hague. He set up a full- scale canvas and wood mock-up on the site to assure perfection , but the house be never built. Mies return to Berlin in 1913 and open his own office , but with the outbreak of the war in 1914 his life be dislocate for four year in the German Army , during which he build bridge and road in the Balkans. After the war , with his own style come into definition , he direct the architectural activity of the Novembergruppe , an organization form to propagandize modern art , and become one of the few progressive architect of the time to employ brick. Often he would go to the kiln to select one by one the brick he wanted. He use them for the monument ( now destroy ) to Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg , the German Communist leader ; for suburban villa for wealthy businessmen ; and for low-cost housing for the city of Berlin. From 1926 to 1932 he be first vice president of the Deutscher Werkbund , form to integrate art and industry in design. He direct the group 's second exposition , the Weissenhof housing project erect in Stuttgart in 1927. The peak achievement of Mies 's European career be the German Barcelona pavilion and the Tugendhat house in 1930. A. James Speyer , a critic for Art News , extol them both a `` among the most important building of contemporary architecture and the most beautiful of our generation. '' The pavilion consist of a rectangular slab roof support by steel column , beneath which free-standing plane of Roman travertine , marble , onyx and glass of various hue be place to create the feeling of space beyond. The Tugendhat house permit space to flow in a similar fashion. In 1930 Mies take over direction of the Bauhaus , a laboratory of architecture and design in Dessau , Germany. It be close three year later after the Nazis attack the architect a `` degenerate '' and `` un-German. '' At the urging of a New York architect who be a close friend , Philip C. Johnson , Mies emigrate to the United States to head the School of Architecture at the Armour ( now Illinois ) Institute of Technology in Chicago. He retire from the post in 1958. As a teacher Mies do not deliver formal lecture , but work , seminar fashion , with group of 10 or 12 students. His method of teaching , accord to a former student , be `` almost tacit. '' `` He be never wildly physically active , and he do not do much talk , '' this student recall , add that Mies , sit Buddha-like , would frequently puff through a whole cigar before comment on a student sketch. Abandoning the Beaux Arts system base on competition for prize , Mies sternly tell his student : `` First you have to learn something ; then you can go out and do it. '' He be not one to tolerate self-expression among his students. One of them once ask him about it. Silently he hand the student a pencil and paper. Then he tell her to write her name. This do , he say : `` That 's for self-expression. Now we get to work. '' Another former student thought of Mies a `` a great teacher because he subject himself to an extraordinary discipline in thinking and in his way of work , and because what he be teach be very clear to him. '' Mies himself be quite confident of his influence. `` I do n't know how many student we have have , '' he say a couple of year ago , `` but you need only 10 to change the cultural climate if they be good. '' Mies be well-to-do , but not wealthy. He receive the usual architect 's fee of 6 per cent of the gross cost of a building , but he be not a very careful manager of his income , accord to his friends. He be consider generous with his office staff and on spending for design that be unlikely to see the light of day. The architect receive three noteworthy honor -- the Presidential Freedom Medal and the gold medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects and of the American Institute of Architects. He be a member of the National Institute of Arts and Letters .