March 29 , 1969 OBITUARY Dwight David Eisenhower : A Leader in War and Peace By THE NEW YORK TIMES Military leadership of the victorious Allied force in Western Europe during World War II invest Dwight David Eisenhower with an immense popularity , almost amount to devotion , that twice elect him President of the United States. His enormous political success be largely personal , for he be not basically a politician deal in partisan issue and party maneuvers. What he possess be a superb talent for gain the respect and affection of the voter a the man suit to guide the nation through cold war confrontation with Soviet power around the world and to lead the country to domestic prosperity. Eisenhower 's gift for inspire confidence in himself perplex some analyst because he be not a dash battlefield general nor a masterly military tactician ; apparently what count most in his generalship also impress the voter most : an ability to harmonize diverse group and disparate personality into a smoothly functioning coalition. Thus Eisenhower 's two term in the White House be a personal triumph in which he transcend the person and force around him. About his bewitching , benign and smiling figure there grow an aura of certain success that weather shift in his personal popularity and begin to wane only in the year after he leave the Presidency. Of all his unquestioned great moment , two stand out a landmarks. One be May 7 , 1945 , when Gen. Alfred Jodl , chief of the German Armed Forces Operations Staff , surrender unconditionally to the Allies at a schoolhouse in Rheims , France , culminate the European phase of a terrible conflict that have nearly consume the world. The other be Nov. 6 , 1955 , when Eisenhower be elect to a second term a President by one of the large vote ever roll up by a candidate of any party. His vote of 35.5 million have since be eclipse , but it be a stunning performance at the time. Advisor to Presidents In the year that follow his military and Presidential victory , he retire to the role of elder statesman , counsel his successor in the White House when they seek his advice and work to help unify ( but never to lead ) the Republican party along moderate lines. In the campaign of 1964 , however , he decline to use his prestige to block the nomination of Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona. Moderates back Gov. William W. Scranton of Pennsylvania be disturb and disheartened. The source of Eisenhower 's quality of leadership be far different from those of other contemporary statesmen. Franklin D. Roosevelt be a patrician with a master 's manner in handle men ; Sir Winston Churchill be an aristocrat bear to command ; Josef Stalin be a tyrant who rule by ruthless craft ; Nikita S. Khrushchev be a peasant 's son give to hearty bluster ; Harry S. Truman be a commoner who lead because he be stubborn. Eisenhower 's political appeal , apart from the glory confer by his military accomplishment , lay in his background and his expression of it. He be a product of Abilene , Kan. , a small Middle Western town that do not have a paved street until 1910 -- the year after his graduation from high school. He be also the product of a close-knit Mennonite German family that pass on to him the simple piety of 19th-century agricultural America. Insulated all of his adult life from the rise of industrialism and the anxiety of the job world by the institutional security of Army life , Eisenhower preserve these homily virtually intact : God help those who help themselves ; the devil find mischief for idle hand ; do justice and you will receive justice ; prosperity be a sign of divine blessing ; a change of heart expiate sin. The heart-warming sincerity with which he utter these belief and their obvious role in fashion his life create around him an atmosphere of uncomplicated goodness and uprightness. It disarm his critic and confound his enemies. A Man to Be Trusted Eisenhower 's scrubbed face , his dimple , infectious grin , his exuberance , his quick Jovian anger ( and his equally swift return to calm ) , his paternal manner , all fuse into a personality that the American public respond to and heeded. Cloaked with the power to command , he prefer to persuade and conciliate ; he seem to radiate goodwill and diplomacy. He be , in short , a man to be trust , a man to make the complex simple , to do the job. For these characteristic much be overlook : his vacation from the White House , his endless golf , his frequent bridge game , his fondness for cowboy story , his bumble syntax ; for he exemplify the homespun , folksy virtue that many Americans like to think they themselves possess , or should ideally possess. Eisenhower 's entrance into politics be reluctant. Before the end of World War II Dr. Douglas Southall Freeman , the historian , suggest that he consider public office , and his reply be , `` God forbid ! '' In the glow of the war 's end , President Harry S. Truman offer to assist the general if he want to seek the Presidency in 1948. `` Mr. President , '' he say , `` I do n't know who will be your opponent for the Presidency , but it will not be I. '' Pressure build up to draft Eisenhower for the race in 1948. Both Democrats and Republicans have hope of snare him because there be nothing in the public record to indicate which party , if either , hold his favor. The general squelched talk of a draft for the nomination. `` I be not available for and could not accept nomination for high public office , '' he write in a letter. At the time he be on leave from the presidency of Columbia University to serve a commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization force in Europe. Despite Eisenhower 's disclaimer , lead Republicans in the East keep their eye on him. In 1950 , when the party resurgent in Congress , Thomas E. Dewey of New York , the titular leader , propose Eisenhower a the nominee for 1952. Soon there be a well-beaten path to Rocquencourt , outside Paris , where the general make his headquarters ; it be tread by politician and businessmen , many of whom assure him , with adroit flattery , of the public clamor for him back home and of the ease with which he could get the nomination. Having indicate that he would accept the party 's designation , however , Eisenhower soon discover that it be not quite his for the asking. Pitted against him be Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio , the `` Mr. Republican '' of the party 's conservative wing. The decisive issue between them , a the general saw it , be isolationism. Indeed , Eisenhower agree to run after he be convince that Taft would not commit himself to the principle of NATO. The struggle be close , and the general be oblige to do some campaigning. Up to the convention in July , 1952 , the outcome be unresolved. With the party machinery in Taft 's hand , the issue hinge on how delegate contest in Texas , Louisiana and Georgia would be decided. In a maneuver that outwit and discomfit the opposition , the Eisenhower force , mastermind by Dewey , put across a `` fair play '' amendment to the rule that restrict voting by contested delegation already seated. It swing control of the convention away from Taft and lead to Eisenhower 's nomination. Victory Over Taft The victory come after the regular order of the first roll-call , when Minnesota switch 19 vote and give the general the 604 vote he require for nomination. Other shift eventually bring his total to 845 vote , while Taft slip from a high of 500 to 280. As a Vice-Presidential candidate the convention choose Senator Richard M. Nixon of California , a man know then for his conservative views. Eisenhower quickly move to attain party unity by call on Taft at his convention offices. Later the two have a dramatic breakfast meeting at Columbia University that bring Taft follower into line , for both agree , in a communique , that they seek similar foreign and domestic objectives. In the broad term , Eisenhower campaign against his Democratic opponent , Gov. Adlai E. Stevenson of Illinois , on a pledge to clean up `` the mess in Washington '' and to balance the budget. Shortly before the election he promise he would personally go to Korea and try to end the war there. In it day-to-day unfolding , however , the campaign be much akin to a popularity contest. The country be cover with `` I Like Ike '' button , placard and poster ; `` All the Way With Adlai '' be a fervent , but forlorn , cry. Eisenhower 's concept of loyalty and integrity be test twice in the campaign , once with Senator Nixon and once with Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , Republican of Wisconsin. The Nixon case begin with the disclosure that a group of California supporter have place an $ 18,000 fund at his disposal while he be in the Senate. In a dramatic television appeal to the nation , Nixon make a sweeping denial of wrongdoing , satisfy Eisenhower 's insistence that his running mate be `` clean a a hound 's tooth. '' Accepting Nixon 's version of the fund , Eisenhower exclaim : `` That 's my boy. '' In the McCarthy episode , the general be persuade to delete from a campaign speech a defense of General of the Army George C. Marshall , his Army mentor , whom Senator McCarthy have impugn a a traitor. Political adviser have tell Eisenhower that he need McCarthy 's support to win the election. These incident seem not to have arouse voter reaction , for Eisenhower poll 33,936,252 popular vote and 442 vote in the Electoral College ; Stevenson receive 27,314,992 popular vote and 89 electoral votes. Significantly , Eisenhower 's `` crusade '' ( a he call it ) carry four state of the Old Confederacy , a Democratic stronghold for generations. But the vote there , a elsewhere , be a personal tribute. The Republican edge in Congress be slight , and it vanish altogether in 1954 and 1956 , indicate how far , in the voter 's mind , the general stood above party. Eisenhower begin his first term in January , 1953 , a a symbol of international goodwill as well a of national high purpose. He have travel to Korea , where a truce be soon effect , bring back thousand of servicemen. At home the government climate be benign and the press be friendly , even protective , a a seem new era opened. Even the political opposition struck at the men around the President rather than at Eisenhower himself. John Foster Dulles in the State Department and Ezra Taft Benson in Agriculture be popular target between 1953 and 1957. Oddly , Old Guard Republicans , long entrench in Congress , be among the most vocal critic , because the first Republican Administration in 20 year do not make a clean break with the New and Fair Deals. The Old Guard object when the Administration ease credit , abandon effort to balance the budget and , in addition to let $ 5-billion in Korean War tax lapse , sanction a further tax reduction of $ 2.4-billion. On top of this , the Administration put through an extension of insurance coverage under Social Security and accept a minimum wage of $ 1 an hour , up from 75 cents. It be the Democrats who give Eisenhower the vote he require to pass key legislation. In his conduct of the White House the new President introduce the staff concept , under which the workload be distribute among associates. Sherman Adams , a former New Hampshire Governor , head the staff with the title `` The Assistant to the President. '' Despite some initial creaking , the system work smoothly , especially late in the fist term when the President be twice stricken with serious illness. Eisenhower attach great importance to business success , a fact evident from the many representative of big business name to his Cabinet and other key posts. It be a stand joke that his first Cabinet be compose of `` eight millionaire and a plumber. '' Perhaps significantly , the first to depart be the plumber , Martin P. Durkin , who resign within a year a Secretary of Labor. He say the President have renege on a promise to press for revision of the Taft-Hartley Act , which restrict the union shop. At least three businessmen name to Cabinet-level post -- Charles E. Wilson , George M. Humphrey and Harold E. Talbott -- be subject to Senatorial question on their investment and on possible conflict of interest between their official and business lives. Talbott , Secretary of the Air Force , later resign over such charges. What 's Good for Business Throughout , the President be irritate by suggestion that his policy favor business at the expense of other segment of the population. He firmly believe that what be good for business be good for the nation. His contention seem borne out by the economic boom that begin in mid-1954 and continue through the rest of the first term. Because prosperous time follow a mild recession in 1953 , tax concession to business seem all the more vindicated. Under Eisenhower , the nation maintain it international leadership even if , at time , it course seem uncertain and erratic. The Administration have high hope that , with the Korean truce , psychological warfare would give the West an ascendancy in the battle of ideologies. But when Stalin die in 1953 , and again when revolt flare three year later in Hungary and elsewhere behind the Iron Curtain , there be no master plan ready to capitalize on developments. Yet Eisenhower 's atoms-for-peace proposal make before the United Nations in 1953 , and his open sky inspection plan , present at the summit conference in Geneva in 1955 , contribute markedly toward relaxation of world tension and a more hopeful outlook. Although the promise of the Geneva conference , attend by Eisenhower , Soviet Premier Nikolai A. Bulganin , French Premier Edgar Faure and British Prime Minister Anthony Eden , never fully materialize , the meeting do produce a tacit understanding that nuclear war would be avoided. The neutral and nonaligned power , notably India , like Eisenhower 's thinking in these areas. This be significant because other policy of this nation perturb the neutrals. They do not agree that the cause of peace be be serve by the ring of defensive alliance draw around the Soviet bloc on the United States initiative. Among these be the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization , an alliance set up late in 1954 upon French withdrawal from Indochina. A Pledge to Vietnam At that time Eisenhower also write a letter to the Diem Government of South Vietnam , vaguely pledge United States economic and arm assistance. That letter , scarcely notice at the time , be later use to justify massive American military involvement in Vietnam. Although an uneasy detente exist in Europe , tension prevail in the Orient , especially between the Peoples Republic of China and the Nationalist regime on Taiwan. This reach a high point in 1955 , when the Communists seem ready to strike at the offshore island. In a dramatic step , Eisenhower ask Congress to underwrite his authority to use American arm force `` if necessary to assure the security '' of Taiwan. Many believe that the resolution , overwhelmingly approve , keep Communist China from move against Quemoy and Matsu , Nationalist-held islands off China , because of uncertainty a to how the United States would react. In some area the United States find itself in trade-and-aid competition with the Soviet Union. Middle East development in 1955 point up the extent of this rivalry. The West , jolt by an Egyptian arm purchase from the Soviet bloc , be draw into the bidding to finance the Aswan High Dam that the United Arab Republic want to build on the Nile. Midway in 1956 the West pull out of the bidding and in a matter of day the U.A.R. seize the Suez Canal. Tensions mount a negotiation fail to produce a formula for operation of the waterway , and by fall event be move swiftly. After Israeli force enter Egypt , Britain and France threaten on Oct. 30 , 1956 , to intervene if the fighting be not halt promptly. With world attention divide between the Mideast and Hungary , in the throe of upheaval , the U.A.R. balk , and Anglo-French force take action. The conflict be speedily take to the United Nations , where , in the voting for a cease-fire , the United States side with the Soviet Union against France and Britain. The U.A.R. come out of the struggle triumphant. Invasion force be oblige to withdraw under United Nations pressure ; the U.A.R. retain the Suez Canal , and financing for the Aswan Dam be arrange with the Soviet Union. To many Americans , however , event abroad seem remote in those years. Anxieties center rather on the President , who suffer two major illness toward the end of his first term. The first , on Sept. 24 , 1955 , be diagnose a a coronary thrombosis , a clot in the artery of the heart. It send the President to the hospital for seven weeks. The second occur eight and a half month later , on June 8 , 1956 , and be diagnose a ileitis , an inflammation of the low part of the small intestine. Eisenhower underwent a successful operation the next day to bypass the ileum , which be obstruct the intestinal tract. The President be on vacation in Denver when his heart attack occurred. He have just return to the home of his mother-in-law , Mrs. John S. Doud , from a four-day fishing trip in the Rockies. After complain of indigestion and intense chest pain , he be take to the Fitzsimmons Army Hospital in Denver. Heart specialist be call in , include Dr. Paul Dudley White of Boston , who describe the attack a `` moderate. '' The patient be clear to leave the hospital Nov. 10 , and he fly to Washington the following day , `` happy that the doctor have give me a parole if not a pardon. '' Throughout the illness the public be keep minutely inform of the President 's progress and of the fact that , with his staff , he continue to direct affair of state. In these task he be aid by Vice President Nixon as well a by Sherman Adams. Despite the smoothness with which the President make decision and despite the general uneventfulness of his recovery , speculation arise on his availability for a second term. After be pronounce medically fit by Dr. White , the President consult earnestly with his close advisers. They unanimously favor a second term , tell him it be his duty to continue work for peace if his health permitted. This advice lead to Eisenhower 's announcement on Feb. 29 , 1956 , that he would run again. The ileitis attack , come in June , cast momentary doubt on Eisenhower 's candidacy , but a routine recovery from three-hour surgery at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington relieve public apprehensions. The Republicans renominated him along with Nixon a his run mate. A Limited Campaign Eisenhower , at the peak of his popularity , conduct a restrict campaign in which he stand on his record of peace and prosperity. He make a limited number of radio and television speech and undertook only two campaign swing that keep him away from the capital overnight. Stevenson , again the Democratic choice , hammer away at the `` breakdown of leadership , '' at domestic and foreign policy that be `` stall on dead center '' and at a `` part-time President. '' He inveigh against a Cabinet representative of `` the large interest '' and , with reference to `` the heir apparent , '' seek to increase the misgiving of some about Nixon. `` Why this anguish cry of some politician that we have no peace ? '' Eisenhower ask in the face of attack on his foreign policy. Countering the charge of undue big-business influence , he demand to know whether government affair should be entrust to `` some failure ... or a successful businessman. '' He insist that his Administration have bring `` sense and order '' to Washington. Developments in the Middle East in October , touch off by the Israeli march into Egypt and the Anglo-French thrust at Suez , unquestionably help Eisenhower with the voter , for his quick response to those event put the United States on the side of peace. The election result give him 35,582,236 vote , a record up to that time , and 457 electoral vote , include those of five Southern state ; Stevenson 's popular vote be 26,031,322 , his electoral total 73. Difficult and fateful problem at home , abroad and in space confront Eisenhower in his second term. Economic Troubles There be mob violence over school integration in the South , and in September , 1957 , the President be oblige to send troop to Little Rock , Ark. , to enforce court-ordered school desegregation. Business slump sharply in the winter of 1957-58 , and only slowly recovered. By July , 1959 , when a steel strike deal the economy another stinging blow , employment still have not recovered. The national debt climb high than ever. The Soviet Union achieve a stunning scientific success , with strong military implication , when it orbit the first man-made earth satellite in October , 1957. With the collapse of the second summit conference , in May , 1960 , the perilous stalemate between the Soviet Union and the West over Berlin continued. Tensions in the Far East reach a peak a month later when the President , in the middle of a trip through the area , be force to cancel a visit to Japan because of anti-American rioting there. The widen rift between Cuba and the United States bring economic reprisal on both side and a threat of Soviet intervention that lead Eisenhower to declare that he would never `` permit the establishment of a regime dominate by international Communism in the Western Hemisphere. '' And in the Middle East , a policy design to promote stability do not prevent the decline of Western influence through civil war in Lebanon and revolution in Iraq. The demand of the time would have tax the energy of the healthy of men , and they be especially heavy for Eisenhower on account of his heart attack and his bout of ileitis. His health be far compromise Nov. 25 , 1957 , when he suffer an occlusion of a small branch of the middle cerebral artery on the left side. He be leave with a mild aphasia ( difficulty in speak ) and he be not pronounce recover from the stroke until March 1 , 1958. Eisenhower seek to preserve his strength and health by daily rest , week- [ MISSING END OF ARTICLE ]