May 20 , 1969 OBITUARY Coleman Hawkins , Tenor Saxophonist , Is Dead By JOHN S. WILSON Coleman Hawkins , the tenor saxophonist who , with such musician a Louis Armstrong , Duke Ellington and Jelly Roll Morton , be one of the pioneer shaper of Jazz , die yesterday at Wickersham Hospital. Mr. Hawkins , who suffer from a liver ailment , be 64 year old. He live at 445 West 153d Street. During Mr. Hawkins 's career , which span almost half a century , he create the first valid jazz style on the tenor saxophone , influence countless saxophonist and be in the vanguard of jazz development. There be saxophonist in jazz band before Mr. Hawkins begin to develop his manner of play in the mid-1920's. But they be use a slap-tongue effect , which result in a chickenlike sound , reflect the prevalent feeling that the saxophone be essentially a comic instrument. Mr. Hawkins , who have be use this technique himself , find and developed resource in the saxophone while he be in Fletcher Henderson 's Orchestra at Roseland Ballroom between 1924 and 1927. He use a big tone and a heavy vibrato. His swagger attack drove along relentlessly through intensely rhythmic , choppy phrases. Developing the Sound `` I always do play with a kind of stiff reed , '' he say in explain the basis of his early style. `` When I start , I also use to play very loud because I be try to play over seven or eight other horn all the time. I use to work on those reed all night to make them sound. Having to play loud develop the fullness of my sound. '' The power with which Mr. Hawkins play his saxophone be vividly recall by Rex Stewart , the cornetist , who once receive an emergency call to fill in with the Henderson band after two trumpet player be injure in an accident. One of those injure be the first trumpet. En route to the job , Mr. Stewart wonder who have be call in to play the first trumpet part. `` On arrival , '' Mr. Stewart say , `` we set up and , much to my surprise , Coleman -- on tenor -- take over the first-trumpet book and not only play the part so well that we scarcely miss the first trumpet but also carry the orchestra with volume such a I have never hear come out of a tenor sax. '' Many of the saxophonist who be initially influence by Mr. Hawkins during this period never go beyond that influence. Mr. Hawkins , however , continue to develop. In 1939 he make a recording of `` Body and Soul '' that still stand a a classic model of weld grace and strength in a jazz ballad. And in the 1950 's , he remove some of the early heaviness from his tone and use silence a an element in his solo along with rough ascending and descend runs. Emergence of Emotion `` He get wilder and wilder , '' write Whitney Balliett in The New Yorker , `` like an age conservative who don sneaker and a sport jacket for lunch at the Plaza. For the first time , the emotion beneath the surface of his solo become steadily visible and once in a while it back up and burst through. '' In recent year , Mr. Hawkins grow a long , gray patriarchal beard. Shuffling out on the stage in a grandfatherly manner , he give the impression that he could scarcely hold up his saxophone. The first few tentative sound he blow seem to confirm that. Then , a his solo begin to develop , he appear to grow in stature a the note he produce gain in authority and his performance take on the power and individuality that have always characterize his work. `` The older he get , the good he get , '' say Johnny Hodges , the alto saxophonist in Duke Ellington 's Orchestra. `` If you ever think he 's through , you find he 's just go right on ahead again. '' Mr. Hawkins be bear in St. Joseph , Mo. , on Nov. 21 , 1904. His mother , an organist , start teach him piano when he be 5. At 7 , he be study cello and when he be 9 he get a saxophone. He study harmony , counterpoint and composition at Washburn College in Topeka , Kan. , and at 17 , he join Mamie Smith 's Jazz Hounds , a group that accompany Miss Smith , a vaudeville singer , at the 12th Street Theater in Kansas City. Garvin Bushell , a clarinetist in that band , have a vivid initial impression of Mr. Hawkins. `` He be ahead of everything I 'd ever hear on the instrument , '' say Mr. Bushell , add : `` He read everything. And he do n't -- a be the custom then -- play the saxophone like a trumpet or a clarinet. He be run change because he 'd study the piano a a youngster. '' Mr. Hawkins reach New York with the Jazz Hounds in 1922 and make his first record then with Miss Smith. Fletcher Henderson hear him play at jam session , use him on several recording accompany blue singer and add him to the band that he take into the Club Alabam in 1923. Mr. Hawkins remain with the Henderson band for 11 year , play most of the time at the Roseland Ballroom. He work constantly on his style and technique. Copied Honky Tonks ' Style `` Maybe the rest of the fellow would be out look for kick or something , '' he say , `` and I 'd be in the honky-tonk joint , listen to the musician , and I 'd hear thing I 'd like and they 'd penetrate and I 'd keep them. If I hear something I like , I do n't go home and get out my horn and try to play it. I just incorporate it within the thing I play already , in my own style. '' In 1934 , learn that his fame have spread to Europe , Mr. Hawkins impulsively send a cablegram to Jack Hylton , a bandleader who be the English equivalent of Paul Whiteman. The full message be `` I be interested in come to London. '' Mr. Hylton respond the next day and within a week Mr. Hawkins be on the Ile de France. The saxophonist tour in England , France and the Netherlands , and when the threat of World War II develop in 1939 , he with several other American jazz musician , return to the United States. While he have be overseas , Lester Young 's style of play tenor saxophone -- lighter in tone than Mr. Hawkins 's and more concerned with linear improvisation -- have catch the fancy of young jazz musician who now consider Mr. Hawkins 's style a dated. However , Mr. Hawkins quickly reassert his dominance with his recording of `` Body and Soul. '' `` I never think of 'Body and Soul ' seriously a be anything big for me , '' Mr. Hawkins say year after make the recording. `` I 'd use it occasionally a an encore , something to get off the stage with. And at Kelly 's Stable '' -- a jazz club on 51st Street where Mr. Hawkins be lead a combo after his return from Europe -- '' sometimes at night , after a couple of quart of scotch , very late , I 'd sit down and kill time and play about 10 chorus on it , and then the boy would come in and play harmony note in the background while I finish it up. That 's all there be to it. '' Mr. Hawkins record the tune only a a favor to Leonard Joy , who produce his record sessions. It become such a hit that he have to play it at almost every appearance for the next 15 years. Although most jazz musician of Mr. Hawkins 's generation resist the harmonic and rhythmic approach that develop in jazz in the 1940 's and that become know a bebop , Mr. Hawkins welcome them. In 1944 he make what be consider to be first bop record `` Woody 'n ' You , '' with a group that include Dizzy Gillespie , Max Roach and Oscar Pettiford. For the last 25 year , Mr. Hawkins perform most of the time a a single , play with whatever rhythm section be available for accompaniment. Writing in Downbeat magazine in 1950 , Michael Levin sum up Mr. Hawkins 's past a of that date and accurately project his future. Keeping Up With the Times `` Despite all of the amazing element of his personal style , '' Mr. Levin write , `` the most fascinating thing about Hawkins a a musician be the way he have change with the time , move with music , and never allow himself to become dated. `` In the final analysis , this can only be charge off to his completely cold and observant mind when it come to music , his ability to remain disentangled from emotional argument about style and mode of playing , and his genuine interest in constantly make himself a good musician. '' Mr. Hawkins be survive by his widow , Dolores ; a son , Rene , and two daughter , Colette and Mrs. Melvin Wright. A funeral service will be hold on Friday at 2 P.M. at St. Peter 's Lutheran Church , Lexington Avenue and 54th Street .