A Bollywood legend whose tragic life mirror Marilyn Monroe’s. By AISHA KHAN It be probably the first ghost story in Indian cinema. A bewilder young man in a mansion chase glimpse of an ethereal , veil beauty. The movie , “Mahal , ” be a huge success , make the lead actress , Madhubala , who be barely 16 , a superstar overnight. Nearly seven decade later , strain of the film’s signature song , “Aayega aane wala” ( He will come ) , be instantly recognizable to most Indians , evoke the suspenseful tale of lose love and reincarnation. Madhubala’s tragic turn in the film a an enigmatic young woman in search of love seem to foreshadow her own glittering but short life. She die 20 year later a an icon of beauty and tragedy — her dazzling career , unhappy love life and fatal illness more dramatic than any movie she star in. Asked once to describe herself , Madhubala say she be so young when she enter the “maze” of the film industry — she make her debut at 9 — that she have lose herself. “When you have forget yourself , what can you tell people about yourself ? ” she once said. Besotted poet call her “a live Taj Mahal , ” but Madhubala’s radiant beauty be not cold or forbidding. Her dreamy eye , vivacious smile and mischievous laughter give her a girl-next-door appeal. She have be compare to Marilyn Monroe : the smolder look , the short career , the tragic end. “There be a remarkable similarity in the soft vulnerability of their face , ” write Khatija Akbar in her biography of Madhubala. “The same abandon to their laughter , head throw back , that same incandescent glow.” Starting in the late 1940s — in a newly independent India find it place in the world — Madhubala often portray modern young woman test the limit of traditions. Her role “embodied the optimism of a new generation which be rather consciously move away from it colonial past , ” write Nupur Sharma and Inam Abidi Amrohvi , independent journalist research Hindi cinema. Unlike other actress of her time , she wasn’t typecast. Her natural , understated act style bring her equal success in serious social drama like “Amar” ( Eternal ) and in lighthearted comedy and period pieces. She could play with equal ease a spoiled heiress in “Mr. and Mrs. 55” ( 1955 ) , a reporter investigate a murder in “Kala Pani” ( Exile , 1958 ) , and a rebellious woman whose car break down in the comedy “Chalti Ka Naam Gaadi” ( If It Ain’t Broke , 1958 ) . Younger Indians may not have see all her film , but in Bollywood , an industry that churn out musical , Madhubala be associate with dozen of iconic song : a flirty number in “Howrah Bridge” ( 1958 ) , a folk song in “Phagun” and an ode to love in “Barsaat Ki Raat” ( A Rainy Night , 1960 ) . Though like most Indian actor , she be only lip-syncing. Madhubala’s movie be also hit abroad , even in faraway place like Greece. Theater Arts , a New York magazine publish from 1916 to 1964 , call her “the big star in the world.” Life send a photographer to profile her. Frank Capra Jr. , visit Bombay for a film festival in 1952 , be say to have offer her a job in Hollywood. But Madhubala’s father , who control her career , forbid it. Despite her success and the breadth of her work , Madhubala’s act skill be still underappreciated. She never win any award , even for her big hits. “Everyone go on about how beautiful she be , but she really hold her own against some acclaimed actor , ” say Tejaswini Ganti , an associate professor of anthropology at New York University who study Bollywood. Madhubala ( Muh-DHOO-baa-laa ) be bear Mumtaz Begum on Feb. 14 , 1933 , in Delhi to a poor Pashtun family. Her father move the family to Bombay , where they live in a shantytown that happen to be near the Bombay Talkies film studio. Mumtaz catch the eye of the studio’s co-founder , Devika Rani , who later give her the name Madhubala , or honeybelle. Madhubala be soon know for her fastidious work ethic — on set at 6 a.m. , no matter what. She take on a many film a possible , to support her family. She have already appear in 17 film by the time she star in “Mahal” ( Mansion ) , one of nine movie she make in 1949. She be bear with a ventricular septal defect , a hole in her heart , diagnose after she begin working. There be no treatment for her condition , and she continue her punish pace , complete more than 70 film in her short career. She tell a friend : “No sooner have I learn what I be do , God say , ‘Enough.’ ” Madhubala and Dilip Kumar in the 1960 film “Mughal-e-Azam , ” the most expensive Indian movie of it time. It be colorize and re-released in 2004. Ronald Grant Archive/Alamy Madhubala be uninhibited for an Indian actress of that time. She be playful and flirtatious , and make news for her dalliances. “Tarana” ( Anthem , 1951 ) pair her with the star Dilip Kumar , who play a doctor who fell for Madhubala’s feisty village girl. She be immediately smitten with Kumar , 10 year her senior , and reportedly send him a rise , the beginning of a long romance. The two be the talk of film magazine , and fan love their pairing. “She live a far more liberal lifestyle than most Indian woman , with romance itself an act of subversion in a conservative society , ” Sharma said. Kumar recommend Madhubala a his co-star for “Mughal-e-Azam” ( “The Great Mughal” ) , base on the legend of a romance between the Mughal prince Salim and a dancer , Anarkali. The director be K. Asif , whose painstaking vision make it the most expensive Indian movie of it time , and for year , the most successful. One of it most memorable sequence , the only one originally film in color , be a dance in a hall of mirror , faithfully recreate from a Mughal palace. A defiant Anarkali declare her love before the disapproving Emperor Akbar with a dare refrain : “I have only fall in love , I have nothing to fear.” In keep with the era , the two lover barely embrace , let alone kiss. Yet , a scene when Salim caress Anarkali’s face with a feather be consider one of the most erotic in Indian cinema. But by the time the scene be film ( the movie take about a decade to make ) , the two be long estrange , accord to Kumar. They have be eager to marry , but Madhubala’s father have set condition , include that they star in movie he would produce. Kumar demand that she choose between him and her father. She choose her family. An ugly lawsuit over another movie hasten their breakup. “The romance that wasn’t realize be the big story of her life , which add to her legend , ” Ganti said. Once , ask her thought on love , Madhubala say : “No peace or happiness be possible in life without true love.” In 1960 , the year “Mughal-e-Azam” be finally release , she marry her frequent co-star Kishore Kumar , a talented singer. While their pairing in a string of comedy be cinema gold , offscreen the two be quickly estranged. Madhubala make a few more hit movie , but her health deteriorate rapidly , and she spend her last year at home , out of the public eye. In her final day , accord to her sister , Madhubala would say : “I want to live. Please God , let me live.” She die on Feb. 23 , 1969 , nine day after her 36th birthday. Aisha Khan be an assistant editor at The Times. The first Indian movie she ever saw be “Mother India.” Her capsule review : “Heartbreaking.”