June 23 , 1969 OBITUARY Judy Garland , 47 , Star of Stage and Screen , Is Found Dead in Her London Home Special to The New York Times London , June 22 -- Judy Garland , whose success on stage and screen be later overshadow by the pathos of her personal life , be find dead in her home here today. The cause of death of the 47-year-old singer be not immediately establish , and an autopsy be scheduled. [ Reuters report that police source say a preliminary investigation reveal nothing to suggest that Miss Garland have take her own life. ] Miss Garland 's personal life often seem a fruitless search for the happiness promise in `` Over the Rainbow , '' the song she make famous in the movie `` The Wizard of Oz. '' Her father die when she be 12 year old ; the pressure of adolescent stardom send her to a psychiatrist at the age of 18 ; she be marry five time ; she be frequently ill ; her singing voice falter , and she suffer from the effect of drug she once say be prescribe either to invigorate or tranquilize her. She come here at the end of last year to play a cabaret in another of the `` comeback '' performance that dot her last 15 years. Three month ago she marry Mickey Deans , a discotheque manager. It be Mr. Deans , her fifth husband , who find Miss Garland dead on the bathroom floor in their home in the Belgravia district. Also survive be three child , Liza Minnelli , the singer and actress , and Lorna and Joseph Luft. Funeral arrangement be incomplete tonight. Moved by Compulsion Judy Garland 's career be mark by a compulsive quality that display itself even during her first performance at the age of 30 month at the New Grand Theater in Grand Rapids , Minn. Here , the story be tell , Frances Gumm -- both her parent be vaudeville player -- sing `` Jingle Bells '' on a Christmas program. She respond so favorably to the footlights that her father be force to remove her after she have repeat the song seven times. The other side of the compulsively vibrant , exhaust performance that be her stage hallmark be a seemingly unquenchable need for her audience to respond with acclaim and affection. And often they do , screaming , `` We love you , Judy -- we love you. '' She make more than 35 film , once set a New York vaudeville record with an engagement of 19 week and 184 performance , cut numerous record and in recent year make frequent television appearances. Her other film include , `` Every Sunday , '' `` Babes In Arms , '' `` Little Nellie Kelly , '' `` For Me and My Gal , '' `` The Harvey Girls , '' `` Meet Me in St. Louis , '' `` The Pirate , '' `` Easter Parade , '' `` A Star Is Born , '' `` Judgment at Nuremberg , '' and `` A Child Is Waiting. '' Miss Garland 's early success be firmly root in an extraordinary talent. She be an instinctive actress and comedienne with a sweet singing voice that have a kind of brassy edge to it , which make her something of an anachronism : a music hall performer in an era in which music hall be obsolete. In an early era , or in another society , she might have grow up slowly , develop her talent a she discipline it , and go on like other , tough performer to enjoy a long and profitable career. Discipline Not Required Instead , Judy become a star at 15 in the relentless world of motion pictures. Movies -- which be put together in bit and piece -- do not particularly require rigid discipline , and she therefore never have a chance to acquire the quality that could have sustain her talent over the years. Perhaps the most remarkable thing about the career of Judy Garland be that she be able to continue as long a she do -- long after her voice have fail and long after her physical reserve have be spend in various illness that might have leave a less tenacious woman an invalid. She be the kind of movie personality whose private life define much of her public response. Whenever she step out on a stage in recent year , she bring with her , whether she welcome it or not , all the well-publicized phantom of her emotional breakdown , her career collapse and her comebacks. The pressure of perform begin for her at an early age. When she be 18 and Louis B. Mayer 's favorite at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios make $ 150,000 a picture , she be already see a psychiatrist. Recounts Experience She write about the experience year later : `` No wonder I be strange. Imagine whip out of bed , dash over to the doctor 's office , lie down on a torn leather couch , tell my trouble to an old man who could n't hear , who answer with an accent I could n't understand , and then dash to Metro to make movie love to Mickey Rooney. '' It be during this period that she also begin take stimulant and depressants. `` They 'd give u pep pill , '' she wrote. `` Then they 'd take u to the studio hospital and knock u cold with sleep pill . . . after four hour they 'd wake u up and give u the pep pill again . . . `` That 's the way we work , and that 's the way we get thin. That 's the way we get mixed up. And that 's the way we lose contact. '' Less than 10 year after these experience , at the age of 28 , the singer attempt suicide. The unhappiness that plague her during the last few year alone include the breakup of her 13- year marriage to Sid Luft , a film director and the third of her five husband ; a subsequent bitter custody fight over their child , Lorna and Joseph , with Mr. Luft accuse her of have attempt suicide on at least 20 occasion ; sudden hospitalization for cause range from paralysis to unconsciousness after a fall in a hotel room , and the breaking of her voice during appearance in several cities. Miss Garland be bear in Grand Rapids on June 10 , 1922 , the young of three daughter of Frank Avent and Ethel Marian Gumm. Her parent bill themselves in vaudeville a Jack and Virginia Lee. After her debut with `` Jingle Bells , '' she perform with her sister , Suzanne and Virginia , until , accord to theatrical legend , their act be erroneously bill at a Chicago theatre a `` The Glum Sisters. '' Garland be her mother 's maiden name. When the family arrive in Hollywood in 1936 , the 14- year-old singer , who make her feature film debut in `` Pigskin Parade , '' be bill a Judy Garland. She make a short subject with another adolescent singer , Deanna Durbin. Louis B. Mayer be impressed , and when he learn that M-G-M have allow Miss Durbin 's contract to lapse and lose her to a rival studio , he determine to give Miss Garland a major build-up. She sing `` Dear Mr. Gable '' in `` Broadway Melody of 1938. '' Then she make a big hit a a gawky adolescent with a crush on Mickey Rooney in `` Love Finds Andy Hardy. '' In `` Dear Mr. Gable '' she confess her hopeless adolescent love for an idealized movie star in special lyric add to the ballad `` You Made Me Love You. '' At 17 , play the pig-tailed girl in `` The Wizard of Oz , '' she sing the song that become her trademark , `` Over the Rainbow '' -- a wistful pursuit of happiness that seem , to her , unattainable. In 1939 , `` The Wizard of Oz '' earn her a special Oscar. Ray Bolger , the dancer , actor and singer , who play the Scarecrow in `` The Wizard , '' make it plain yesterday that Miss Garland 's charisma be notable even when they make that film. Three month after she have sign the contract with M-G-M , Judy 's father die of spinal meningitis. In a newspaper article in 1964 , Miss Garland write that her father 's death `` be the most terrible thing that ever happen to me in my life. '' `` I can say that now , '' she go on , `` because I 'm more secure than I be then. '' `` But the terrible thing about it , '' she write , `` be that I could n't cry at my father 's funeral. I 'd never be to a funeral. I be ashamed because I could n't cry , so I feign it. But I just could n't cry for eight day , and then I lock myself in a bathroom and cry for 14 hours. `` I be n't close to my father , but I want to be all my life. He have a funny sense of humor , and he laugh all the time -- good and loud , like I do. He be a gay Irish gentleman and very good- looking. And he want to be close to me , too , but we never have much time together. '' Passed Awkward Age By 1942 , Miss Garland have pass the awkward age through a popular series of musical comedy with Mr. Rooney , and be play love scene with Gene Kelly in `` For Me and My Gal. '' She be already one of the top box-office star at the most celebrated star studio in Hollywood. Her personal trouble have already begun. She be marry to the composer-pianist David Rose in 1941. They be divorce three year later. The next year she be marry to her director , the gifted musical specialist , Vincente Minnelli. Under her husband 's guidance , her career flourished. She sing `` The Trolley Song '' in `` Meet Me in St. Louis '' and be praise for her first nonsinging dramatic performance , in `` The Clock. '' By 1948 , when Miss Garland play with Gene Kelly in `` The Pirate , '' and Fred Astaire in `` Easter Parade , '' she be indisputably the lead musical star in films. The next year she fail to report for work on three successive film and be report to be suffer from a nervous breakdown. The one film she do finish in this period , `` Summer Stock , '' attract much comment because of her increased weight. It be during the next year , 1950 , that she slash her wrist after M-G-M suspend her contract. She and Mr. Minnelli be divorce the next year. In 1951 Miss Garland return to the stage in England , do a solo sing show with great success. She have another success with a vaudeville engagement at the New York Palace. Frequently , however , she complain of laryngitis , and critic note that her voice have lose some of it quality. At the same time they note that her personality retain it full impact. In review a late performance at the Palace , Vincent Canby write in The New York Times of Aug. 1 , 1967 , that `` that the voice -- a of last night 's performance , anyway -- be now a memory seem almost beside the point. '' He conclude that all the performer on the bill be good , `` but it be Judy who be great. And let 's not worry about her voice. '' Another writer call a typical Garland appearance `` more than a concert . . . it be a tribal celebration. '' The crowd often scream during her frenzied finale for `` More ! More ! '' and begin the ritual chant of `` We Love You , Judy ! '' When she leave the stage for intermission , Miss Garland often stagger to her dressing room , sometimes gasp , pant that she could not possibly finish the show , that she be exhaust or that her throat ached. But back she went. Miss Garland describe her feeling toward the audience for a magazine interviewer in 1961 : `` A really great reception make me feel like I have a great big warm heating pad all over me. People en masse have always be wonderful to me. I truly have a great love for an audience , and I use to want to prove it to them by give them blood. But I have a funny new thing now , a real determination to make people enjoy the show. I want to give them two hour of just pow. '' Return Impressive The performer make an impressive return to film in 1954 with `` A Star Is Born , '' with James Mason. But her erratic work habit have cause the production to take month long than plan , at great expense. A commercial disappointment , the film represent a personal triumph for her. Her best song in `` A Star Is Born , '' a torch ballad call `` The Man That Got Away , '' join `` Over the Rainbow '' a a Garland trademark. She be expect to win an Academy Award for her performance , but Grace Kelly win it instead , for `` The Country Girl. '' For the next few year Miss Garland be plague by throat trouble and marital difficulties. She be overweight for a star , consistently ill and more temperamental than ever. Hollywood would not risk employ her. By the autumn of 1959 she be unable to work at all. She felt sick , frightened and mentally confused. In late November she be admit to a New York hospital , where doctor find she be suffer from hepatitis. They say she might have have the illness for as long a three year and that the hepatitis be attribute at least in part , to the combined effect of certain tranquilizer and diet pill that previous doctor , treat earlier breakdown , have prescribe for her. Miss Garland admit at the time to have take a great many drug over the last 15 year , include sleep pill , pep pill , diet medicine and nerve tonics. Then , in 1960 , she come back again. During a concert at London 's Palladium , she be more successful than ever. She follow it with a spectacular , sob performance at Carnegie Hall. Miss Garland sign for a weekly television series , with much fanfare , in 1963 , but it be a failure. The carefully nurtured emotional impact that make each of her performance a special event be lose in the weekly program. The Columbia Broadcasting System drop the show after one season , amid loud complaint from the voluble legion of Garland fans. Seemingly undaunted , she set out for Australia on another concert tour. Again she be plague by `` laryngitis. '' When Miss Garland leave Australia , she speak wistfully about retire and devote herself to her three child , Liza Minnelli , 18 , Lorna Luft , 11 , and Joseph Luft , 9. After her divorce from Mr. Luft , Miss Garland admit to friend that she sometimes felt `` like I 'm live in a blizzard. '' In 1965 she marry Mark Herron , an actor. Two year later , they be divorced. She go to London at the end of 1968 for a five-week cabaret appearance and announce she would marry Mr. Deans. Looking slim and relaxed , Miss Garland win a stand ovation at her first London appearance. But then she begin to appear late for performance , and one night walk off the stage when she be heckle by the audience , whom she have keep wait for an hour and 20 minutes. A few day later it be announce she be ill and would not finish the last week of the run. Unpredictable a ever , Miss Garland appear on the stage that night , give a smash performance and announce that she have marry Mr. Deans three week earlier in a secret church ceremony. The confusion from which Miss Garland often seem to suffer in her personal life apparently extend to her performance in `` The Wizard of Oz. '' Harold Arlen , who compose the score for the film , say she felt most deeply about the song `` Over the Rainbow. '' He quote yesterday from a letter he say he have receive from Miss Garland. She write : `` As for my feeling toward 'Over the Rainbow , ' it 's become part of my life. It be so symbolic of all my dream and wish that I 'm sure that 's why people sometimes get tear in their eye when they hear it. '' But recently recall her role in `` The Wizard '' in another context , she say , `` I be really little tortured Tillie in the whole damn thing . ''