June 22 , 1969 OBITUARY Maureen Connolly , Tennis Star , Dies By THE NEW YORK TIMES DALLAS , June 21 ( AP ) -- Maureen Connolly Brinker , who rule the woman 's tennis world from 1951 to 1954 before a horseback rid accident end her career , die today of cancer. She be 34 year old. She have suffer from the disease since 1966 but still be active in teach young people the fundamental of the game. `` Little Mo , '' a she be know , be marry to Norman Brinker , a businessman , in 1955. They have two child -- Cindy and Brenda. Won Grand Slam in 1953 The stock blond prodigy , whose intense and powerful game win her three United States and Wimbledon crown , become , in 1953 , the first woman to achieve the grand slam of tennis -- the national championship of the United States , Britain , France and Australia. The feat have never be duplicated. Little Mo 's meteoric record of court success begin in 1951 when she win the United States national title at the West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills , Queens , shortly before her 17th birthday. She defend her United States crown successfully two more time and win the woman 's single championship at Wimbledon three time before the horseback-riding accident cut short her career in July , 1954 , when she be 19 year old. Riding a thoroughbred colt name Colonel Merryboy , which have be give to her by her neighbor in San Diego after a triumphant 1952 tour of Europe , Miss Connolly approach a concrete mixer truck. Her mount rear and slam against the truck , crush her right leg. She suffer a broken leg and deeply gashed muscle and tendons. Retired in 1955 Although she have hop to resume her tennis career upon recovery -- probably a a professional -- the injury prove more serious than be originally think and she announce her retirement in February , 1955. Later that year she be marry to Mr. Brinker , a former member of the United States Olympic equestrian team. Until her death , Mrs. Brinker have devote herself to teach the game to youngsters. Named the female athlete of the year three time by The Associated Press , she have be active in recent year with the Maureen Connolly Brinker Foundation for the advancement of tennis achievement among junior player in Texas. In explain her inability to play tournament tennis , although she be able to instruct child , she say : `` I can teach adequately enough. I can hit the ball to my pupil and , if it come back to me , I can hit it. My stroke be as good a ever. But , if the ball be out of reach , I have to let it go. '' At the time that her tournament play earn her comparison with the great woman player of the country , there be few ball she could not reach , and most of them that she stroke do not recross the net. Her game be mark by swiftness , powerful stroke and a great competitive spirit. Allison Danzig , the former tennis writer of the New York Times , say of her : `` Maureen , with her perfect timing , fluency , balance and confidence , have develop the most overpowering stroke of it kind the game have known. '' Maureen Connolly , the daughter of Martin and Jessamine Connolly , be bear Sept. 17 , 1934 , in San Diego. She start play tennis at the age of 10 when her mother buy her a racket and send her to Eleanor Tennant for lessons. She win her first major title , the national outdoor junior championship , at 14 and proceed to national and international fame. Harry Hopman , the captain of the Australian Davis Cup team , become one of her adviser and stress to her the importance of physical condition. The regimen she follow a a teen-age champion be difficult. She once say : `` Tennis can be a grind and there be always the danger of go stale if you think about it too much. You can get embitter if you train too hard and have nothing else on your mind. You have to be able to relax between match and between tournaments. '' Off the court , Maureen be a bubbling young girl , full of gaiety and friendliness for everyone , fond of hamburger , baseball game , dance and music of every kind. The tennis world be sadden at her retirement , but she accept her fate philosophically. `` Tennis be a wonderful game and I leave it with no regret , '' she said. `` I 've have a full life with lot of travel and I 've meet lot of wonderful people. Now I 'm go to be a little housewife. It 's a new career and I 'm awfully happy with it . ''