September 4 , 1969 OBITUARY Ho Chi Minh Was Noted for Success in Blending Nationalism and Communism By ALDEN WHITMAN Among 20th-century statesman , Ho Chi Minh be remarkable both for the tenacity and patience with which he pursue his goal of Vietnamese independence and for his success in blend Communism with nationalism. From his youth Ho espouse freedom for the French colony of Vietnam. He persevere through year when his chance of attain his objective be so minuscule a to seem ridiculous. Ultimately , he organize the defeat of the French in 1954 in the historic battle of Dienbienphu. This battle , a triumph of guerrilla strategy , come nine year after he be name President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. After the suppose temporary division of Vietnam at the 17th parallel by the Geneva Agreement of 1954 and after that division become harden by United States support of Ngo Dinh Diem in the South , Ho lead his countryman in the North against the onslaught of American military might. In the war , Ho 's capital of Hanoi , among other city , be repeatedly bomb by American planes. At the same time Ho be an inspiration for the National Liberation Front , or Vietcong , which operate in South Vietnam in the long , bloody and costly conflict against the Saigon regime and it American allies. In the war , in which the United States become increasingly involve , especially after 1964 , Ho maintain an exquisite balance in his relation with the Soviet Union and the People 's Republic of China. These Communist country , at ideological sword 's point , be Ho 's principal supplier of foodstuff and war goods. It be a measure of his diplomacy that he keep on friendly term with each. Small and Frail To the 19 million people north of the 17th parallel and to other million below it , the small , frail , ivorylike figure of Ho , with it long ascetic face , straggly goatee , sunken cheek and luminous eye , be that of a patriarch , the George Washington of his nation. Although his name be not attach to public square , building , factory , airport or monument , his magnetism be undoubted , a be the affection that the average citizen have for him. He be universally call `` Uncle Ho , '' a sobriquet also use in the North Vietnamese press. Before the exigency of war confine him to official duty , Ho regularly visit village and towns. Simply clad , he be especially fond of drop into school and chat with the children. Westerners who know him be convince that , whatever his guile in large political matter , there be no pose in his expression of feeling for the common people. Indeed , Ho 's personal popularity be such that it be generally concede , even by many of his political foe , that Vietnam would have be unify under his leadership have the countrywide election pledge at Geneva take place. As it be , major segment of South Vietnam be effectively control by the National Liberation Front despite the presence of hundred of thousand of American troops. Intelligent , resourceful and dedicate , though ruthless , Ho create a favorable impression on many of those who deal with him. One such be Harry Ashmore of the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions and former editor of The Arkansas Gazette. Mr. Ashmore and the late William C. Baggs , editor of The Miami News , be among the last Americans to talk with Ho at length when they visit Hanoi in early 1967. `` Ho be a courtly , urbane , highly sophisticated man with a gentle manner and without personal venom , '' Mr. Ashmore recall in a recent interview. At the meeting Ho be dress in his characteristic high-necked white pajama type of garment , call a cu-nao , and he wear open-toed rubber sandals. He chain-smoked cigarette , American-made Salems. Adept in English Their hour-long conversation start out in Vietnamese with an interpreter , Mr. Ashmore say , but soon shift to English. Ho astonish Mr. Ashmore by his adeptness in English , which be one of several language -- the principal others be Chinese , French , German and Russian -- in which he be fluent. At one point Ho remind Mr. Ashmore and Mr. Baggs that he have once be in the United States. `` I think I know the American people , '' Ho say , `` and I do n't understand how they can support their involvement in this war. Is the Statue of Liberty stand on her head ? '' This be a rhetorical question that Ho also pose to other Americans in an effort to point up what to his mind be an inconsistency : a colonial people who have gain independence in a revolution be fight to suppress the independence of another colonial people. Ho 's knowledge of American history be keen , and he put it to advantage in the summer of 1945 when he be write the Declaration of Independence of the Democratic Republican of Vietnam. He remember the content of the American Declaration of Independence , but not it precise wording. From an American military mission then work with him he try in vain to obtain a copy of the document , and when none could supply it Ho paraphrase it out of his recollections. Thus his Declaration begin , `` All men be create equal ; they be endow by their Creator with certain inalienable Rights ; among these be Life , Liberty , and the pursuit of Happiness. '' After explain that this meant that `` all the people on the earth be equal from birth , all the people have a right to live , to be happy and free , '' Ho go on to enumerate , in the manner of the American Declaration , the grievance of his people and to proclaim their independence. 'Likable and Friendly' Apart from Americans , Ho strike a spark with many others who come in contact with him over the years. `` Extraordinarily likable and friendly '' be the description of Jawaharlal Nehru , the Indian leader. Paul Mus , the French Orientalist who conduct delicate talk with Ho in 1946 and 1947 , find him an `` intransigent and incorruptible revolutionary , a la Saint Just. '' A French naval commander who observe the slender Vietnamese for the three week he be a ship 's passenger conclude that Ho be an `` intelligent and charm man who be also a passionate idealist entirely devote to the cause he have espouse '' and a person with `` naive faith in the politico-social slogan of our time and , generally , in everything that be printed. '' Ho be an enormously pragmatic Communist , a doer rather than a theoretician. His speech and article be bring together in a four-volume `` Selected Works of Ho Chi Minh '' issue in Hanoi between 1960 and 1962. The late Bernard B. Fall , an American authority on Vietnam , publish a collect of these in English in 1967 under the title `` Ho Chi Minh on Revolution. '' They be simply and clearly worded document , most of them agitational or polemical in nature and hardly likely to add to the body of Marxist doctrine. Like Mao Tse-tung , a fellow Communist leader , Ho compose poetry , some of it consider quite affecting. One of his poem , write when he be a prisoner of the Chinese Nationalists in 1942-43 , be call `` Autumn Night '' and read in translation by Aileen Palmer : In front of the gate , the guard stand with his rifle. Above , untidy cloud be carry away the moon. The bedbug be swarm around like army tank on maneuver , While the mosquito form squadron , attack like fighter planes. My heart travel a thousand li toward my native land. My dream intertwines with sadness like a skein of a thousand threads. Innocent , I have now endure a whole year in prison. Using my tear for ink , I turn my thought into verses. Ho 's rise to power and world eminence be not a fully document story. On the contrary , it detail at some crucial point be imprecise. This lead at one time to the suspicion that there be two Hos , a notion that be discount by the French Surete when it compare photograph of the early and the late Ho. One explanation for the confusion be that Ho use about a dozen alias , of which Ho Chi Minh ( which can be translate a Ho , the Shedder of Light ) be but one. Another be Ho 's own reluctance to disclose biographical information. `` You know , I be an old man , and an old man like to hold on to his little mystery , '' he tell Mr. Fall. With a twinkle , he continue , `` Wait until I 'm dead. Then you can write about me all you want. '' Nonetheless , Mr. Fall report , before he leave Hanoi , he receive a brief , unsigned summary of Ho 's life `` obviously deliver on the old man 's instructions. '' Despite Ho 's apparent self-effacement , he do have a touch of personal vanity. Mr. Fall recall have show the Vietnamese leader a sketch of him by Mrs. Fall. `` Yes , that be very good. That look very much like me , '' Ho exclaimed. He take a bouquet of flower from a nearby table and , hand it to Mr. Fall , say : `` Tell her for me that the drawing be very good and give her the bouquet and kiss her on both cheek for me. '' Although there be some uncertainty over Ho 's birth date , the most reliable evidence indicate he be bear May 19 , 1890 , in Kimlien , a village in Nghe-An Province in central Vietnam. Many source give his true name a Nguyen Ai Quoc , or Nguyen the Patriot. However , Wilfred Burchett , an Australian-born correspondent who know Ho well , believe ( and it be now generally accept ) that Ho 's birth name be Nguyen Tat Thanh. He be say to be the young of three children. His father be only slightly good off than the rice peasant of the area , but he be apparently a man of some determination , for by rote learn he pass examination that give him a job in the imperial administration just when the French rule be beginning. An ardent nationalist , Ho 's father refuse to learn French , the language of the conqueror of his country , and join anti-French secret societies. Young Ho get his first underground experience a his father 's messenger in the anti-French network. Shortly , the father lose his Government job and become a healer , dispense traditional Oriental potions. Ho 's mother be believe to have be of peasant origin , but he never speak of her. Attended Lycee Ho receive his basic education from his father and from the village school , go on to a few year of high school at the Lycee Quoc-Hoc in the old imperial capital of Hue. This institution , found by the father of Ngo Dinh Diem , be design to perpetuate Vietnamese national traditions. It have a distinguish roster of graduate that include Vo Nguyen Giap , the brilliant guerrilla general , and Pham Van Dong , the current Premier of North Vietnam. Ho leave the school in 1910 without a diploma and taught briefly at a private institution in a South Annam fish town. It be while he be there , accord to now accept source , that he decide to go to Europe. As a step toward that goal , he go to a trade school in Saigon in the summer of 1911 where he learn the duty of a kitchen boy and pastry cook 's helper , skill in demand by Europeans of that day. His training give Ho a gourmet 's palate , which he like to indulge , and an ability to whip up a tasty dish , which he delight to do when he could. For the immediate moment , though , his training enable him to sign aboard the Latouche-Treville a a kitchen boy , a job so menial that he work under the alias Ba. In his travel , he visit Marseilles and port in Africa and North America. Explaining the crucial significance of these voyage for Ho 's education a a revolutionary , Mr. Fall write in `` The Two Vietnams '' : `` His contact with the white colonizer on their home ground shatter any of his illusion a to their 'superiority , ' and his association with sailor from Brittany , Cornwall and the Frisian Islands -- a illiterate and superstitious a the most backward Vietnamese rice farmer -- do the rest. `` Ho still like to tell the story of the arrival of his ship at an African port where , he claim , native be compel to jump into the shark-infested water to secure the mooring of the vessel and be kill by the shark under the indifferent eye of passenger and crew. But his contact with Europe also bring him the revelation of his own personal worth and dignity ; when he go ashore in Europe in a Western suit , white , for the first time in his life , address him a 'monsieur , ' instead of use the deprecating 'tu , ' reserve in France for child but use in Indochina by Frenchmen when address native , no matter how educated. '' In his year at sea , Ho read widely -- Shakespeare , Tolstoy , Marx , Zola. He be even then , accord to late account , an ascetic and something of a puritan , who be offend when prostitute clamber aboard his ship in Marseilles. `` Why do n't the French civilize their own people before they pretend to civilize u ? '' he be say to have remarked. ( Ho , incidentally , be believe to have be a bachelor , although the record on this point be far from clear. ) With the advent of World War I , Ho go to live in London , where he work a a snow shoveler and a a cook 's helper under Escoffier , the master chef , at the Carlton Hotel. Escoffier , it be say , promote Ho to a job in the pastry kitchen and want to teach him the art of cuisine. However that may be , the 24-year-old Vietnamese be more interested in politics. He join the Overseas Workers Association , compose mostly of Asians , and agitate , among other thing , for Irish independence. Sometime during the war , Ho give up the Carlton 's kitchen for the sea and journeyed to the United States. He be believe to have live in Harlem for a while. Ho himself often refer to his American visit , although he be hazy about the details. According to his close associate , Pham Van Dong , what impress Ho in the United States be `` the barbarity and ugliness of American capitalism , the Ku Klux Klan mob , the lynching of Negroes. '' Out of Ho 's American experience come a pamphlet , issue in Moscow in 1924 , call `` La Race Noire '' ( `` The Black Race '' ) , which assail racial practice in America and Europe. About 1918 Ho return to France and live in a tiny flat in the Montmartre section of Paris , eking out a living by retouch photo under the name of Nguyen Ai Quoc. At the Versailles Peace Conference of 1919 Ho emerge a a self-appointed spokesman for his native land. Seeing in Woodrow Wilson 's proposal for self-determination of the people the possibility of Vietnam 's independence , Ho , dress in a hired black suit and bowler hat , travel to the Palace of Versailles to present his case. He be , of course , not receive , although he offer a program for Vietnam. Its proposal do not include independence , but basic freedom and equality between the French ruler and the native population. Whatever hop Ho may have hold for French liberation of Vietnam be destroy in his mind by the failure of the Versailles Conference to settle colonial issues. His faith be now transfer to Socialist action. Indeed , his first record speech be at a congress of the French Socialist party in 1920 , and it be a plea not for world revolution but `` against the imperialist who have commit abhorrent crime on my native land. '' He bid the party `` act practically to support the oppressed natives. '' Immediately afterward Ho become , fatefully , a founding member of the French Communist party because he consider that the Socialists be equivocate on the colonial issue whereas the Communists be willing to promote national liberation. `` I do n't understand a thing about strategy , tactic and all the other big word you use , '' he tell the delegate , `` but I understand well one single thing : The Third International concern itself a great deal with the colonial question. Its delegate promise to help the oppressed colonial people to regain their liberty and independence. The adherent of the Second International have not say a word about the fate of the colonial areas. '' Edited Weekly Paper With his decision to join the Communists , Ho 's career take a marked turn. For one thing , he become the French party 's resident expert on colonial affair and edit Le Paria ( The Outcast ) , the weekly paper of the Intercolonial Union , which he be instrumental in found in 1921. This group be a conglomeration of restless Algerian , Senegalese , West Indian and Asian exile in Paris who be unite by a fervid nationalism and , to a less extent , by a common commitment to Communism. For another thing , the fragile-looking Ho become an orator of sort , travel about France to speak to throng of Vietnamese soldier and war worker who be await repatriation. In addition , Ho gravitate to Moscow , then the nerve center of world Communism. He go there first in 1922 for the Fourth Comintern Congress , where he meet Lenin and become a member of the Comintern's Southeast Asia Bureau. By all account , Ho be vocal and energetic , meet all the reign Communists and help to organize the Krestintern , or Peasant International , for revolutionary work among colonial peoples. After a brief sojourn in France , Ho be back in Moscow , his base for many year thereafter. He attend the University of the Toilers of the East , receive formal training in Marxism and the technique of agitation and propaganda. Following his study in Moscow , Ho be dispatch to Canton , China , in 1925 a an interpreter for Michael Borodin , one of the leader of the Soviet mission to help Chiang Kai-shek , then in Communist favor a an heir of Sun Yat-sen. Once in Canton , Ho set about to spread the spirit of revolution in the Far East. He organize Vietnamese refugee into the Vietnam Revolutionary Youth Association and set up the League of Oppressed Peoples of Asia , which soon become the South Seas Communist party , the forerunner of various national Communist group , include Ho 's own Indochinese Communist party of 1930. For two year , until July , 1927 , when Chiang turn on his Communist ally , Ho send apt Vietnamese to Chiang 's military school at Whampoa while conduct a crash training course in political agitation for his compatriots. Fled to Moscow After the Chiang-Communist break , Ho flee to Moscow by way of the Gobi. His life immediately thereafter be not clear , but it be believe that he live in Berlin for a time and travel in Belgium , Switzerland and Italy , use a variety of alias and passports. After 1928 Ho turn up in eastern Thailand , disguise a a shaven-headed Buddhist monk. He travel among Vietnamese exile and organize political group and publish newspaper that be smuggle over the border into Vietnam. In 1930 , on advice from the Comintern , Ho be instrumental in settle the vexatious dispute that have arise among Communists in Indochina and in organize the Indochinese Communist party , which later become the Vietnamese Communist party and , still later , the Vietnamese Workers party. In that same year a peasant rebellion erupt in Vietnam , which the Communists backed. On it suppression by the French , Ho be sentence to death in absentia. At the time he be in a British jail in Hong Kong , have be arrest there in 1931 for subversive activities. The French seek his extradition , but Ho argue that he be a political refugee and not subject to extradition. The case , which be handle in London by Sir Stafford Cripps in a plea to the Privy Council , be decide for Ho. He be release , and flee Hong Kong in disguise ( this time a a Chinese merchant ) and make his way back to Moscow. There he attend Communist school -- the Institute for National and Colonial Questions and the celebrated Lenin School. He be , however , back in China in 1938 , now a a communication operator with Mao Tse-tung 's renowned Eighth Route Army. Subsequently , he find his way south and enter Vietnam in 1940 for the first time in 30 years. A Master Stroke The timing be a master stroke , for the Japanese , virtually unopposed , have take effective control of the Indochinese Peninsula and the French administrator , most of them Vichy adherent , agree to cooperate with the Japanese. With great daring and imagination , Ho take advantage of World War II to piece together a coalition of Vietnamese nationalist and Communists into what be call the Vietminh , or Independence Front. The Vietminh create a 10,000-man guerilla force , `` Men in Black , '' that battle the Japanese in the jungle with notable success. Ho 's action project him onto the world scene a the lead Vietnamese nationalist and a an ally of the United States against the Japanese. `` I be a Communist , '' he say then , `` but I be no long one. I be a member of the Vietnamese family , nothing else. '' In 1942 Ho be send to Kunming , reportedly at the request of his American military aides. He be arrest there by Chiang Kai-shek 's men and jail until September , 1943 , when he be release , it have be say , by American request. On his release , accord to Mr. Fall , Ho cooperate with a Chinese Nationalist general in form a wide Vietnamese freedom group. One result of this be that in 1944 Ho accept a portfolio in the Provisional Republican Government of Vietnam. That Government be largely a paper affair , but it permit Ho to court vigorously the American Office of Strategic Services. Thus when Ho 's Vietminh take over Hanoi in 1945 , senior American military official be in his entourage. It be in this period that he take the name of Ho Chi Minh. Independence Proclaimed With the end of World War II , Ho proclaim the independence of Vietnam , but it take nine year for his declaration to become an effective fact. First , under the Big Three Agreement at Potsdam , the Chinese Nationalists occupy Hanoi and the northern sector of Vietnam. Second , the French ( in British ship ) arrive to reclaim Saigon and the southern segment of the country. And third , Ho 's nationalist coalition be strain under pressure of these events. Forming a new guerrilla force around the Vietminh , Ho and his colleague , accord to most account , deal summarily with dissident unwilling to fight in Ho 's fashion for independence. Assassinations be frequently reported. Meantime , a the Chinese withdrew from the north and the French advance from the south , Ho negotiate with the French to save his nationalist regime. In a compromise that Ho work out in Paris in 1946 , he agree to let the Democratic Republic of Vietnam become a part of the French Union a a free state within the Indochina federation. The French recognize Ho a chief of state and promise a plebiscite in the South on the question of a unified Vietnam under Ho. By the start of 1947 , the agreement have break down , and Ho 's men be fight the French Army. The Vietminh guerrilla hold the jungle and the village , the French the cities. For seven year the war rag a Ho 's force gather strength , squeeze the French more and more. For most of this time , Ho be diplomatically isolated , for he be not recognize by Communist China or the Soviet Union until his victory over the French be virtually assured. In an effort to shore up their political force , the French resurrect Bao Dai , the puppet of the Japanese who hold title a Emperor. Corrupt and pleasure-loving , he soon move with his mistress to France , leave a weak and splinter regime in Saigon. This , of course , prove no support for the French Army , which be also sap by General Giap 's guerrilla tactics. Finally , on May 8 , 1954 , the French force be decisively defeat at Dienbienphu. The Indochina war end officially in July at a cost to the French of 172,000 casualty and to the Vietminh of perhaps three time that many. The cease-fire accord be sign in Geneva July 21 , 1954 , and it represent far less than Ho 's hopes. But by that time the United States be involve in Vietnam on the French side through $ 800-million a year in economic aid. Fear of Communist expansion in Asia dominate Washington , with Vice President Richard M. Nixon say , `` If , to avoid further Communist expansion in Asia , we must take the risk of put our boy in , I think the Executive Branch have to do it. '' The Geneva Accord , however , divide Vietnam at the 17th parallel , create a North and a South Vietnam. It remove the French administration from the peninsula and provide for all-Vietnam election in 1956 a a mean of unify the country. Although a party to the Geneva Accord , the United States decline to sign it. South Vietnam , also a nonsignatory , refuse to hold the elections. Meantime , the United States build up it military mission in Saigon and it support of the regime of President Ngo Dinh Diem a a counter to continue guerilla activity of the National Liberation Front , which become pronounce after 1956. The front , technically independent of Ho Chi Minh in the North , increase it sway into the nineteen-sixties. It supply itself from capture American arm and from material that come through from the North. Beginning in 1964 , thousand of American troop be pour into South Vietnam to battle the Vietcong and then to bomb North Vietnam. The halt of American bombing in 1968 finally lead to the peace negotiation in Paris , but in the meantime the fighting in South Vietnam continued. Confident of Victory Throughout , Ho be confident of victory. In 1962 , when the war be still a localized conflict between the South Vietnamese force and 11,000 American adviser on the one hand and a small guerrilla force on the other , he tell a French visitor : `` It take u eight year of bitter fight to defeat you French , and you know the country and have some old friendship here. Now the South Vietnamese regime be well-armed and help by the Americans. `` The Americans be much strong than the French , though they know u less well. So it perhaps may take 10 year to do it , but our heroic compatriot in the South will defeat them in the end. '' Ho be still confident in early 1967 , when he talk with Mr. Ashmore and Mr. Baggs. `` We have be fight for our independence for more than 25 year , '' he tell them , `` and of course we cherish peace , but we will never surrender our independence to purchase a peace with the United States or any party. '' At the close of his conversation , he clench his right fist and say emotionally , `` You must know of our resolution. Not even your nuclear weapon would force u to surrender after so long and violent a struggle for the independence of our country. '' Of his own death he appear unemotional. He have be urge to give up cigarette , but he persist in smoking. `` When you be as old a I be , '' he remark , `` you do not worry about the harm of cigarette . ''