October 13 , 1969 OBITUARY Sonja Henie , Skating Star , Dies BY THE NEW YORK TIMES OSLO , Oct. 12 ( AP ) -- Sonja Henie , ice-skating queen and film star , die tonight on an ambulance plane fly from Paris to Oslo. She be 57 year old. Miss Henie have be suffer from leukemia for the last nine months. In Paris yesterday her condition worsen , and it be decide to fly her home. Her husband , Neils Onstad , a Norwegian shipowner , say she `` just sleep away '' halfway through the two-hour flight. Champion and Star Three time the Olympic figure-skating champion , Miss Henie win most of the major world skate title from 1927 to 1936 , when she turn professional. A petite , glamorous woman with a taste for luxury and a shrewd business sense , she be immensely successful next with a series of her own ice revue , and prosper a a motion picture star. After her marriage to Mr. Onstad , a childhood sweetheart , in 1956 , she become interested in modern art. The Onstads give Norway an art museum and 250 of their painting in August 1968. Two early marriage to Americans , Daniel Reid Topping and Winthrop Gardiner Jr. , end in divorce in 1946 and 1956. She have become an American citizen in 1941. Miss Henie have a home in the Holmby Hills section of Los Angeles , an apartment in Lausanne , Switzerland , and an estate overlook the Oslo fjord. Skated a 6-year-old Born in Oslo on April 8 , 1912 , Miss Henie receive her first skate from her father , a Norwegian fur wholesaler , on the Christmas after her sixth birthday. She have already delight in dancing , and -- with her brother Leif give her her first lesson -- enjoy skate even more. While improve her skating , in the next few year , she also study ballet with a former teacher of Anna Pavlova , and eventually she combine the two form on ice. She win the child 's figure skate championship of Oslo when she be 8 , and two year later , in 1923 , she win the figure skate championship of Norway. She enter her first Olympic Winter Games the next year , primarily for experience , and take third place in the free skating competition. Practicing as much a seven hour a day , she study with teacher in Germany , England , Switzerland and Austria. With her well-to-do father 's backing , she study ballet in London , and begin apply choreography to her routines. Her mother travel with her constantly , a she do throughout Miss Henie 's career. She win the first of 10 consecutive world skate title at Oslo in 1927 , captivate the crowd with her ballet style , a white silk and ermine costume and short skirt and a dimpled smile. Over the next decade Miss Henie win Olympic title at St. Moritz , Switzerland ( 1928 ) , at Lake Placid ( 1932 ) , and at Garmisch-Partenkirchen in Bavaria ( 1936 ) . She announce then that she be turn professional , and tour the United States in an ice show. She say her great hope be to become a movie star , and she soon did. `` I want to do with skate ( in the movie ) what Fred Astaire be do with dancing , '' she said. First Movie in 1936 She sign with Darrly F. Zanuck and 20th Century-Fox , and her first skating film , `` One in a Million , '' be release at the end of 1936. It be a box-office smash , a be others she make in the following dozen years. The picture be report to have gross $ 25-million. She herself earn over $ 200,000 from her film work alone in 1937. She also begin stag and appear in ice show , in association with Arthur Wirtz , her business manager , and these , too , be very successful -- with lavish costume and spectacular routines. These show , the `` Hollywood Ice Revues , '' be major attraction at Madison Square Garden for many year , up to 1952. Miss Henie be an exacting star. She once call Eddie Pec , the only person she permit to sharpen her skate , in New York , to ask him to come to Chicago , where her show be to open. He hop on a train , reach Chicago the next day , rush to her hotel , and sharpen the skate with a hand stone -- a few minute work. `` Anything else ? '' he asked. `` No , thank you , '' she say sweetly. `` That 's all. '' And back he go to New York. She break with her manager in 1951 , and begin produce show on her own , but give them up after a block of seat at a Baltimore armory collapse before a show in March , 1952 , injure more than 250 people. Although later clear of any responsibility for the accident , she do not stage any more arena- type shows. She appear on several television show in the next few year , include a one- hour special of her own. Shows More Demanding Commenting on the difference between skate in her show and in competition , Miss Henie once say : `` When I be in championship competition I be on the ice for exactly four minutes. Now I arrive at the Garden at 6:45 and I never stop until 11:10. Besides , I ca n't quite imagine my do the hula in the Olympics. '' Her illness have be a well-kept secret. Less than two week ago she attend a theater performance in Oslo with her husband .