September 8 , 1969 OBITUARY Dirksen Dead in Capital at 73 By E. W. KENWORTHYIt be Sept. 11 , 1963. The Senate floor be unusually fill , the gallery crowd , for Everett McKinley Dirksen be about to speak on the nuclear test-ban treaty. The Republican leader stood by his seat in the front row to the left of the center aisle. Years and illness have take toll of the stout , wavy-haired baker who have come to Congress in the year that Franklin D. Roosevelt move into the White House. Now the face beneath the gray curl be deeply line , and there be heavy bag under the watery eyes. ( `` His face look like he sleep in it , '' a reporter have said. ) But the voice be still the voice -- modulate to the word , now a whisper , now a deep growl , now roll thunder -- that for year have send the cry through the press gallery , `` Ev 's up ! '' Mr. Dirksen recall that `` bright , sunny day '' in August , 1945 , when the bomb hatch of the Enola Gay open over Hiroshima , and `` for the first time , the whole bosom of God 's earth be rupture by a man-made contrivance that we call a nuclear weapon. '' `` I want to take a first step , Mr. President , '' Mr. Dirksen said. `` I be not a young man. One of my age think about his destiny a little. I should not like to have write on my tombstone. He know what happen at Hiroshima , but he do n't take a first step. ' '' Speech on Amendment It be Sept. 19 , 1966 , and the Senate floor be not crowd , for Everett Dirksen be to speak on his propose amendment to the Constitution to permit prayer in public schools. He call down the wrath of God on the minister , priest and rabbi -- '' social engineer , '' he term them -- who oppose his amendment. `` I think of the child , '' he whisper , `` the million whose soul need the spiritual rehearsal of prayer. '' His voice rise in scorn. `` Imagine the Chicago Bears football team , make up of green , inexperienced , unpracticed and unrehearsed player , undertake a game against the Cleveland Browns. It would be unthinkable because they have not be discipline by practice. . . . Mr. President , the soul need practice , too. It need rehearsal. '' These two speech encompass -- but do not entirely explain -- that remarkable political phenomenon , Everett McKinley Dirksen , Republican of Illinois. He could aspire to the height , climb them and take the long view , without regard to party and , apparently , without regard to his political fortune. But he could also descend into bathos. There be some who believe that he figure it that way , and not entirely cynically -- that what he lose by espouse the nuclear test-ban treaty or the civil right bill he recover by apostrophe to the flag and motherhood. At a $ 100-a-plate dinner in Chicago in April , 1966 , he bring tear and certainly vote when he intone : `` No , you ca n't eat freedom , or buy anything with it. You ca n't hock it downtown for the thing you need. When a baby curl a chubby arm around your neck , you ca n't eat that feel either , or buy anything with it. But what in this life mean more to you than that feeling , or your freedom ? '' Mr. Dirksen spend most of his adult life under the dome of the United States Capitol. After 16 year in the House , he serve since 1951 in the Senate , and a Republican leader since 1959. Talent for Compromise He be the very archetype of the politician , with all the politician 's shortcoming and virtues. Inconstant , often too apt in expedient , he be find , in the course of his career , on both side of almost every question. But he also have the talent for compromise , adjustment and conciliation that be the secret of effective government under the American system. Furthermore , he love the process of politics -- the wile , the guile , the wheeling and dealing , even it fustian. But he almost always stop short of cant. In a Senate increasingly compose of drab , machine-tooled men , Mr. Dirksen remain an original , a throwback to the more colorful , less inhibited politics of the Midwest at the turn of the century. From boyhood , his ear be enrapture by the rolling phrase , the well-turned apothegm , and he rarely let a day pas without roll or turn one of his own. Sometimes they be 100-proof corn , but often they deserve a place in a political Bartlett. Thus , his lapidary `` The oil can be mighty than the sword '' capture in eight word the essence of the democratic process. The comic spirit nestle in his lock , but it be the spirit of broad country humor rather than city wit. Like Lincoln , he love to make his point with anecdote. It be these quality that explain his warm friendship with Presidents as different a John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson , even though he delight in needle both. On one occasion , during his absence in a hospital , three Republican bill be narrowly defeated. On his return , he say : `` To my bedridden amazement , my pajama-ruffled consternation , yes , my pill-laden astonishment , I learn they be victim of that new White House telephonic half-Nelson know a the Texas twist. '' Because he be such an unabashed sentimentalist and ham , some set him down a a fraud at bad or a buffoon at best. He be neither. He be naturally a ham , and he enjoy the role. But he also stand outside himself while he play it. He be a political satirist and he do not spare himself. More than be himself , he relish be a caricature of himself. Mr. Dirksen be by nature kind and understanding , but he could cut a Senator down for a breach of courtesy or an unfair attack. Once after Senator Thomas J. Dodd , a notable absentee from the floor , roll in late in the day and demand that Majority Leader Mike Mansfield `` behave like a leader , '' Mr. Dirksen dismiss `` the brave crusader from the Nutmeg State '' a suffering from `` cerebral incoherence. '' Partisanship Fades After he become Republican leader in 1959 , much of the old partisan spirit seem to evaporate from Mr. Dirksen. It be true that the time have change , that Mr. Dirksen himself be at last freed from the pressure both of campaigning and ambition for high office. Nevertheless he seem to realize that , now that he have become leader , his responsibility lay with the national party and not to it right wing , and with the Presidency regardless of it occupant. He do loyally support Barry Goldwater in 1964 , but he confide to friend that he have little stomach for the assignment. He do do conservative battle against many New Frontier and Great Society domestic program , and he resist control over his favored drug industry. But on the great issue in international affair ( the nuclear test-ban treaty , the Vietnam war ) , and the most seminal in domestic affair ( the 1964 Civil Rights Act and the 1965 Voting Rights Act ) , Mr. Dirksen give Presidents Kennedy and Johnson indispensable support. Keenly aware of their dependence on his help and grateful for it , the two Democratic Presidents make much of the Senate minority leader , call him frequently to the White House to solicit his advice , Mr. Dirksen , who be not without vanity , bask in this attention. This vanity be undoubtedly wound when , with Richard M. Nixon in the White House , he discover that he be not the `` Mr. Big '' he have be under Democratic Administrations. Son of German Settlers Everett Dirksen and his twin brother , Tom , be bear Jan. 4 , 1896 , in Pekin , Ill. , then a farm-belt community of about 5,000 people , near Peoria. The parent , Johann Frederick and Antje Conrady Dirksen , be German settler who continue to speak their Ostfriesian dialect at home. When Everett be 5 , his father have a crippling stroke and die four year later. Everett and his brother help their mother milk the cow , slop the six hog , then the 150 chicken and the 15 stand of bee , and plant and weed the vegetables. They sell milk , egg and produce. In 191 [ MISSING TEXT ] he enrol at the University of Minnesota a a pre-law student. To pay his fee , he work a an ad-taker at The Minneapolis Tribune , a a lawyer 's assistant and in a railroad office. In 1917 young Dirksen quit the university just short of a degree to enlist in the Army on the United States entry into World War I. Sent to France in May , 1918 , he become -- a he later describe his service -- a `` gas-bag man. '' From a tethered , hydrogen-filled balloon 3,500 foot above the line , observe and correct artillery fire. He be commission a second lieutenant in the field and be discharge in October , 1919. Returning to Pekin , he invest in a new washing machine business , which failed. From 1922 to 1925 he be general manager of a dredge company. Then he and his brother buy a wholesale bakery business. It succeeded. In 1927 he be elect to the part-time position of city commissioner of finance , and he begin to have vision of a political career. But he also develop writer 's itch and become stage-struck. ( Over the year he write five novel and more than 100 short story -- all unpublished. ) He and an old schoolmate , Hubert Ropp , collaborate on writing and produce community play , mostly with Chinese themes. The Dirksen-Ropp team also produce Percy MacKaye 's `` A Thousand Years Ago '' during the town 's centennial celebration. Mr. Dirksen play the lead who capture the heart of the Princess of Pekin , play by Louella Carver. The stage romance become a real one and in 1927 they be married. Two year later they have a daughter , Danice Joy. She be married to Howard H. Baker Jr. , now Republican Senator from Tennessee. In the 1930 primary Mr. Dirksen challenge the incumbent Republican Congressman , William E. Hull. He lose by 1,100 vote and immediately begin campaign for 1932. Whisky-making Pekin have be hurt by Prohibition. In 1932 Mr. Dirksen , who have once orate against drink , attack Mr. Hull for vote for a bill to strengthen the Prohibition Amendment. Mr. Dirksen get the nomination. In the campaign for the general election , he urge economic reform to combat the Depression -- without be too specific. He win by 23,147 votes. From then on , all be clear sailing. He be regularly return with large majority up to 1946. As soon a he arrive in Washington in 1933 , Mr. Dirksen demonstrate that capacity for work and attention to legislative detail that characterize him up to the time of his death , even during extend period of illness. Above all , he set out to be a good committeeman. He go home each night with a bulging briefcase and arose every morning at 5:30. He complete his law degree by go to night school. During his first four term in the House he vote against many New Deal measure , include public housing , rural electrification and the Tennessee Valley Authority. But he support enough of them -- include Social Security ( 1935 ) and the minimum wage ( 1938 ) -- to be accuse of `` me-tooism '' by what he later call the `` hard-bitten Republicans '' back home. In foreign policy , Mr. Dirksen begin a a stanch isolationist. He vote against the Reciprocal Trade Act in 1934 and again in 1940. In September , 1940 , three month after the fall of France , he vote against the first peace-time conscription in United States history. In February , 1941 , he oppose the first lend-lease bill. In August , 1941 , only four month before Pearl Harbor , when extension of the draft clear the House by 203 to 202 , Mr. Dirksen vote against it. A month later , however , he begin to veer around. He urge his fellow Republicans to show `` a unity of purpose '' behind the President. To do otherwise , he say , `` could only weaken the President 's position , impair our prestige and imperil the nation. '' In October , 1941 , he vote for additional lend-lease funds. Hoped for Nomination In 1944 , Mr. Dirksen have hope of second place on the ticket. But Thomas E. Dewey , the Republican Presidential nominee , choose John W. Bricker of Ohio. Mr. Dirksen do not forgive or forget. One morning in 1947 Mr. Dirksen , then 51 , awake to find his right eye clouded. His doctor diagnose the trouble a a degeneration of the retina , possibly cause by cancer. Specialists recommend removal of the eye , but after `` weeping and praying '' he decide against it. But the eye require rest , and Mr. Dirksen retire from the House at the end of 1948 and do not seek re-election. After 10 month of rest and medication , the eye gradually recover it vision. In 1950 the Illinois voter send Mr. Dirksen back to Washington a a Senator. But it be a different Dirksen who take his seat in January , 1951. The Korean war be on and he have hitch his wagon to the ill-fated Presidential star of Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio. During the fight at the 1952 convention over whether a pro-Taft delegation from Georgia or one favor General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower should be accredit , Mr. Dirksen go to the rostrum and in full view of million of watcher on television , address himself to the New York delegation lead by Governor Dewey , and Eisenhower strategist. `` When my friend Tom Dewey be the candidate in 1944 and 1948 , '' he cry , `` I try to be one of his best campaigner , and you ask him whether or not I do n't go into 18 state one year and 23 state the next. Re-examine your heart before you take this action [ vote against the Taft delegation ] , because '' -- and here he point his finger at Mr. Dewey -- '' we follow you before and you take u down the path to defeat ! '' Nominating Speech In his speech nominate Mr. Taft , he give what turn out to be a preview of much of the Eisenhower campaign. He say : `` Once it be deem to be the primary duty of government to keep the nation at peace. In the last 20 year those in power have give u the big , costly , bloody war in the history of Christendom. They have give u more. They have give u an undeclared , unconstitutional , one-man war in Korea , now in it third year. It have become an inferno for the holy blood of American youth. As one Korean G.I. put it , 'We ca n't win. We ca n't lose. We ca n't quit. ' He might have add , 'We can only die. ' '' The chill of Mr. Taft 's loss of the nomination be deep in Mr. Dirksen 's bone , and even after his leader 's death in July , 1953 , he follow a Taft course , vote to slash President Eisenhower 's foreign aid request and to override his opposition to the Bricker amendment. As Senate wrath slowly mount against Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , Mr. Dirksen go to the defense of the Wisconsin Republican and fought doggedly to prevent his censure in 1954. After President Eisenhower 's re-election , Mr. Dirksen get on the team. ( `` Change , '' he be fond of say , `` be an inherent way of life. '' ) In 1959 , Senate Republicans , with the general 's approval , elect Mr. Dirksen minority leader , and he fell to with a will. `` When you carry the flag , you carry the flag , '' he said. `` I be of the stuff which cry , 'Chief , hand me the red-hot poker ! ' '' Three Great Reversals With some , but not much , poetic license , The Chicago Sun-Times once charge Mr. Dirksen with change his mind 62 time on foreign policy , 31 time on defense policy and 70 time on farm legislation. As he get old , such chiding have all the effect -- a he be to say of a Kennedy program -- '' of a snowflake on the bosom of the Potomac. '' Mr. Dirksen probably assure himself a place in the history book by three great reversal over three year -- on the United Nations bond issue of 1962 ; the nuclear test-ban treaty of 1963 and the Civil Rights Act of 1964. He begin by take a jaundiced view of the Administration 's request for authority to purchase United Nations bond to make up deficit result largely from the refusal of the Soviet Union and France to pay peace-keeping assessments. But on April 5 , 1962 , he rise and admit that he have do some soul-searching , He say : `` Mr. President , I will not charge my conscience with any act or deed which would contribute to the foundering of the United Nations , because I do not know how I would then be able to expiate that sin of commission to my grandchildren. '' The bill pass , 70 to 22 , with 22 Republicans vote for and 11 against. Mr. Dirksen 's opposition to the test-ban treaty would have make ratification uncertain. At the outset he be against it. The pressure on him be great -- 40,000 letter and petition contain 10,000 name in opposition to the treaty. But in study the treaty , he become convinced that his fear have be base on misunderstanding. He know from his mail that million probably share the same misunderstanding. In handwritten note to President Kennedy , he set forth question on which Senators want assurance , and suggest that the President send a communication to Majority Leader Mansfield and himself clarify issue raise by the critics. The President do so. On Sept. 11 , Mr. Dirksen rise and say that he have find that his early opinion `` do not stand up. '' He read the President 's letter , and he say : `` Mr. President. . .this be a first single step. . . . But with consummate faith and some determination , this may be the step that can spell a grander destiny for our country and the world. If there be risk , Mr. President , I be willing to assume them for my country. '' The treaty be approve 80 to 19 , with 25 Republicans vote for it and against. The Illinois chapter of Republican Women pass a resolution condemn him , and The Chicago Tribune ask `` Is Dirksen Going Soft ? '' In the past Mr. Dirksen have support civil right bill , but these have be anti-lynching , anti- poll tax or suffrage measure such a the 1957 and 1960 acts. The 1964 bill , however , a it come from the House , arouse great doubt in him. With his highly developed sense of property right , he be particularly worried about give the Federal Government the power to enforce nondiscrimination in public accommodation and jobs. On March 26 , 1964 , he open an attack on the bill , say , `` They be remake America and you wo n't like it. '' He proceed to tear the bill apart. But two month later , on May 26 , he tell the chair he be present `` an amendment in the nature of a substitute '' for the House bill , which have be shape `` on the anvil of controversy and discussion '' with the Justice Department and the civil right coalition. He hop it would command enough support to make closure possible , and thus permit a vote. His Greatest Shift Between those two date Mr. Dirksen have go through his great reversal and manage to carry most of his Republican colleague with him. He insist that actually `` they '' -- the Justice Department -- have come around to him. Attorney General Nicholas B. Katzenbach , the Administration 's liaison with Mr. Dirksen , say Mr. Dirksen have be `` reasonable '' in insist on only minimal change in the public accommodation and fair employment sections. The Senate impose closure by a vote of 71 to 29 , four more than the necessary two-thirds. Mr. Dirksen have corral 27 out of 33 Republican votes. Mr. Dirksen , in explain to reporter why he be fight for the bill he have violently attack only two month before , say : `` On the night Victor Hugo die , he write in his diary : 'Stronger than all the army be an idea whose time have come. ' '' In 1965 Mr. Dirksen , after again extract adjustment from the Administration , lead the battle for the Voting Rights Act. But even a he reach the height of his career and be be herald for his statesmanship , he begin to divert his energy into cause that many believe to be not only backward-looking but futile. Thus he fight and lose battle to stay Federal court order on reapportionment of state legislature ; to enact a constitutional amendment that would overturn the Supreme Court 's one- man , one-vote decision by permit apportionment of one house of a state legislature on a nonpopulation basis , and to pass a school prayer amendment. To the Marigold Inconstant in so many large thing , Mr. Dirksen be ever constant to the marigold , which he seek to make the national flower and which he grow profusely in his garden at Leesburg , Va. But he be also a sophisticated gardener , a those knew who saw him at his Florida home in DeBary , mulch his prize rose and fragile camellia and nurse his red and white poinsettia to bring them to their best for Christmas. Mr. Dirksen 's last year be burden with illness and injury -- duodenal ulcer , chronic emphysema , a cracked vertebra from a violent fit of coughing , a broken hip. He wear a steel brace on his back and hobble for month on crutches. He never complain , and he refuse to believe that the ill of the flesh would be cure by mortify it. When a caller , see a glass of whisky in one hand and a cigarette in the other , say he think the Senator have give them up on his doctor 's order , he growl : `` I have give up nothing. '' The truth be not always in Everett Dirksen. But the juice of life and humanity flow strong in him to the end .