May 11 , 1970 OBITUARY Reuther Dies in Jet Crash With Wife and 4 Others Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES DETROIT , May 10 -- Walter P. Reuther , the president of the United Automobile Workers , and his wife , May , die last night in a plane crash in northern Michigan. Mr. Reuther be 62 year old , and his wife be 59. Four other person be also kill when the charter Lear-Jet crash in flame near Pellston , Mich. , 260 mile northwest of Detroit , at 9:33 P.M. Michigan time ( 10:33 P.M. New York time ) . The four be Oskar Stonorov , 64 , a Philadelphia architect who be a friend of Mr. Reuther ; William Wolfman , 29 of Detroit , a Reuther bodyguard who be a nephew of Mrs. Reuther ; and the pilot , George Evans , 48 , and Joseph Karrafa , 41 , both of Columbus , Ohio. The Reuthers be fly to a union recreation and educational center at Black Lake , 25 mile from Pellston. Their plane leave Detroit at 8:44 P.M. and crash in fog and rain while attempt to land at the Emmet County Airport. The plane be clear for landing and break through the scattered cloud at 400 feet. But it be short of the airport and clip treetops. It come down burn , crash a mile and a half southwest of the airport and exploding. The body be burn beyond recognition except through dental records. President Nixon call Mr. Reuther 's death `` a deep loss not only for organize labor but also for the cause of collective bargaining and the entire American process. '' Mr. Nixon add : `` He be a man who be devote to his cause , speak for it with eloquence and work for it tirelessly. While he be outspoken and controversial , even those who disagree with him have great respect for his ability , integrity and persistence. '' George Meany , the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. , who over the year have frequently and sharply criticize the auto union leader -- criticism that be return in kind by Mr. Reuther -- say in a statement that his old rival have `` make a unique and lasting contribution to the labor movement and the nation. '' `` We have disagreement , but we work together , '' Mr. Meany say , `` and it be the latter that stand out in my memory. '' Other tribute to Mr. Reuther be offer across the national and around the world yesterday by political leader such a Prime Minister Wilson of Britain : union official ; and many of the industrialist -- such a Henry Ford 2d -- with whom the auto union leader have often find himself at odds. Funeral arrangement will be announce later. The family request that no flower be sent. Mr. and Mrs. Reuther be survive by two daughter , Linda , 27 , a San Francisco teacher , and Lisa , 22 , a student at Oakland University here. Mr. Reuther be also survive by his mother , Mrs. Valentine Reuther of Wheeling , W. Va. , a sister , Mrs. Eugene Richey of Reading , Mass. , and two brother , Theodore of Wheeling , and Victor of Washington , who be director of the U.A.W. 's International Affairs Department. Mrs. Reuther be also survive by her father , Frank Wolfman , and two brother , Earl Wolfman and Leo Wolf of Detroit. William Wolfman be a Detroit policeman for two year and be one of the union president 's three bodyguards. He be survive by his wife , Martha , and two child , Dean , 6 , and Diane , 3 .