October 12 , 1970 OBITUARY Daladier , Signer of Munich Pact , Dies at 86 Special to The New York Times PARIS , Oct. 11 -- Edouard Daladier , one of the most prominent leader of the prewar Third Republic , die here yesterday , an almost forgotten man. He be 86 year old. As Premier , Minister of Defense and Foreign Minister in the nineteen-thirties , Mr. Daladier lead his country into a war that bring it one of the most crushing defeat of it history and end the Third Republic. In the Fourth Republic , form in 1946 , he win a bitterly contest comeback , and until 1958 be regularly elect deputy from the Vaucluse Department , where he retain his popularity. Defeated in 1958 , he live in quiet obscurity in an apartment in western Paris. He leave his second wife , the former Jeanne Boucoiran , whom he marry in 1951 , and two son , Jean and Pierre , by his first wife , the former Madeline Laffort , who die in 1932. An Agile Politician By ALDEN WHITMAN In the inglorious fall of France , a process that go on for at least a decade and culminate in her crushing defeat by Germany in the spring of 1940 , Edouard Daladier play a conspicuous part. Perennially Minister of War and thrice Premier ( he be in office when World War II begin in September , 1939 ) , he be one of those political leader who fail , until it be far too late , to perceive the menace of Hitlerism to France , to Europe and to the world. Irresolute , weak , intellectually unalert , Mr. Daladier push France a giant step along the road to her doom by join in the Munich Pact of September , 1938 , whereby his country 's ally , Czechoslovakia , be virtually dismembered and Adolf Hitler 's appetite for a war of genocidal conquest be sharpened. Mr. Daladier be not the architect of the pact ( British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain be that ) so much a an accomplice in it. He be not initially eager to abandon Czechoslovakia and France 's traditional balance-of-power policy. Indeed , he talk to Chamberlain once about attack Germany ; but he permit himself to be dissuade on the ground that such a step would surely result in a general war ; and ultimately he sign the pact along with Chamberlain , Hitler and Benito Mussolini , Italy 's Fascist dictator. Justifying his action , Mr. Daladier say at Munich : `` I believe we have do the reasonable thing. Should 15 million Europeans have be kill in order to oblige three million Sudeteners , who wish to be German , to remain in Czechoslovakia ? '' Astonished by Cheers Yet Mr. Daladier be shrewd enough to realize that yield to Hitler 's demand for German occupation of the Sudetenland be a grave diplomatic and military setback for France. Flying back to Paris , he voice somber thought for France 's future , and fear that he would meet a hostile reception from a public apprehensive over this late triumph of German bellicosity. To his astonishment , he be wildly cheered. `` I return , '' he tell the airport crowd , `` with the profound conviction that this accord be indispensable to the peace of Europe. '' However , accord to William L. Shirer 's `` The Collapse of the Third Republic , '' this episode also occur : `` To Gen. [ Maurice ] Gamelin , wait among the crowd of notable at the airport , he whisper : 'It be n't brilliant , but I do everything I could. ' Gamelin be think of the 35 Czech division lose , and [ Paul ] Reynaud needle him by ask : 'Where be you go to find 35 new division now ? ' Daladier , who be Minister of Defense as well a Premier , could not fail to think of them too. Still surprise at the tumultuous welcome along his route back to the capital , he be report to have turn to an aide and say : `` The imbecile -- if they only know what they be acclaim ! '' Political Success Story Mr. Daladier , in truth , be not a great leader but an agile politician , most of whose adult life up to 1940 have be pass in climb the slippery pole of public advancement. Born June 18 , 1884 , in Carpentras , a village near Avignon in southern France , Edouard Daladier be the son of a baker. Bright in school , the young man be send to the Lycee Duparc in Lyons , where he meet Edouard Herriot , then a teacher and later a leader of the Radical Socialist party , who be to introduce his protege to politics. Won Mayoralty in 1912 On graduation , he teach history , first , at the University of Nimes , then at Grenoble , Marseilles and in 1919 at the Lycee Condorcet in Paris. Meantime , in 1912 , he enter politics by win the mayoralty of his home town ; and two year later he stand for the Chamber of Deputies and be beat by the Radical Socialist candidate. Invoking an ancient political rubric , he join the Radical Socialists. In World War I Mr. Daladier go into the army a a sergeant and be demobilize a a captain with a Croix de Guerre and the Legion of Honor win in action. A war hero , Mr. Daladier have no trouble be elect to the Chamber of Deputies a a Radical Socialist from the town of Orange in the Department of Vaucluse. He be re- elect consistently for the next 20 years. With the help of Mr. Herriot , the leader of the Radical Socialists , Mr. Daladier find a place in the Cabinet in 1924. He be represent in every subsequent Cabinet in which his party participate , either a Minister of War , Colonies , Education , Public Works or National Defense , or a Vice Premier or Minister of Foreign Affairs. At last , in 1933 , Mr. Daladier become Premier , form a Cabinet that last nine months. In this period , he and his Foreign Minister , Joseph Paul-Boncour , attempt to establish a four-power directorate for Europe consist of Britain , France , Germany and Italy. The pact be shatter by Germany 's defiant exit from the League of Nations , the beginning of a series of event that lead to Munich and World War II. Mr. Daladier 's second Premiership be in early 1934 , and last only 11 days. He be oblige to resign after his vigorous effort to quell Paris demonstration on Feb. 6 over a financial scandal result in some 20 deaths. Ironically , he have be appoint Premier because of public confidence in his personal probity , a confidence that be justify by Mr. Daladier 's atypical disinterest in graft. Then and later he live quite simply , content with an unpretentious apartment heavy with books. Moved Away from Left Not notably social , he prefer small gathering , such a the salon maintain in the late thirty by his mistress , the Marquise de Crussol , the handsome daughter of a wealthy sardine packer. It be at the Marquise 's salon that he accommodate himself to French business and industrial interest after he drop out of the leftist Popular Front of 1935- 38. In that period Mr. Daladier not only serve a Minister of War , but he also make a number of platform appearance with Leon Blum , the Socialist leader , and Maurice Thorez , the Communist chieftain. In these speech he declare his enmity to `` a financial oligarchy from whom power must be wrest and give back to the people. '' However , when he become Premier for the third ( and final ) time in April , 1938 , his Government move perceptibly to the right. He move to abolish the 40-hour factory week , break strike by force and seal the Spanish border , thus effectively help Francisco Franco to crush the Republican Government of Spain. In the year between Munich and the start of World War II , Mr. Daladier be publicly optimistic about the chance of peace while build up , a best he could , his country 's armaments. When Germany open the war with an attack on Poland , France could no longer ignore her treaty obligation to an ally , and enter the conflict. 'The Phony War' However , instead of attack Germany from the west , France keep her soldier in the Maginot fort , and what come to be know a `` the phony war '' develop on the Franco- German front a neither side move against the other. Mr. Daladier , meanwhile , help to create a super-Maginot myth by declare on every occasion that `` formidable '' fortification have be construct on the Belgian frontier , with an implication that a German invasion be unlikely. Thus , when Hitler strike west in the spring of 1940 , the French public be ill-prepared for the swiftness of the German advance , the dispatch with which the Maginot Line crumple and the thrust across the Belgian border , where the defense prove virtually nonexistent. But by the time the German blitzkrieg open , Mr. Daladier have resign a Premier ( he step down March 20 after lose a vote of confidence ) although he remain in the Cabinet of Paul Reynaud , his successor , until June 2. Neither in France 's defeat , which occur in the middle of June , nor later , be it suggest that Mr. Daladier be lack in patriotism : His judgment be question but not his commitment to France. Denounced Petain Regime Indeed , under the pro-German Vichy regime of Marshal Henri-Philippe Petain , Mr. Daladier be arrest and try for war guilt at Riom in 1942. He be accuse of declare war against Germany without Parliament 's concurrence and with have fail to equip the army properly. At his trial he courageously denounce the Vichy regime , and be imprison first in France and then in Germany. He be liberate by American troop in 1945. After the war he be elect to the Constituent Assembly , in 1946 , and seat by a vote of 311 to 132 in a challenge to his war record .