September 26 , 1970 OBITUARY Erich Maria Remarque Is Dead ; Novels Recorded Agony of War Special to The New York Times GENEVA , Sept. 25 -- Erich Maria Remarque , the German-born author who attain world fame with his World War I novel `` All Quiet on the Western Front , '' die at noon today of a heart collapse at the Sant Agnese clinic at Locarno , Switzerland. He be 72 year old. A naturalized American , Mr. Remarque make his residence at Porto Ronco on the Swiss shore of Lake Maggiore for 40 years. At his bedside when he die be his wife , the actress Paulette Goddard. Mrs. Remarque say by telephone that her husband 's heart collapse have be bring on by an aneurysm , a tumor form by the dilatation of an artery. He have be suffer for four month , she said. A funeral service be to be hold Sunday at the Roman Catholic Church at Ronco , a village near Mr. Remarque 's residence. Burial will be at the village cemetery `` overlook the Lake Maggiore that he love so much , '' his widow said. Compassionate Storyteller By ALDEN WHITMAN The power to move people by word , to arouse their sensibility as well a their mind , be Erich Maria Remarque 's to an extraordinary degree. He demonstrate it again and again in novel that sell in the million , but in none so much a in `` All Quiet on the Western Front. '' A novel of unrelenting realism of battle action in World War I , it be publish in Germany in 1929 a `` Im Westen Nichts Neues. '' The English translation appear the same year in the United States. Its stark description of the physical agony of battle be write with anger and with grief for the plight of the conscript soldier , who be depict in his lyric moment and in his most crass. A moralist who be indignant , even passionate , Mr. Remarque shun the superficial explanation of war a man 's inhumanity to man and stroke to discern it power politics and to identify the `` they '' who send million to their deaths. `` I see how people be set against one another and in silence , unknowingly , foolishly , obediently , innocently slay one another , '' Paul Baumer , the protagonist in `` All Quiet on the Western Front , '' says. `` I see that the keen brain of the world invent weapon and word to make it yet more refined and enduring. '' And in his most recent book , `` The Night in Lisbon , '' there be no question for Mr. Remarque that World War II be Hitler 's war , in which the `` master race '' be to exterminate the Jews and other `` nonpeople. '' 'Best Story of the War' Mr. Remarque ( pronounce Raymark ) be compare with Ernest Hemmingway for the terseness of his style and with Stephen Crane for his compassion. To H. L. Mencken , `` All Quiet on the Western Front '' be `` unquestionably the best story of the World War. '' Christopher Morley call it `` the great book about the war that I have ever seen. '' A rash critic once rank Mr. Remarque just below Thomas Mann a the fine writer of his age in Germany. This be hardly so , for Mann , like Proust , dissect a whole society , an entire era. Nonetheless , Mr. Remarque help to liberate German write from it stodgy formalism by bend language to his will. Mr. Remarque have an uncommon ability a a storyteller. None of his novel , not even such an undistinguished one a `` Arch of Triumph , '' ever creak , nor be his `` point '' or moral obtrusive. He count on narrative to convey his philosophy. `` All Quiet '' be not the first of the World War I novels. Henri Barbusse have write `` Le Feu '' in 1916 and John Dos Passos `` Three Soldiers '' in 1921. Hemmingway 's `` A Farewell to Arms '' come out in 1929 , the same year a `` All Quiet. '' But it be Mr. Remarque who capture reader all over the world , for `` All Quiet '' be the conscript soldier 's war par excellence , whose modern counterpart be Norman Mailer 's `` The Naked and the Dead. '' Reflected Own Service Part of the book 's impact trace to the fact that it reflect Mr. Remarque 's own service a a German soldier and part to the disillusion with World War I that be widespread in the late nineteen-twenties. Speaking for the common soldier , Mr. Remarque sum up a popular mood by have one of them say : `` We be forlorn like child , and experience like old men ; we be crude and sorrowful and superficial -- I believe we be lost. '' The book get it ironic title from a recurrent sentence in the Kaiser 's high communiques. `` All quiet on the western front , '' the communique say , gloss over the harsh reality of gaunt , hollow-eyed , frightened soldier in the trench-lined battle zones. Mr. Remarque 's 10 novel deal with some aspect of the futility and horror of war , of it capacity to dehumanize not only it immediate participant but also those on the periphery of the conflict. The book be read by million and motion picture base on many be see by million more. `` All Quiet on the Western Front , '' for example , sell 1.2 million copy in Germany in it first year. It be translate into a dozen language and be still sell well in the United States in paperback editions. In 1930 , the Hollywood film version appear , with Lew Ayres , Louis Wolheim , John Wray , Slim Summerville , Russell Gleason and William Bakewell. It become a film classic , rereleased a number of time and show often on television. Book Burned by Nazis The Nazis condemn the book and the film by throw them both into a huge bonfire of `` objectionable '' literature in front of Berlin University on May 10 , 1933. According to the Nazis , the book and the movie display `` treachery toward the German soldier of the World War. '' The first showing of the movie in Berlin set off street riot generate by Nazi gangs. On Dec. 6 , 1930 , Joseph Goebbels , later the Propaganda Minister , break up a showing by throw stench bomb and loose white mouse into the theater. A few week later , the picture be ban a `` prejudicial to German national prestige. '' In the early fifty the movie be reintroduce in West Germany and it play to large and enthusiastic audiences. The profit from `` All Quiet on the Western Front '' be enormous. Mr. Remarque spend much of them on art , and he accumulate an impressive collection of painting by Van Gogh , Cezanne , Renoir and Degas. Mr. Remarque , a quiet , soft-spoken man , be once describe a resemble a halfback on an American football team. He be tall , blond , athletic appearing and handsome. He hat publicity and do not like to meet strangers. Nonetheless , in the late thirty he build up quite a reputation in New York a a nightclubber. He be frequently see at the Stork Club and at 21 , but it be say that he be not a carouser so much a a night owl with a taste for fine food and memorable champagne. When he be in Hollywood he be the constant companion for several year of Marlene Dietrich , who be say to have be the model for the actress heroine in `` Arch of Triumph. '' Mr. Remarque be bear in Osnabruck in Westphalia on June 22 , 1898 , the son of Peter Maria Remarque and his wife , Anna Maria. His father be a bookbinder whose family have settle in the Rhineland after the French Revolution. Wounded Five Times The young Remarque be educate in Osnabruck and later at the University of Munster. At the age of 18 , he be draft into the German Army and serve on the Western front. He be wound five time -- the last time seriously. After the war , he work a a teacher , a stonecutter in a cemetery , a race-car driver , a test driver for a Berlin tire company and an advertising copywriter. He begin write article for a Swiss auto magazine and then become assistant editor of Sport in Bild , an illustrated sport magazine. In 1929 , he finish the novel that have be on his mind since the war. The manuscript be reject by one publisher and reluctantly accept by another. Following the success of the novel , Mr. Remarque retire to Porto Ronco to write and to care for his war-injured lungs. His exile become permanent in 1938 when the Nazis deprive him of German citizenship. His first literary success be follow by a sequel , `` The Road Back '' in 1931 , which deal with the problem of the return soldier in adjust to peace. The novel be a uncompromisingly critical and bitter a it predecessor. A film version be say by critic to have lose much of it savage antiwar message. Novels Before War Mr. Remarque write two more novel before the world again be engulf by war , `` Three Comrades '' in 1937 and `` Flotsam '' in 1941. They be make into film , with `` Flotsam '' appear a `` So Ends Our Night. '' In 1939 , the author come to the United States. While he be en route on the Queen Mary , war break out in Europe , and the vessel sail part way accompany by a British cruiser. Interviewed at the pier in New York , Mr. Remarque be deeply distressed. `` I would like to tell you in a few sentence what I think of the war , '' he say , `` but I can't. I think there be no reason in the whole world for any war , think what you will. This will not be a war on the front. It will be a war on woman and children. '' During the war , he work on `` Arch of Triumph , '' which be publish in 1946. It be a story of a love affair between a German refugee physician and an actress , set in Paris in the day just before World War II. The book , which have a huge sale , be generally accept a a serious and absorb book , although many critic be revolt by it brutality and sensationalism. One reviewer write that `` powerful writing and many fine touch of characterization be clot for want of selection. '' The book be make into a film in 1947 with Charles Boyer and Ingrid Bergman. Mr. Remarque become a United States citizen in 1947 and divide his time between New York and Lake Maggiore. Two year before become a citizen , he say that `` I be no more German for I do not think in German nor feel German , nor talk German. Even when I dream it be about America , and when I swear , it be American. '' His next book , publish in 1951 , be `` Spark of Life , '' a grim picture of life in a German concentration camp. It be follow by `` A Time to Love and a Time to Die '' in 1954 and `` The Black Obelisk '' in 1957. `` Heaven Has No Favorites '' appear in 1961. It be a story of the love of a successful auto race driver for a girl in a tuberculosis sanitarium and their subsequent tour of Europe. Orville Prescott , a reviewer for The New York Times , describe it a the `` least successful of all of Mr. Remarque 's novel , '' add : `` In fact , it be very poor indeed. '' `` The Night in Lisbon , '' Mr. Remarque 's most recent novel , be issue in 1964 by Harcourt Brace & World. `` It be a brilliant novel and a strange one , '' Charles Poore write in The Times , `` not completely successful but hauntingly moving. '' The book describe the spiritual and physical agony of refugee flee without the paper that would make their existence legal. Faith in Humanity Mr. Remarque saw his time , he once say , a a conflict between `` technological progress and cultural regression. '' He be chill by the possibility that an impersonal scientism would triumph and , with it , a frigid nihilism. Against this he pose an almost old-fashioned faith in the vitality of humanity. Paul Baumer may have die on the day the German communique report all be quiet on the Western Front ; but Josef Schwartz , in `` The Night in Lisbon , '' affirm the humanist value of love , faith and affection. What give Mr. Remarque his stature a a novelist be this belief that man be inextinguishable. Not even a Hitler can quench the human spark. Mr. Remarque be a conscientious craftsman. According to Denver Lindley , one of his translator , the author work `` for year over each of his novel , turn out ( in neat , precise longhand ) one draft after another until the final one be achieved. '' Frequently , Mr. Lindley say , Mr. Remarque even rewrite the typescript. A spokesman for Mr. Remarque 's publisher , now Harcourt Brace Jovanovich , Inc. , say yesterday that he have complete another novel and that it be be edited. Mr. Remarque also write a play , `` The Last Station , '' which open to critical acclaim in Berlin in 1956. The drama be about the fall of Berlin , and it central character include member of Hitler 's Schutzstaffel ( elite guard ) , women-chasing Russian soldier and fugitive from Nazi concentration camps. Wrote Film on Hitler He also write a screenplay , `` The Last 10 Days , '' a graphic speculation on the manner in which Hitler die and the event lead to the end of the Third Reich in a Berlin bunker. It be base on a book , `` 10 Days to Die , '' by M. A. Musmanno and be produce by an Austrian film company. Mr. Remarque make his only movie appearance in the brief role of a schoolteacher in the last Hollywood adaptation of `` A Time To Love and a Time To Die. '' In 1923 Mr. Remarque marry Ilsa Jeanne Zamboui. They be divorce in 1932 and remarry in 1938. A year later , when Mrs. Remarque arrive in New York , she be detain apparently because of passport irregularity , and be oblige to go to Mexico. They be later divorce again. In 1958 Mr. Remarque marry Miss Goddard in a civil ceremony in Branford , Conn .