November 11 , 1970 OBITUARY De Gaulle Rallied France in War and Strove to Lead Her to Greatness By ALDEN WHITMAN `` Your reply be go to determine the destiny of France , '' an intense , solemn yet age voice tell the French people on April 25 , 1969 , `` because if I be disavow by the majority of you , my present task a chief of state would obviously become impossible [ and ] I would immediately stop exercise my functions. '' That curiously aloof yet paternal voice , which in 1940 have exhort a prostrate nation to rise from defeat and fight still against a merciless and omni-present enemy , and which in the year after 1958 have rally a country to grandeur and glory beyond her size and resource , have now lose the compelling eloquence that less than a year earlier , have seem invincible. Thus it be that two day after his appeal for confidence over a relatively minor issue , Charles de Gaulle be repudiate by 53 per cent of the voters. And within 12 hour he depart the splendorous Elysee Palace on the bank of the Seine in Paris , his residence for almost 11 year , for his plain home in the tiny village of Colombey-les-Deux-Eglises. More than the end of a singular political reign , it be the end of an era. That era start virtually unobserved on June 18 , 1940 , when an obscure temporary brigadier general , have escape to London from a batter and disorganize France about to capitulate to Nazi Germany , exhort his countryman to continue in a war that he perceive would evolve into a world conflict. `` But have the last word be say ? '' the 49-year-old officer ask in his pungent speech in a British Broadcasting Corporation studio. `` Must we abandon all hope ? Is our defeat final and irremediable ? To those question I answer -- No ! `` For remember this , France be not alone. She be not alone. She be not alone. Behind her be a vast empire , and she can make common cause with the British Empire , which command the sea and be continue the struggle. '' He conclude with these characteristically self-confident word : `` I , General de Gaulle , now in London , invite French officer and men who be at present in British soil , or may be in the future , with or without their arm ; I invite engineer and skilled workman from the armament factory who be at present on British soil , or may be in the future , to get in touch with me. `` Whatever happen , the flame of French resistance must not and shall not die. '' Very few Frenchmen hear that impromptu broadcast ; and at first very few hearken to it. In Britain , too , de Gaulle be unknown except by a few Cabinet minister and Prime Minister Winston Churchill. Churchill , however , have an intuitive confidence in him , have already address him a `` l'homme du destin. '' `` He carry with him in his small airplane the honor of France , '' Churchill write later of the general 's flight to Britain. Although it seem ludicrous to some that de Gaulle , with a mere 100,000 franc and a handful of volunteer , could put together a Free French cause , the general exude total faith in himself. `` When leader fail , '' he write , `` new leader be project upward out of the eternal spirit of France : from Charlemagne to Joan of Arc to Napoleon , Poincare and Clemenceau. Perhaps this time I be one of those thrust into leadership by the failure of others. '' And allude to his self-conceived mission he write in `` The Call to Honor , '' the first of his three-volume war memoir : `` What I be determine to save be the French Nation and the French State. What I have to bring back into the war be not just Frenchmen , but France. '' In a tone that appear to derive from Louis XIV , he add : `` C'etait a moi d'assumer la France. '' ( `` It be up to me to take responsibility for France. '' ) This merger of identity -- in which de Gaulle believe himself to be the incarnation of the nation stand superior to faction -- account for many of his action , just a it roil his critics. His certainty that he be France ( `` Je suis la France , '' he declare in 1940 ) sustain him through many mutation of fortune before the country 's liberation in mid-1944 ; and it embolden him when he be shape the Fifth Republic , decolonize the empire , free Algeria , create a nuclear capability and fashion a foreign policy design to give France an independent world stature. His certainty , which some saw a hubris , or arrogance , also contribute to his downfall -- to his blindness to the domestic economic disaffection that turn public opinion against him. As he emerge in 1940 , de Gaulle appear tailor to the role of a man of destiny. Describing him after his initial broadcast , Pierre Bourdan write : `` I saw a man of another age. Very tall [ he be 6 foot 4 inch ] , he be wear a uniform and legging and hold himself extremely straight. But this erectness , accentuate by his thrown-back head and by his arm , which follow exactly the line of his body , seem a natural and comfortable position for him. A Preordained Look `` The bearing of his head , so very remote , and the expression of his face show his intransigence. `` The chief characteristic of his eye be that they be oblivious of the outer world. Their expression could not change to suit the mood of the people around him. Their look seem preordained ! '' It be this hauteur that permit him to stride into the pantheon of hero in August , 1944 , a he lead a Paris liberation parade from the Arch of Triumph to Notre Dame. Cheered by two million people in an explosion of national fervor , he experience his fine hour , his apotheosis. It be the hauteur , too , that exasperate Allied leader during the war. `` The Cross of Lorraine [ de Gaulle 's emblem ] be the heavy cross I have ever have to bear , '' Churchill once bristle , although he concede in another context , `` Never mind , he defy all . . . '' The general 's fervid nationalism ( `` France can not be France without greatness '' ) impress Stalin , and it seem to him that this idiosyncratic conception of France explain de Gaulle. `` He be not a complicated man , '' Stalin remark at the Yalta Conference in 1945. He think that give France an occupation zone in Germany be a courtesy gesture , not a right she have win in the war. President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's relation with de Gaulle be hostile from the outset. Suspicious of the general , Roosevelt saw him a `` more and more unbearable , '' a petty , vainglorious and , potentially , a dictator. These attitude , reinforce by gossip from French exile in the United States and by adverse report from the State Department and from pro- Vichy diplomat , involve the United States in a search for alternative to de Gaulle up to the liberation of Paris. `` De Gaulle may be a good man , '' Roosevelt tell Churchill in 1943 , `` but he have a messianic complex. '' One result of the President 's mistrust be to foster in the hypersensitive de Gaulle an animosity toward the United States. He never forget that the United States try to maneuver him into turn over Free French leadership to Gen. Henri-Honore Giraud in 1943 ; that the United States do not recognize the French National Committee until mid- 1944 , and then only grudgingly ; and that Roosevelt have blackball him from Yalta. Although impersonal factor undoubtedly enter into the general 's American policy , he be convince on the basis of his own experience that the United States , in the war and later , be seek `` to settle Europe 's future in France 's absence. '' This sentiment harden , and in the nineteen-sixties he believe the evidence of world event show that the United States be aggressive , be engage in `` a dirty little war in Vietnam '' and be a menace of great magnitude to European and world stability. This estimate undoubtedly underlay his effort to scuttle the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and American arming of West Germany. It also be in part responsible for his diplomatic initiative in Latin America , Africa , the Soviet bloc , China and Southeast Asia. Tweaking the eagle 's beak be not only a calculated sport ; it be also a constituent of French glory. Although much be make of de Gaulle 's aloofness and his sibylline utterance , the founder and first President of the Fifth Republic be less of a mystery to those who have read his philosophy of leadership , a set down in `` Learning fil de l'epee '' ( `` The Edge of the Sword '' ) in 1932. 'The Mark of Grandeur' Doctrine , character and prestige , he write , be the indispensable ingredient in a leader. `` It be essential that the plan on which the leader have concentrate all his faculty shall bear the mark of grandeur , '' he wrote. And on another page he say , `` First and foremost there can be no prestige without mystery , for familiarity breed contempt. '' As another precept , he speak of calculate the effect of an action. `` The great leader have always carefully stage-managed their effect , '' he noted. Summing up , he say : `` The statesman must concentrate all his effort on captivate men 's minds. He have to know when to dissemble , when to be frank. He must pose a the servant of the public ... to be it master. He must outbid his rival in self-confidence , and only after a thousand intrigue and solemn undertaking will he find himself entrust with full power. '' In the first year of the Fifth Republic de Gaulle do indeed seem to `` concentrate all his effort '' on establish his authority and his personality. In large matter , such a liquidate the Algerian war , he serve a a unifier by cast what amount to a spell over metropolitan France. This be nurture by episode of personal courage in hostile crowd : He be shoot at but never hit ; plot against him failed. In small matter , too , de Gaulle make certain that he project perfection. Every detail of a trip , a speech , a news conference be work out in advance ; whatever appear to be a spur-of-the-moment gesture be a well-rehearsed bit of stage business. For television he take lesson from an actor ; he practice before a mirror ; he learn his text by heart. Equally carefully prepare be his hand-shaking excursion into crowds. However , because he be near-sighted and dislike to wear glass , he often shake hand with member of his own security guard along with those of the public. In each case , though , there be a stately personal greeting : `` Bonjour , madame '' ; `` bonjour , monsieur '' ; `` bonjour , mon petit. '' Groundwork for Visit When it come to generate goodwill abroad , de Gaulle be indefatigable. For his 12-day trip to the Soviet Union in 1966 , for example , he read up on all the place he be to visit and work reference to them into his speeches. Moreover , he take the trouble to conclude every toast with a few word in Russian , even once use a Pushkin quotation. Although de Gaulle like to invest every event with as much pomp a it could wear , he skimp on his state banquets. A rapid eater , he set the pace for his guest , who often have their plate snatch away three-quarters full. These repast be cheeseless ( de Gaulle do not fancy the small ) and fruitless ( he think fruit take too long to peel ) . An entire banquet rarely last more than an hour. The fact that de Gaulle stand on his dignity so markedly in public give rise to report that he be equally ceremonial in private. One such story have de Gaulle 's wife , Yvonne , return to the Elysee from shopping , slump into a chair and exclaiming , `` God , I be tired. '' Her husband be suppose to have reply , `` I have often tell you , my dear , it be sufficient in private if you address me a 'Monsieur le President. ' '' Actually , de Gaulle be quite unformidable in his private moments. After dinner , he and his wife , a self-effacing woman who be popularly know a Tante Yvonne , spend many evening watch television , especially the light programs. On Thursday afternoon , a school holiday in France , their grandchild often come to tea at the Elysee. De Gaulle have two survive child , Philippe , a naval officer on his father 's staff , and Elizabeth , the wife of Gen. Alain de Boissieu. Another daughter , Anne , be bear a Mongoloid and die when she be 20. Of his decision in 1940 to try to build a resistance movement at the bleak moment of the war , de Gaulle write : `` I felt within myself a life come to an end -- the life I have live within the framework of a solid France and an indivisible army. '' And indeed the first 49 year of his life be solidly conventional. Charles Andre Joseph Marie de Gaulle be bear Nov. 22 , 1890 , in Lille. Members of the less nobility , conservative and stanchly Roman Catholic , the de Gaulle family have furnish soldier , lawyer and writer to France since at least 1210. Henri , Charles 's father , be lay headmaster of the Jesuit College of the Immaculate Conception in Paris when his son be born. He also teach Latin , Greek , philosophy and literature there and at his own school after the Society of Jesus be expel from France in 1907. Charles 's mother , Jeanne Maillot-Delannoy , be his father 's cousin , and , like her husband , she be intensely patriotic and conservative. In childhood , Charles be much expose to family conversation about the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 , in which his father have be wounded. Talk center on France 's ignominious loss of Alsace-Lorraine and the abject defeat of the French Army. Indoctrinated to believe that the army be the quintessence of France , the young man have little choice but to be a soldier , and in 1910 he enter Saint-Cyr , the officer-training academy. Graduated two year later , he join the 33d Infantry Regiment at Arras command by Col. Henri-Philippe Petain. The life of the two men become ironically entwined. Early in World War II , when de Gaulle found the Resistance , his old Arras colonel , then a Marshal of France and head of the collaborationist Vichy regime , have him condemn to death for desertion. When the table be turn after the war , Petain be condemn to death for treason , and de Gaulle , the provisional President-Premier of France , commute his sentence to life imprisonment. In World War I , de Gaulle , who be wound three time and capture by the Germans at Verdun , win a Legion of Honor and achieve the rank of captain. Afterward he teach briefly in a Polish military college , then at Saint-Cyr ; then , become a protege and close friend of Petain -- who be godfather to de Gaulle 's son , Philippe -- he spend two year at the army staff college. Post on Defense Council In 1925 Petain attach his friend to his secretariat in the Supreme War Council. Two year later he become a major and serve for two year in the occupation army in the Rhineland and two year in the Middle East. De Gaulle return to France in 1932 , become a lieutenant colonel and , at Petain 's intervention , be name secretary to the High Council of National Defense , a post that he hold for five year and that bring him into everyday touch with the country 's military leaders. The job also give him his first close-up view of parliamentary politics , by which he be not favorably impressed , for in five year no few than 14 Cabinets chase one another in and out of the swing door of the Chamber of Deputies in the Palais Bourbon. De Gaulle 's career up to this point have not be brilliant , despite Petain 's patronage. One reason be the officer 's spit-and-polish personality ; another be his scholarly but unorthodox book , `` Vers l'armee de metier '' ( `` Toward a Modern Army '' ) , publish in 1934. Scornful of several pet army doctrine , include conscription , the book also disparage the Maginot Line , a supposedly impregnable fortress system along the French-German border. Equally upset to the reign military mind be de Gaulle 's proposal for a modernized army with an elite mobile tank force at it head. This striking force , he argue , could overrun and disorganize enemy territory , which later could be occupy by foot soldiers. When World War II break out , de Gaulle be a colonel in command of a tank regiment in Metz. When Hitler , after chew up Poland , turn on France , the debacle that de Gaulle have foresee take place : The Maginot Line be turn and northern France be overrun by Nazi tanks. In the sweep de Gaulle , with his meager force , give a good account of himself and be make a temporary brigadier general -- the young in the army at that time. Premier Paul Reynaud bring him into the Cabinet June 5 , 1940 , a Under Secretary of Defense. In this capacity he meet Churchill for the first time on a visit to London June 9. It be about then that he come to his momentous decision -- that event make it evident that Britain would remain in the war , that it would become worldwide and that he would try to organize French resistance base on the colonies. A few day afterward , in France , he sit next to Churchill at dinner. `` Our conversation confirm in me my confidence in Churchill , '' de Gaulle recalled. `` And no doubt he also grasp that de Gaulle , though helpless at the moment , be a full of resolve a himself. '' Epic Task Undertaken After the discomfited French Government flee to Bordeaux and prepare to sue for an armistice , de Gaulle take flight to London. Assuming there the epic task of organize a resistance , he be recognize June 28 by the British Government `` a the leader of all the Free French , wherever they may be , who will rally to him in defense of the Allied cause. '' With a mystique already sprout around him , de Gaulle be able , by claim to embody France ( and no one challenge him then ) , to draw into his cause the governor of French Equatorial Africa , the Chad and the French Cameroons. This give de Gaulle a territorial base that , however far remove from the war theater , be at least more imposing than his office in Carlton Gardens. Some of the edge be take off his first success when his small naval expedition to Dakar be easily repulse by the Vichy garrison. Although he set up a Council for the Defense of the Empire in Brazzaville , the French Congo , and raise the Cross of Lorraine there , the Dakar failure make American recognition of the Vichy regime seem plausible. The setback also hold down his follow inside France. A further setback in Syria in May , 1941 , when Free French troop fail to win over Vichyite soldier , almost make de Gaulle a chanticleer without a flock. But a month later , in June , 1941 , the Soviet Union 's entrance into the war dramatically alter de Gaulle 's fortune by produce two important development : direct Free French contact with the Russians and the start of an active Resistance in France , now organize by the energetic French Communist party. Ultimately , in July 1942 , the Soviet Union set it seal upon de Gaulle a the Resistance leader. By then the underground war in France be a flourishing arm enterprise of men and woman of many political convictions. Meanwhile , de Gaulle take astute political advantage of the Soviet Union 's entry into the war by organize , in September , 1941 , the French National Committee , a virtual government in exile , with himself a chairman. The general , however , be far from receive United States recognition and cooperation. On the contrary , Roosevelt , urge on by Adm. William D. Leahy , his envoy to Vichy , and by Robert W. Murphy , his representative in Algiers , seek an alternative to de Gaulle , someone more complaisant. The Americans ' choice fell on General Giraud , a Petainist who be take out of France to North Africa , where he be appoint French commander in chief in late 1942. At about the same time Adm. Francois Darlan , a Vichy man who think the time have come to jump on the Allied bandwagon , arrive in Algiers. A deal be conclude whereby he become the chief French authority in North Africa , but his tenure be cut short by his assassination under mysterious circumstance on Christmas Day. General Giraud be then appoint civil and military commander. In these murky dealing de Gaulle could not be ignore completely , for he have support in the colony and in France ; and in a complicated series of maneuver Roosevelt and Churchill bring de Gaulle and General Giraud together at a conference at Anfa , near Casablanca , in late January , 1943. A fragile alliance be fabricate , symbolize by a handshake for cameramen. But General Giraud , with his conservative association and his political ineptitude , be sack a co-chairman of the Committee of National Liberation within a year. Even in control of the committee , however , de Gaulle do not have the confidence of the Americans a the man to govern France after the war. W. Averell Harriman , the diplomat , sum up official feeling when he write : `` Unfortunately de Gaulle be think more of how he be go to rule France than of way of liberate her. That be his great flaw. Also , he be extremely vain and imagine himself a sort of Joan of Arc , and that make work with him difficult. '' The hunt for a more pliable leader lead to proposal to keep de Gaulle out of France after the Normandy landing in June , 1944. It also account in part for the fact that only a token French force go ashore on D-Day. This so irked de Gaulle that 20 year later he refuse to attend commemorative rite at the Normandy beaches. `` The Anglo-Saxons , '' he write , `` never really treated u a real allies. '' Circumventing Britain and the United States , the de Gaulle committee declare itself the Provisional Government of France ; and then , on June 13 , the general and a tiny group of aide make a quick , almost stealthy , trip to Bayeux , where he receive a hearty welcome and where he appoint a Gaullist governor for Normandy. De Gaulle do not return to France until Aug. 20 , have meet meanwhile with Roosevelt in Washington and establish a superficially cordial relationship. One result be Washington 's recognition of his committee a `` qualify to exercise the administration of France. '' He go on to establish his personal authority in fact in a tremendous outburst of emotional frenzy that convulse Paris when he lead a triumphal march from the Arch of Triumph to the Cathedral of Notre Dame on Aug. 26 , 1944. Paris have be liberate the day before by the combined effort of armed Parisians , Gen. Jacques Leclerc 's Second Armored Division and American troops. But de Gaulle , tall , smartly turn out in his military best , be the one person on whom the hero 's mantle seem to fall. If he at this moment be not France , who be ? 14 Fitful Months In the day that follow , de Gaulle create a moderate Government of National Unanimity , which last for 14 fitful months. During it tenure , he take pain to cold-shoulder leftist group in the Resistance and to disarm their paramilitary units. Even so , he do not satisfy President Harry S. Truman , who tell him bluntly on a trip to Washington in August , 1945 , not to expect much American financial help unless he throw out the few Communists in his Cabinet. In October , 1945 , the French , disavow the Third Republic , elect a Constituent Assembly. With it convocation , which foreshadow the Fourth Republic , de Gaulle become a parliamentary executive , a role for which he have no liking. So , give the excuse that the `` regime of party '' have again emerge , he resign in January , 1946. His sojourn , though , be brief , for he emerge from `` retirement '' in April , 1947 , to call for formation of a Rally of the French People ( Rassemblement du Peuple Francais ) -- a party against parties. It be a venture that the general 's admirer be later to play down. At first he attract thousand to the Rally a , in a bid for centrist and rightist backing , he inveigh against the Communists and the trade unions. The Rally have a grand success in the municipal election of 1947 , gather nearly 40 per cent of the votes. But de Gaulle overplay his hand by issue a virtual ultimatum to the National Assembly that seek an immediate general election. The demand agitate the Assembly and dismay many in the Rally 's rank-and-file who still think a bad republic preferable to a good tyranny. Moreover , the paramilitary character of Rally meeting disquiet public opinion , a do de Gaulle 's friendly reference to Dr. Konrad Adenauer , the West German leader. No U.S. Backing In any event , the Rally do not obtain significant big-business support and it fail also to attract the United States , which place it confidence and it Marshall Plan money in such politician a Robert Schuman and Jules Moch. De Gaulle seem too unreliable. By 1954 , when his Rally be in disarray , de Gaulle 's spirit be so buffeted that he could say , `` J'etais la France '' ( `` I be France '' ) . And in July , 1955 , he announce his retirement from public life. `` I say farewell to you , '' he tell newsmen. `` We shall not meet again until the tempest again loose itself on France. '' He be near his 65th birthday. From then until the middle of 1958 , he live at Colombey , where he complete `` The War Memoirs of Charles de Gaulle. '' He also travel to the French West Indies and the Pacific. More important , he receive politician at Colombey and journey to Paris once a week for political chat in his office on Rue Solferino. The `` tempest '' that bring de Gaulle openly back to public life , and to power , be the war in Algeria , under way since 1954. The Fourth Republic , already sting by the loss of Indochina and the defeat at Dienbienphu , be bedevil by the conflict against the Algerian Nationalists. By 1958 some 35,000 French troop be in Algeria attempt to contain 15,000 insurgents. The brutal war be unpopular in France , where it cost be cut into a spreading prosperity ; but no Cabinet know how to liquidate it without risk an army coup. The crisis come in May , 1958 , when hysterical Europeans in Algeria seize Government office with the aid of army officers. There be talk of a rightist coup in Paris. Almost automatically attention swung to de Gaulle , and he be ready -- with a statement that say : `` In the past , the country from it very depth entrust me with the task of lead it to salvation. Today , with new ordeal face it , let the country know that I be ready to assume the power of the Republic. '' After two week of frenetic political dealing he be invest a Premier of France on June 1 and give decree power for six month with the right within that time to submit a new Constitution. He be accept by the army in the belief that a general would surely support the war. Abandoning demagoguery and proceeding with caution and adroit double talk , he move to dismantle the French Algerians ' Committees of Public Safety while appear to place confidence in Gen. Raoul Salan a the Government representative in Algiers. With the immediate crisis muffle , a Constitution for the Fifth Republic be draft that place effective power in a President rather than in Parliament. It be ratify by an 80 per cent majority of the voter , and in December de Gaulle be elect President for a seven-year term that begin Jan. 8 , 1959. Certain of his position in France , de Gaulle remove General Salan and , over a year , transfer to France 1,500 army officer associate with the French Algerian diehards. Nevertheless , in January , 1960 , there be an army-led insurrection in Algiers , which be contain with the arrest of the ringleader and the cashiering of some rightist generals. In November of that year de Gaulle suggest an independent Algeria , a proposal that be endorse in a referendum in France and Algeria in January , 1961. Orderly progression to independence be thwart , however , by the rise of the Secret Army Organization and by the obduracy of many French Algerians. Terrorism spread into France , while the unrest and violence in Algeria culminate in rebellion there in April , 1961. De Gaulle act with firmness and energy. The revolt collapse , and three of it four leader go into hide while the fourth be jailed. Independence for Algeria Finally , in September , 1962 , an independent Algerian regime be establish and within a year about 750,000 French Algerians emigrate to metropolitan France. All this be accomplish in the face of Secret Army terrorism that include two attempt to assassinate the President. In the second attempt , in August , 1962 , a bullet miss his skull by an inch. Turning to his bodyguard , he remark : `` This be get to be dangerous. Fortunately , those gentleman be poor shots. '' Once the Algerian problem be solve , de Gaulle be able to flex French muscle in Europe and around the world. A mighty ingredient of the `` new '' France be her development of an atomic bomb , which come about in 1960 , when a device be explode in the Sahara. Further test indicate a considerable military potential. De Gaulle 's European policy be aim at restore France to a position of greatness. This involve , on the one hand , an entente with the Soviet Union and , on the other , an effort to keep Britain and the United States at a distance. The Russian phase of his policy entail a dramatic trip to the Soviet Union in mid-1966 and visit to other Eastern European nations. His relation with Britain , never comfortable , seem to reflect a belief that she be an American satellite. This be say to account for his veto of Britain 's bid ( the first rebuff be in 1963 ) to join the Common Market , a six-nation economic group compose of France , West Germany , Italy , Belgium , the Netherlands and Luxembourg. De Gaulle profoundly disagree with United States policy in Europe , and he eventually decide to withdraw France from NATO. He bar American nuclear warhead from French territory and deny French rocket site to the United States. At the same time he sharpen his attitude toward West Germany , call that country at one point `` America 's Foreign Legion in Europe. '' In addition , he establish diplomatic relation with Peking and nettle Washington by condemn the Vietnam war. His policy toward West Germany , however , prove ambiguous. On the one hand , de Gaulle be alert to the potential danger of militarism across the Rhine. On the other hand , he seek to mute the hatred generate by World War II. In this spirit , he tour West Germany and invited German official to Paris. He seem to realize that European stability could not be achieve unless the government in Bonn play it part in the economic and political life of Western Europe. An Alternative Sought He also strive to exert leadership in the nonaligned world by try to create an alternative to the dual hegemonics of the United States and the Soviet Union. Polarization of the world into two antithetical camp , he believe , tend to increase global tensions. French nuclear development , he felt , help to overcome an American-Soviet atomic monopoly. At the same time , he could not resist shock American opinion. He encourage French- Canadian separatism. He court Latin America , a United States preserve. In the Middle East , he lean to the Arab cause against the Israelis by cut off the flow of French arm to Israel. Indeed , de Gaulle generate strong resentment among many Americans , some of whom even refuse to visit France or purchase French-made good while he be in power. De Gaulle 's first term a President of the Fifth Republic expire in January , 1966. He be elect to a second term , but only after a runoff in which he receive 55 per cent of the votes. The principal attack on him come from the Left , temporarily unite under Francois Mitterrand , on account of his essentially conservative domestic policies. Inflation and wage restraint bore heavily on the work class. It be domestic discontent that eventually bring him down. Grandeur -- membership in the nuclear `` club , '' foreign aid in Africa ( include support of Biafra ) and elsewhere , stockpile of gold reserve , pioneer in supersonic air travel -- cost million of francs. This meant austerity at home at a time when a nation of chiefly small shopkeeper and farmer be struggle to transform itself into a more modern country. The transition bring with it tension in virtually every segment of society. There be dislocation in the countryside a corporate farming increase ; in the city supermarket begin to appear , doom the neighborhood grocery and meat stores. And more and more industrial worker be employ in large and large enterprises. In education , more student than ever before crowd the university and study under curriculum and pedagogical practice that be clearly irrelevant to the times. In an effort to accommodate the influx of student , satellite of old university be set up , a at Nanterre , just outside Paris. It be at Nanterre that open rebellion against de Gaulle break out in the spring of 1968. The issue be reform of education. Students at the graceless concrete school occupy a classroom on March 22 , and be rout by the police , who use steel rod a spears. The number of militant student -- many of them commuter from Paris -- grow and the authority close the university in early May. Thereupon a group from Nanterre meet with a Sorbonne group to plan a joint protest. From this mild beginning sprang `` the event of May , '' a month-long clash of social , economic and political force that generate a near-revolution. The Sorbonne student go on strike , and be club and buffet by the police. The turmoil spread to the province , and soon the relatively prosperous son and daughter of bourgeois parent be battle not just oppressive education but government itself. Meanwhile , the student ' spirit of audacity spread to the worker , who have their own discontent , and soon there be factory sit-ins. These grow despite effort of union leader to calm the situation , and all France seem engage in crisis demonstration and strikes. At first aloof to the disorder , de Gaulle pass the early day of the turmoil in write out in longhand the speech he be go to deliver in Rumania. And , indeed , he visit that country later in the month. When he return to Paris he find that the situation be ... out of hand ; and after a quick conference with army leader , then in Germany , to obtain assurance of their support , he begin to resolve the crisis , first by act to pacify the 10 million striking worker with pay increase and then by crack down far on the students. Finally , on May 30 , he dissolve the National Assembly and warn the country in an emotional radio speech ( the Government-run television system be on strike ) that he would restore law and order with all the mean at his disposal. There be an implied threat that 30,000 French troop might be on their way back to France from Germany. De Gaulle fear , he say , the possibility of a Communist `` dictatorship. '' Immediately after he speak , hundred of thousand of his adherent throng the Place de la Concorde in Paris to voice their support. This segment of society , apprehensive over the possibility of a social revolution , prove to be his temporary bulwark. Leftist element , include the Communists , back down from the barricade , decide to take their chance in the National Assembly election make necessary by de Gaulle 's dissolution of that body. The `` day of May '' be over. Posing a choice between chaos and himself , de Gaulle win a big victory in the elections. He seem more in control than ever , and strong enough to bar devaluation of the franc in the fall of 1968 , when most sign point to the necessity for such action. However , a Georges Pompidou , then the Premier , remark shortly after the student-worker insurgency , `` Things would never be quite the same again. '' What have take place during May constitute a fatal undermining of the contention that de Gaulle be the incarnation of France. He might win a National Assembly victory , but it be clear that his policy do not correspond to the aspiration of either French college youth or the workers. The proof that de Gaulle have lose the adherence of his people even a he have win their vote in June , 1968 , come over a relatively minor issue -- the future regional structure of France and the role of it Senate. The matter be to be settle in a referendum in April 1969 , which at first create only slight interest. Then de Gaulle inject himself. The result of the voting be to be a test of public confidence. Precisely why he choose to make the referendum a personal matter be conjectural. As an autocrat he may have felt that he require the extra bolstering that victory would bring him. Perhaps he felt , too , that he could again discomfit his domestic enemy on the Left. Perhaps also the megalomania that often accompany old age may have be a factor in his decision. In any event he gamble on what he be convince would be an assured success. His tactic of May and June , 1958 , be use again : the attempt to frighten the elector with the threat of Communism and chaos should the voting be adverse. Where would they be without de Gaulle ? he asked. The general be unprepared for the results. He be persuade , until the return be indubitable , that he would triumph. He leave office still dazed. Retiring once more to Colombey with a secretary , a bodyguard , a chauffeur and his $ 35,000 pension , he set to write his memoir , date from 1958. `` The Renewal , '' the first of a project three-volume `` Memoirs of Hope , '' be publish last month. Such be the magic of his name and interest in the event recount that 250,000 copy be sell in a few days. At Colombey , though , he vanish into political silence. When he retire in 1969 , the long personalist epoch of Charles de Gaulle be over .