May 13 , 1971 OBITUARY Col. Florence Blanchfield , 87 ; Ex-Head of Nurse Corps , Dies Special to The New York Times WASHINGTON , May 12 -- Col. Florence A. Blanchfield , who a superintendent of the Army Nurse Corps direct 60,000 Army nurse in World War II , die today in Walter Reade Hospital. She be 87 year old and make her home with a sister , Mrs. Ruth Ordnoff in Arlington , Va. Tribute to Heroism Florence Blanchfield be the first woman to receive a commission in the Regular Army. In make the presentation of her commission in a ceremony in 1947 , Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower pay tribute to the heroism of the Army nurses. The War Department credit Colonel Blanchfield , who at the time have spend 30 year in the Army Nurse Corps , with be `` largely instrumental in secure full military rank for nurses. '' She marshal her argument for `` full '' rather than `` relative '' rank at hearing before a succession of Congressional committees. Full rank be win on a temporary basis in July , 1944 , and be make permanent by the Army and Navy Nurse Corps Law of April 16 , 1947. Behind all the argument be a matter of down-to-earth pay -- or , in today 's term , should woman earn less than men for the same work ? In March , 1942 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt appoint Mrs. Julia O. Flikke , Miss Blanchfield 's predecessor a superintendent , a a colonel and Miss Blanchfield a a lieutenant colonel. The Controller General then rule that there could not legally be a woman colonel in the Army. He issue Colonel Flikke the pay of a major and Lieutenant Colonel Blanchfield the pay of a captain. It take a new law to permit the rate of pay to catch up with the rank. Took Secretarial Course Florence A. Blanchfield be bear on April 1 , 1884 , at Shepherdstown , W. Va. She attend the public school of Walnut Springs , Va. , and be graduate from the Granda Institute of Granda , Va. She take a secretarial course at the Martin Business College of Pittsburgh and other course at the University of California and Columbia University. Her attention then turn to nursing , and she study at Pittsburgh 's South Side Training School for Nurses , from which she be graduate in 1906. She take a postgraduate course in surgical technique and operate room supervision at Dr. Howard Kelly 's Sanitarium and at Johns Hopkins Hospital and work in three Pennsylvania hospitals. A year of work in the Canal Zone follow , with general and anesthetic duty , and she become industrial nurse at the United States Steel Company 's plant at Bessemer , Pa. In 1916 she go to the Suburban General Hospital in Bellevue , Pa. and then , in 1917 , take a military leave. She enter the Army Nurse Corps on Aug. 20 , 1917. Miss Blanchfield , who never marry , concern herself with the privilege of Army nurse to take a husband. In June , 1944 , with the war still on , she report that over a four-month period an average of 14 nurse each day become wives. At the time the Nurse Corps number about 40,000. It be another six month , in January , 1945 , that the Navy Nurses Corps permit nurse in service to marry without resigning. The Navy at the time still bar married nurses. The reason for the reluctant acceptance of the married nurse be the hard fact that nurse who want to be marry be resign in large number , and the only way to keep them , it seem , be to permit them to be married. Miss Blanchfield , in service in many country , China , the Phillipines and Europe in addition to a number of Army installation in the United States , pay tribute to the nurse ' aide , and add : `` We have no fear of there be a surplus of nurse after World War II a after World War I . ''