September 12 , 1971 OBITUARY Khrushchev 's Human Dimensions Brought Him to Power and to His Downfall By ALDEN WHITMAN Late in the afternoon of Friday , Feb. 24 , 1956 , a short , rotund , round-headed , gleamingly bald , baggy-suited man step to the microphone at the conclude session of the 20th Congress of the Communist party of the Soviet Union , from which all foreign delegate and reporter have be excluded. `` Comrades , '' he begin in his somewhat harsh-hoarse deliberate voice , `` in the report of the Central Committee of the party. . . in a number of speech by delegate to [ this ] congress . . .quite a lot have be say about the cult of the individual and about it harmful consequences. '' It be well after midnight when the session adjourn , and what the delegate have hear in Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev 's 20,000-word speech be nothing less than a documented , count-by-count indictment of Josef Stalin , then dead about three year and who for a quarter-century have be hold up to the Soviet people , Communist and non- Communist , and to Communists throughout the world a the infallible genius-leader of his country who have advance it unerringly toward Socialism. What some delegate may have suspect but refuse to credence , Mr. Khrushchev , the First Secretary ( chief ) of the Soviet party , lay bare with whiplash candor -- that Stalin , start with the terrible purge year of the thirty , have bring about the death of thousand of innocent person ; that he have rule the party and the country by terror and torture ; that he have be pusillanimous in World War II ; that he have become increasingly vainglorious to the point even of write his own encomium , and that he have set up `` serious obstacle [ s ] in the path of Soviet social development. '' Some of the detail be overdrawn , but the portrait be unmistakably horrifying. Thus , the burden of the speech be to put the blame for the evil of Stalinism on Stalin 's personal shortcoming , while seek to make clear that the dictator 's associate , include many of those on the congress podium -- and the speaker himself -- have be powerless to alter those terrible events. Speech Widely Circulated Although this extraordinary speech be never print in the Soviet press , it be circulate to an astonish public through the Communist party apparatus and mark the start of a 10-year de-Stalinization of Soviet life. The speech be widely publish in the West ( the United States State Department obtain a copy from Yugoslav source and make it available to newspaper ) and it start a chain reaction in the reassessment of Soviet Communism. In speak out with such uncompromising bluntness , Mr. Khrushchev exhibit some of the brash daring that characterize his 10 year ( from 1954 to 1964 ) a one of the world 's most powerful men. The risk be obvious. Could Stalin 's reputation be denigrate without destroy the structure of the system that have make him possible ? Mr. Khrushchev gamble that it could -- and he win , although many observer doubt that he have calculate all the implication of his bravura speech. Apart from preside over the vast change in Soviet and Communist policy that flow from de-Stalinization ( no less profound for the comparatively quiet manner in which they be carry out ) , Mr. Khrushchev put new emphasis on the bread-and-butter goal of Communism. ( `` And what sort of Communist society be it that have no sausage ? '' he often asked. ) Moreover , under the compulsion of the hydrogen bomb , he champion a policy of peaceful coexistence ( symbolize in the 1963 nuclear test ban treaty ) between Socialist and capitalist state , question the popular dictum that war between them be probably inevitable. ( He be certain that Communism could provide more abundance than capitalism and would triumph in a peaceful world on account of it material attractions. ) Mr. Khrushchev also accept some national difference among Socialist country , a in the mixed economy of Poland and Yugoslavia ; but not in Hungary , where he deal with attempted revolt in 1956 a counterrevolution. Outside the Soviet sphere in Eastern Europe , he be less flexible. He tolerate Castroism for Cuba , but not a a model for South American revolutions. He have much less use for the Chinese way to Socialism and exacerbate the split in the Communist world in an acidulous quarrel with Peking over economic aid , the proper strategy against American `` imperialism '' and the Sino-Soviet borders. Mr. Khrushchev introduce a new style into Soviet politics. Whereas Stalin be reclusive , his successor be a tireless traveler and speaker who become intimately acquaint with the city , town and village of his country. Moreover , he oblige his deskbound associate to get out of their office , admonish them not to be afraid `` to get mud on your boots. '' In create a personal sense of hustle and sweat , he be practice what he preach when he tell a Communist leader that the way to success be `` Be popular. '' Just a he journey about his own country and Eastern Europe , so he travel extensively in the world outside. As a travel salesman for Soviet policy ( and by implication for Communism ) he initiate a personal diplomacy that take him to China , India , Britain , France , Switzerland , Austria and the United States. In two visit to this country , he confer with President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1959 , trek to California , shuck corn in Iowa , appear on television ; and in the fall of 1960 he be here for a meeting of the United Nations Assembly , at which , in a fit of pique , he take off his right shoe and bang it vigorously on his desk. Behind these travel be not only his voracity for firsthand knowledge of people and event but also a belief that statesman could and should deal with one another face to face. It be in that vein that he cooperate in the establishing of a `` hot line '' between the White House and the Kremlin in President John F. Kennedy 's Administration. Some of the very extrovert trait that give Mr. Khrushchev his human dimension account for his downfall. By nature an impatient and impulsive man , he promise his people more than he could deliver. With two excellent harvest in 1956 and 1958 , he pledge in 1959 that in seven year the per caput real income of Soviet citizen would rise by 40 per cent and that the minimum wage would be doubled. There would also be a 40-hour week. And by 1970 , agriculture and industry would be produce more than their American counterparts. The Soviet Union be embark on a new stage of it history -- the `` full-scale construction of Communist society. '' One of the key to the new era of plenty be a gigantic stride in meat and grain production. But try and improvise a he might , he could not achieve an output to match his grandiose expectations. He fly in the face of expert by try to grow corn in unsuitable areas. in open up so-called virgin land in Siberia and in too-hasty reorganization of the cumbersome farm and industrial bureaucracy. The result be that economic and bureaucratic dislocation contribute heavily to his ouster. And not the least of those who turn against him be the bureaucrat whose traditional way and power relationship he threatened. Another ingredient in Mr. Khrushchev 's ouster be the failure of his gamble in the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 to pay off. Although he claim at the time to have obtain what he want -- an American pledge not to attack Cuba -- many in the Kremlin believe that the affair be a first-class miscalculation. He be damage also by the American U-2 spy plane incident in 1960 and the subsequent breakup of a Paris summit meet with President Eisenhower. After Mr. Khrushchev 's first visit to the United States , he insist to his colleague that President Eisenhower be a reasonable man and that statesman could promote international amity through personal understandings. This homespun theory , part of his impatience to mute the cold war , be severely strain when the U-2 be shoot down over the Soviet Union and President Eisenhower take the responsibility. For a fourth thing , his bumptious conduct then and on other occasion , such a the shoe- banging at the United Nations , embarrass some of his associate who felt that more dignity befit the leader of a great superpower. Some of them , too , have be bully by their leader in explosion of temper and be delight to vote his ouster. Ranged against him , too , be powerful voice in the army. To allocate capital for agricultural supply and machinery , he be oblige to cut down on spending for heavy industry and defense. The army , which have earlier support him , be dismay by his scheme to achieve defense at the low possible cost and element of the officer corp , whose job be threaten , join in the pressure against him. Mr. Khrushchev also cause alarm by the escalation of his quarrel with Mao Tse-tung , the Chinese leader. It have long be a shibboleth of Marxist think that the Communist world be necessarily a single entity since it derive from a single doctrine , and the Soviet leader 's China policy seem to many Soviet and other Communists to threaten the fraternal spirit of world Communism. His handling of the Mao situation be cite specifically in his ouster. An additional count against him be his action in split the Communist party into industrial and agricultural section , to enhance party control of all aspect of the economy. The party , in effect , be to concentrate on economic , not political , tasks. The step be take precipitately in 1962. According to Mark Frankland , a British expert on Mr. Khrushchev 's fall , `` the plan be bind to upset just those party official on whom Khrushchev have to a large extent build his own power. '' `` In particular , '' Mr. Frankland note , `` it threaten the interest of the regional party boss by split their domain in two and so reduce their status and influence. '' Finally , there be Mr. Khrushchev 's willfulness as well a what seem an increase tendency to take the spotlight. His enemy accuse him of both lack of foresight and building a cult of personality. He do indeed push his plan through the Politburo and be unwilling to accept frustration of his ideas. And he do seem to insist on adulation. The combination of all his shortcoming come to more than outweigh his virtue in the eye of his colleague , and he be pension off in October , 1964. But it be a measure of the change he have wrought that he be vote out of office , not shoot , and that some of his key policy , such a peaceful coexistence and arm limitation and emphasis on Soviet consumer need , be take up by his successor , albeit in a less flamboyant fashion. Part of Mr. Khrushchev 's success a a Soviet leader be his idiosyncratic style -- his easy and infectious smile that show the mark gap between two front teeth , his thunder anger , his earthy wit , his use of old Russian proverb , his capacity for strong drink , his rapport with worker and farmers. When he talk he jab his chubby finger at the chest of the person listen to him , and he could say some impolitic thing such a tell Western diplomat at the Kremlin , `` History be on our side -- we will bury you. '' Or tell an envoy from a Mediterranean country , `` Get out of NATO or we will drop a nuclear bomb on you. '' When the ambassador protest that `` you be such a big country and we be such a small country. '' Mr. Khrushchev reply , `` That 's all right. For you we will use only a teeny tiny nuclear bomb. '' Impatient With Theory He be uncomfortable with intellectual and impatient with abstract theory -- both attitude that reflect his own life -- and his Marxism be one describe a a set of rather simple maims in which he believe deeply. This uneasiness with speculation for it own sake enable him to concentrate on practicality , but it also lead into situation in which he rely overmuch on theoreticians. For example , he give his blessing to publication of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 's `` One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich , '' a book that let some air into Soviet write about life under Stalin. But he also go along with the 1958 conservative ideological attach on Boris Pasternak for his novel `` Doctor Zhivago , '' which portray scene of the Bolshevik Revolution. Later , however , in retirement , Mr. Khrushchev find time to read the book and tell a Soviet friend that he do not understand what the fuss have be all about. `` We could have publish that book , '' he said. `` Maybe 200 word be questionable -- that 's all. '' It be a a practical man that Mr. Khrushchev rise from lowly beginning to the top in the Communist hierarchy. He be bear April 17 , 1894 , in the mud hut of his grandfather in Kalinovka , a poor village in Kursk Province , where Great Russia border on the Ukraine. `` My grandfather be a serf , the property of a landlord who could sell him if he wish , or trade him for a hunting dog , '' Mr. Khrushchev once recalled. `` My father be a farmer who work in the [ coal ] mine in the winter in the hope that he would some day earn enough money to buy a horse , so that he could raise enough cabbage and potato to fee his family. `` As for myself , I begin work as soon a I could walk. I herd calf , then sheep , and finally the landlord 's cow , until I be 15. Then I go with my father to the coalfield of the Donbas to work in the shop and mines. I work at a factory own by the Germans , at coal pit own by Frenchmen and at a chemical plant own by Belgians. There I discover something about capitalists. They be all alike , whatever their nationality. All they want from me be the most work for the least money that would keep me alive. `` So I become a Communist . . . I be not bear a Communist . . . . But life be a great school. It thrash and bang and teach you. '' In his brief account of his early year , Mr. Khrushchev omit to mention that he have not join the Bolshevik party until 1918 , about a year after the outbreak of the Russian Revolution. He have escape conscription during World War I because he be a skilled worker and he have help to organize strike among the Donbas miners. Once the Revolution begin in the late winter of 1917 , Mr. Khrushchev be active in practical measure in it defense and be a member of the Rutchenkovo Soviet. In the civil war Mr. Khrushchev fight a a member of the Red Guards , work in the political department of the Ninth Army in the Ukraine. His job be to form Communist unit among the troops. Having join the party from practical rather than theoretical consideration , he be well suit to recruit others who saw the party chiefly a the defender of `` their '' revolution. On his 1959 visit to the United States Mr. Khrushchev illuminate his feeling in those early year by recall one of his first meeting with intellectual `` when I still have coal on my hands. '' One of them , a woman , twit him about the ballet. `` And I must admit that at that time , '' he reminisce , `` I not only have never see a ballet , I have never see a ballerina. So I do not know what it -- what sort of a dish it be and what you eat it with. `` And I say , 'Wait , it will all come. '' If she be to have ask me then what it be that would come , I could not have give her any reply -- I do not know what would come. But I do know that the new and the good happy life would come. '' When the civil war end , Mr. Khrushchev return to Rutchenkovo a a party organizer. His first wife , whom he marry in 1916 , die , it be say , in the famine of 1921 , but this aspect of his life be obscure. His climb up the party ladder begin in earnest in 1922 , when he be send to the Don Technical College at Yuzovka to remedy his lack of formal education and to become acquainted with Marxism. At the college he be name party secretary , a post of considerable importance that he hold for three years. He also remarried. His wife , Nina , who accompany him to the United States , be a schoolteacher and be believe to have smooth some of his rough edges. On graduation , Mr. Khrushchev be appoint party secretary at Petrovo-Marinsky , a mining district in the Ukraine , where he distinguish himself for his bustling , first-hand knowledge of the mines. He be then under the patronage of Lazar M. Kaganovich , Stalin 's man in the Ukraine , and a such attend his first party congress -- the 14th -- in Moscow in 1925. Staling be then consolidate his hold on the party -- Lenin have die in 1924 -- and be move against his political enemies. Mr. Khrushchev , the record show , support Stalin without apparent reservation , and in a speech at the Ukrainian party congress in 1926 endorse the notion of `` repressive measure '' against Leon Trotsky , Grigory Zinovyev and Lev Kamenev. Meantime , he move up in the party apparatus , first to Kharkov and then to Kiev. Finally , in 1929 he be call to Moscow a a student at the Academy of Heavy Industry. Still back by Mr. Kaganovich , he be name party secretary at the academy and then , after a year , secretary of the district in which the academy be located. His rise be meteoric : second in command of the Moscow city party in 1933 ; it chief in 1934 ; membership in the party 's Central Committee the same year , make him one of a hundred or so most powerful men in the Soviet Union , and in 1935 party leader for the entire Moscow region. Mr. Khrushchev 's principal job be in the modernization of Moscow and especially in the construction of it subway , for which he receive his first Order of Lenin. No detail seem too small for him -- see to the cement supply , advise on the proper height for lay brick , suggest change in subway-car design. His definition then of a `` real Communist '' be one `` whose work be organize , whose machinery work and do n't lie abandon under all kind of rubbish '' and who `` each day , each hour control matter effectively. '' Mr. Khrushchev 's exertion in Moscow coincide with what have be call the Soviet Union 's `` Iron Age '' -- a period when heavy industry and industrial construction be stress a part of Stalin 's goal to build Socialism in one country , which mean make the Soviet Union as strong a possible in as brief a time a possible. It be also a period of forced collectivization of agriculture , in which hundred of thousand of peasant die , and of the `` show trial '' in which Stalin 's opponent be oblige to confess to horrendous crime before they be executed. Of the 139 member of the Central Committee elect with Mr. Khrushchev in 1934 , about 100 be arrest and shoot by 1938. Not a Stalin Intimate Mr. Khrushchev appear to have be a extravagant in his praise for Stalin during the purge a any party leader , but he be not then a Stalin intimate. Of his activity and thought during the purge , he be extremely guarded. Indeed , he be later to suggest that he be ignorant of Stalin 's murder of innocent Communists. Speaking in 1963 , he say : `` It be ask , do the lead cadre of the party know of , let u say , the arrest of people at the time ? Yes , they knew. But do they know that people who be innocent of any wrongdoing be arrest ? No This they do not know. They believe Stalin and do not admit the thought that repression could be apply to honest people devote to our cause. '' Having survive the bad of the purge , Mr. Khrushchev be elect to the Politburo in 1938 and dispatch to the Ukraine a first secretary of the party there. The party leadership in the Ukraine be replace and a membership purge undertaken. Mr. Khrushchev be both Stalin 's scourge and the one who help rebuild a shattered party. His toughness be say to have be unrelenting also in manage the Ukrainian economy. The Ukraine give Mr. Khrushchev his first concentrated experience with agriculture , for that country be ( and be ) one of the Soviet Union 's chief grain areas. Improving the harvest provide scope for his initiative and administrative talents. He get out among the farmer and in his unsubtle but effective fashion stir the party to such activity that the grain yield rose. And although he be away from Moscow , he come to be regard a a farm expert and his speech be reprint in Pravda , the party newspaper. The Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in June , 1941 , hit hard at the Ukraine -- and at Mr. Khrushchev. According to Mr. Frankland 's biography , `` The shock of the first disastrous month of the war have it impact , too , on Khrushchev 's relation with Stalin. '' `` Up to the war , '' Mr. Frankland write , `` there be no evidence that Khrushchev ever question his leader , but this simple relationship be destroy by the war , and be never re-established. It be possible that Khrushchev 's belief in Stalin 's infallibility be first shake at the very start of the war. '' During the war , Mr. Khrushchev not only represent the party at the front but also direct partisan warfare behind the German lines. He take part in the initial severe setback of the Soviet Army in the Ukraine and in the triumphant stand at Stalingrad in 1942. For his effort at Stalingrad , one of the principal hinge of the war in the Soviet Union , he be make a lieutenant general , and he march with the Red army a it retake the Ukraine in 1943. After the war Mr. Khrushchev be in charge of rebuild the Ukraine , the most damage of any area in Europe. Americans with the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Agency who saw him there remark about his concern for the tiny detail of his job -- he be Premier as well a party leader -- and his bounciness , Milovan Djilas , the Yugoslav Communist , find him use folk proverb and saying to rally his associate and report that Mr. Khrushchev `` delve into detail , into the daily life of the Communist rank and file and the ordinary people. '' Improvement , Not Change `` He do not do this with the aim of change the system , '' Mr. Djilas continue , `` but of strengthen and improve thing under the exist system. '' Rivalries at the top of the Soviet Communist party in 1946 almost do Mr. Khrushchev in. He come into conflict with Georgi M. Malenkov over the asserted low level of `` ideological work '' in the Ukraine and with Stalin over spring wheat , which the dictator favored. Mr. Kaganovich be send into the Ukraine to run the party , while Mr. Khrushchev be leave a Premier. This episode be unclear in detail , but apparently Mr. Khrushchev work his way out of disgrace , although there be report later that he have almost be purge by Stalin. In any event , after a year , Mr. Khrushchev improve his situation ( his difference with Mr. Malenkov continue , however ) and at the end of 1949 he be bring to Moscow a head of the party organization and a one of the Central Committee secretariat , which run the party day by day. Until Stalin 's death in 1953 , Mr. Khrushchev live a somewhat precarious existence , he indicate in his secret speech of 1956. On other occasion he relate that Stalin have force him to dance a peasant dance and to sit in a puddle of beer. More seriously , the two differ about agriculture. Whereas Stalin be content to sweat the peasant , Mr. Khrushchev seem genuinely concern to increase party control over the farm , to create more efficient production unit and to raise the standard of living. One instance of this be his proposal in 1950 and 1951 to create `` agrotowns '' -- grand village that would be center of farm life. Under criticism he call them `` collective farm settlement , '' but this fail to save him from Mr. Malenkov and others who chide him in public in 1952. More to the point , he be relieve of supervision over farming. At this time Stalin 's paranoia be grow -- a plot of distinguished Jewish doctor to kill Soviet leader be concoct in his brain -- and Mr. Khrushchev suggest in his 1956 speech , even those close to the dictator felt apprehensive for their safety. In these circumstance Stalin 's death a the result of a stroke be timely , `` I weep , '' Mr. Khrushchev later tell W. Averell Harriman , the American diplomat. `` After all , we be his pupil and owe him everything. Like Peter the Great , Stalin fight barbarism with barbarism but he be a great man. '' The chubby Mr. Malenkov be Stalin 's immediate successor , but in the wheeling and deal he be either force or persuade to drop his job a principal party secretary while retain the Soviet Premiership. This step give Mr. Khrushchev his opening , for he take over virtual control of the party organization -- machinery that he know best of all. Moreover , shortly after Stalin 's death , he come to the fore in a critique of agriculture , with an implied promise of a good life for all. With the elimination by shoot of Lavrenti P. Beria , the state security chief , Mr. Khrushchev and Mr. Malenkov engage in a duel for power with agriculture one of the main point of difference. Mr. Khrushchev 's theme be the low state of farm production and the cry that `` Communist society can not be build without an abundance of bread , meat , milk , butter , vegetable and other agricultural products. '' And to encourage farmer , he be willing to increase money incentive and to chastise Moscow bureaucrats. When the 1953 harvest fell short of prediction , he have increase leverage against Mr. Malenkov. At his urging , an area equal to the entire cropland of Canada -- some 75 million acre -- of virgin and fallow land in Siberia and the Urals be plow and sow to grain by an army of young people send out from the city of European Russia. Also he call for widespread corn-planting , gain the nickname of Nikita Kukuruznik ( Nikita the Corn Man ) . Although these measure be denounce by some of his colleague a gamble , they pay off heavily in 1956 and 1958 , when abundant rainfall permit the virgin land to contribute a record grain crop. His corn proposal be less successful , chiefly because large area of the Soviet Union be climatically unsuited for it. By early 1955 , Mr. Khrushchev have strengthen his position sufficiently to strike down Mr. Malenkov. He accomplish this in part by get army support ( he plead that the Soviet hydrogen bomb detonate in 1953 required strong defense ) , and in the new alignment Marshal Nikolai A. Bulganin be Premier and Mr. Khrushchev be the party leader. Together they be know a `` B & K. '' The maneuver that dispose of Mr. Malenkov ( whose policy Mr. Khrushchev be to adopt ) be one step in the development of a post-Stalin consensus. Another be dismissal of Vyacheslav M. Molotov , Stalin 's longtime Foreign Minister , which culminate in his removal from power in 1957 in the so-called `` antiparty '' affair. Meantime , in 1955 `` B & K '' make three journey abroad , in which Mr. Khrushchev display his energy and his extroversion to an astonish world. One of the most important of these trip be to Belgrade , where he apologize to Marshal Tito , the Yugoslav Communist leader , for Stalin 's expulsion of him from the Communist world in 1948. The reconciliation be never complete , but there be a general accommodation. Later , `` B & K '' go to Geneva , where they meet President Eisenhower and the leader of France and Britain and reiterate Soviet commitment to a policy of peaceful coexistence. `` Vigorous , downright and stubborn but prepared to laugh '' be British Prime Minister Anthony Eden 's comment on Mr. Khrushchev at Geneva. Foothold in Mideast One of the great foreign policy victory be in the Mideast. In the summer of 1955 he arrange an arm deal with Egypt that open the way for large-scale expansion of Soviet influence among the Arab peoples. He be also successful in woo such country a India , which he visit , and Indonesia , praise their third-world policy of neutralism and their struggle to rise from colonial status. As a salesman for Communism , he make three point : Peaceful coexistence and economic competition ; war between East and West could be avoid , and there could be different path to Socialism , include a parliamentary one. Although Mr. Khrushchev be clearly the chief Soviet leader from 1954 , when Mr. Malenkov go into effective eclipse , his position be vastly enhance by his `` secret speech '' at the party congress in 1956. Its theme -- that Stalin have abuse his power -- skip lightly over Mr. Khrushchev 's own role and that of his principal associates. However , by emphasize the corrective step the party have take since 1953 and be prepare to take , the speech cast Mr. Khrushchev in a favorable light : He be now to pursue a policy of fairness and strict legality. And there be in fact a thaw. Thousands of Stalin 's victim be posthumously rehabilitated. Criticism of Stalin appear in print. Some of the fear in Soviet life be muted. The authority of the party , a a collective group , be strengthen , and with it the principle of collegiality. And eventually , the speech contribute to the routing of Mr. Molotov and other hard-liners inside and outside the Soviet Union. Restiveness first show itself in Poland in October , 1956 , when the Poles propose to install a party leader Wladislaw Gomulka , a `` nationalist '' Communist whom Stalin have jailed. Mr. Khrushchev fly to Warsaw and confront Mr. Gomulka and his associate in a considerable rage , threaten the use of force to prevent a Polish defection. Mr. Gomulka , however , stand his ground and win out after pledge to keep Poland within the Moscow bloc. Immediately thereafter trouble break out in Hungary. A de-Stalinized government under Imre Nagy announce that Hungary would leave the Warsaw Pact , the Eastern counterpart of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. This , to Mr. Khrushchev 's mind , amount to counterrevolution , and the Nagy regime be crush with Soviet tank and replace with a more amenable government. The difference between Poland and Hungary appear to be that the Poles be willing to remain within the Soviet orbit , whereas the Hungarians be not. Mr. Khrushchev 's triumph over his foe be complete in 1957 , when Mr. Malenkov , Mr. Kaganovich and Mr. Molotov be outvote in the Central Committee after win an apparent victory in the Politburo. The three men be remove from their post and expel from the Central Committee , along with Dmitri Shepilov. Mr. Khrushchev have the help of Marshal Georgi K. Zhukov , who , however , be shortly ditch a be Marshal Bulganin , leave Mr. Khrushchev a both Premier and party leader -- the same dual role occupy by Stalin. For more than six year he would rule without serious challenge. He grow cocky and domineer with his colleague , unable to believe , until it be too late , that he could be deposed. In these six year , the jaunty and irrepressible Mr. Khrushchev have his diplomatic ups and down with the United States. One of the ups be his visit to the United States in September , 1959 , which follow a `` debate '' with Vice President Richard M. Nixon in Moscow over the relative merit of capitalism and Communism. The impromptu exchange take place in a model kitchen at the American Exhibition there. Arriving in the United States in a giant Tu-114 airliner , the Soviet leader get a decidedly mixed reception. He be think of a `` the butcher of Hungary , '' and there be hostility on the part of the press as well a from Roman Catholic prelates. He be , moreover , a Soviet Communist , a man many Americans have be condition to believe be a mortal enemy to the Republic. Mr. Khrushchev , however , come bear olive branch , say if `` the two big country in the world '' could develop amicable relation `` peace on earth will be more stable and durable. '' He barnstorm the country from coast to coast , appear on television , engage in off- the-cuff colloquy , visit Roswell Garst 's cornfield in Iowa , everywhere promote the idea of a Soviet-American detente. The most important result of the tour be an easing of world tension -- over Berlin , which have erupt in 1958 , and over nuclear testing -- that be symbolize in an Eisenhower-Khrushchev conference at Camp David , Md. Cordial relation give way to harshness in May , 1960 , when the Soviet Union shoot down an American U-2 reconnaissance plane and could display the wreckage of the craft as well a it pilot. The wrangle over the episode cause the collapse of a projected Eisenhower-Khrushchev summit meeting in Paris , but it do not seriously deflect Mr. Khrushchev 's policy of peaceful coexistence , although it do weaken the confidence of some Soviet leader in the virtue of personal diplomacy. Mr. Khrushchev return to the United States in September , 1960 , a chief of the Soviet delegation to the United Nations General Assembly. There be no official welcome and he be restrict to Manhattan and to weekend visit to Long Island. His presence provoke demonstration -- and incredulity , too. While Harold Macmillan , the British Prime Minister , be address the Assembly , Mr. Khrushchev interrupt him with heckle shout and table-thumping. Oblivious to decorum , he take off his right shoe , brandish it at one speaker and then pound it on his desk. And he refer to a Philippine delegate a a stooge and a jerk. After 25 day , he return home. His performance fail to please either the American pubic or his Soviet colleagues. When John F. Kennedy become President in 1961 , Mr. Khrushchev go to confer with him in Vienna. The purpose be to test each other 's intention , and Mr. Khrushchev be say to have come away with the belief that Mr. Kennedy lack a certain nerve. That impression may have contribute to Mr. Khrushchev 's willingness to place missile in Cuba in 1962 , follow the American Bay of Pigs invasion debacle in 1961. There appear to have be several motivation -- to strengthen Fidel Castro 's Socialism , to achieve an easy missile parity with the United States and , perhaps , to precipitate a situation that would lead to a Soviet-American summit session. `` If he could place Soviet medium-range missile in Cuba , '' accord to Frankland 's book , `` the main Soviet deficiency -- in long-range ICBM 's -- would to a considerable extent be overcome. The heavy pressure on him to concentrate all available resource on the defense industry would be largely relieved. '' Other commentator , however , insist that the missile be intend to provoke a crisis that would inevitably lead to a climactic summit. But Mr. Khrushchev reckon without Mr. Kennedy and the threat the President discern to the United States. A crisis be on , which be resolve late in October when the Soviet Union agree to withdraw it missile in return for a Kennedy pledge not to attack Cuba. In retrospect , there appear to have be a great sense of crisis in the United States than in the Soviet Union , where Mr. Khrushchev make point public appearance , include a chat with an American singer. There be little evidence that he be prepare for war -- and later he insist that he have obtain what he want -- the pledge on Cuba. Last month , a Soviet article base on official archive assert that Mr. Khrushchev have agree to withdraw the Soviet missile from Cuba after receive private assurance from Robert F. Kennedy that the United States would pull it missile out of Turkey. The Cuban adventure cost Mr. Khrushchev dearly in his worsen quarrel with Mao Tse-tung , who saw it a yet another example of his inability to deal with American `` imperialism. '' Differences with the Chinese Communists go back many year , but begin to be acute with Mao 's victory over Chiang Kai-shek in 1949. After 1949 Mao turn to the Soviet Union for material help , seek long-term credit and substantial quantity of capital goods. He receive some assistance , but not nearly so much a he believe one Socialist country should render to another. Mao also do not get the credit he felt he deserve for his Marxist sagacity in accomplish the Chinese revolution. Nor do he make any headway in his proposal for `` border rectification '' with the Soviet Union -- change that would have return some Chinese territory take away under the Czars. Moreover , Mao adopt a strong world revolutionary line , with American `` imperialism '' a it chief target. Taking into account the American setback in Korea in 1953 , Soviet nuclear gain and the Soviet sputnik in 1957 , he say -- at the 40th anniversary of the Russian Revolution -- that `` the east wind now prevail over the west wind. '' Offensive Urged by Mao The world situation , Mao be convince , have reach a turning point at which `` the Socialist force be overwhelmingly superior to the imperialist forces. '' The time be now , he indicate , to go on the offensive. But that be exactly what Mr. Khrushchev and his Soviet colleague be unwilling to do. They prefer , they say , to `` conquer capitalism with a high level of work and a high standard of living '' rather than to engage in warfare , although Mao offer his million of Chinese a troops. From 1957 onward , Mr. Khrushchev 's quarrel with Mao go from bad to worse. China do not get Soviet nuclear help , credit be discourage , technician be withdraw and by 1964 the exchange of polemic threaten to sever bond between the two country and the two Communisms. As bitterness with China escalate , Mr. Khrushchev be face with discontent at home. The virgin land and the corn program falter ; harvest be poor ; grain have to be import from the United States , and in 1962 meat and butter price be raised. Instead of the Khrushchev promise of a rapid advance to plenty , the economy be creaking. All of these thing come to a head in October , 1964 , when member of the Politburo be quietly call to a meeting , with Leonid I. Brezhnev in the chair. Mr. Khrushchev be on holiday at his villa in the Black Sea. The vote go against him both in the Politburo and in the Central Committee. It be all over quickly and without fanfare. Although Mr. Khrushchev have work tremendous change , there be no popular outcry for him. His unfulfilled promise of consumer good , his rough treatment of intellectual -- especially in 1962-63 -- and his attempt to reduce defense spending leave him with few devoted followers. He be officially `` relieve '' of his post and all but vanished. The fourth volume of the new 30-volume Soviet Encyclopedia , publish this April , even omit Mr. Khrushchev from it listing of prominent political commissar of World War II. From all report , he be a lonely man in his last years. Relatively well treat a a high- ranking pensioner , with a town apartment and a country villa , he himself choose to be secluded. Friends say that he never get over the shame of his fall stature. Every year , on election day , Mr. Khrushchev do his civic duty and go to the poll in Moscow. His gait be slow and his smile dim , even when a few bystander might greet him. In December , 1970 , Little , Brown & Co. publish a 639-page book -- and Life magazine publish excerpt -- entitle `` Khrushchev Remembers '' that purport to be his reminiscence make up of material emanating from `` various circumstances. '' Khrushchev issue a statement dissociate himself from the reminiscence in which he say of the material , `` This be a fabrication and I be indignant at this. '' The statement mark the first time his name have be mention on Soviet radio since he be depose in 1964. Even at his death , it have not be establish whether the book be authentic , but the weight of expert opinion be that much , if not all , of it be compile from authentic material .