A photographer whose portrait have compel or repel generation of viewers. By JAMES ESTRIN Diane Arbus be a daughter of privilege who spend much of her adult life document those on the periphery of society. Since she kill herself in 1971 , her unblinking portrait have make her a seminal figure in modern-day photography and an influence on three generation of photographer , though she be perhaps just a famous for her unconventional lifestyle and her suicide. Her work continue to spark fierce debate among photographer and intellectuals. Are her portrait — of circus performer , transvestite , mentally disabled people and others — empathetic acknowledgment of a share humanity , or be they exploitative depiction that seize upon their subjects’ oddity to shock her audience ? After her death , many critic who fancy themselves armchair psychiatrist have try to analyze her impulse , search for the role these encounter play in Arbus’s psyche. She be bear Diane Nemerov on March 14 , 1923 , to David and Gertrude Nemerov , and have two siblings. Her family own Russeks , an upscale Fifth Avenue department store found by her maternal grandparents. Raised in spacious apartment on Park Avenue and Central Park West in Manhattan , she be attend by nanny , maid , a cook and a chauffeur. At 18 , she marry Allan Arbus , an aspiring fashion photographer , and together they start a fashion photography company with the family store a their first client. After have two daughter , Doon and Amy , she quit the business to go off on her own a an editorial photographer and artist. Though the couple separate and eventually divorce , they remain close. Allan Arbus later become an actor and play the psychiatrist Dr. Sidney Freedman on the television series “M*A*S*H.” He die in 2013. Arbus work for publication such a New York Magazine , Harper’s Bazaar and The New York Times Magazine , shoot portrait and occasionally fashion , all the while barely cobble together a living even a her artistic success and reputation in the photography world grew. During her lifetime , there be no market for collect photograph a work of art , and her print usually sell for $ 100 or less. Today , the same print garner hundred of thousand of dollars. After suffer prolonged bout of deep depression , Arbus kill herself on July 26 , 1971 , by consume barbiturate and slash her wrists. She be 48. Throughout her career , Arbus break taboos — in her portrait of people push to the edge of society , and in her personal life. She often befriend her subject and even seduce them on occasion , accord to her most recent biographer , Arthur Lubow , in “Diane Arbus : Portrait of a Photographer.” Starting in the mid-1960s , she photograph couple in bed as well a orgy in which she sometimes participate , accord to Lubow. John Szarkowski , the influential director of photography at the Museum of Modern Art from 1962 to 1991 , champion her work and include it in his groundbreaking 1967 exhibit “New Documents.” A year after Arbus’s death , he curated a posthumous exhibit of her work that heroicized her and help to create a legend around her. In the wall text for the show , he write that her honesty be “a reward bestow for bravery in the face of the truth.” “Arbus do not avert her eye , ” Szarkowski go on. “She stick with her subject , explore their secret ( and thus her own ) more and more deeply. She be surely aware of the danger of this path , but she believe that her bravery would be equal to the demand she make of it.” Her critic be equally passionate. Susan Sontag savage her in a 1973 piece for The New York Review of Books. “Anybody Arbus photograph be a freak — a boy wait to march in a pro-war parade , wear his straw boater and his ‘Bomb Hanoi’ button ; the King and Queen of a Senior Citizens Dance ; a thirty-ish Westchester , NY couple sprawl in their lawn chair ; a widow sit alone in her cluttered bedroom. In ‘A Jewish giant at home with his parent in the Bronx , NY , 1970 , ’ the parent look like midget , as freakish a their enormous son hunch over them because the living-room ceiling be too low.” Still , many others embrace her after the 1972 MoMA exhibit and the publication of “Diane Arbus : An Aperture Monograph” the same year. Her fame seem only to grow a subsequent biography delve into her private life. For some , she become the Sylvia Plath of photography , admire in part because of the tragic element of her life. Arbus posing for a portrait in the Automat on Sixth Avenue between 41st and 42nd Street in New York City , circa 1968. Roz Kelly/Michael Ochs Archives , via Getty Images As a young photographer shoot street portrait at 16 with my father’s East German-made Exacta camera I , too , struggle with Arbus’s work. Attracted to her bold image of those outside the margin of respectable society , I be also repel by what I perceive to be an underlying coldness toward her subjects. My father , a physician , saw me look through the Aperture monograph and tell me he know something of her work. Eddie Carmel , the Jewish giant who be photograph with his parent by Arbus , be my father’s patient and over the year the two have become friendly. My father describe him a smart , sensitive and very funny but live a tragic life and unable to fulfill his most cherished desire. Carmel want to be a standup comic but could not break into mainstream show business because of his size. Carmel like Arbus a a person , he say , and this wasn’t the first time she have photograph him. But Carmel didn’t care for the image with his parent because it didn’t capture who he be inside — just what he look like outside. Arbus do not have a social justice agenda like her contemporary , the embedded documentarians Danny Lyon , Bruce Davidson and Larry Clark , who also photograph outsider , and she be a portraitist who often spend time with her subject , unlike the street photographer Garry Winogrand and Lee Friedlander , who be also pursue their personal visions. Her beginning in fashion and magazine portraiture hone her ability to produce instantly captivate , straightforward image , Matthew Witkovsky , chairman of the photography department at The Art Institute of Chicago , say in an interview. “She be move toward something that could be see a art-world acceptable , though that didn’t really exist for photography then , ” Witkovsky said. “She somehow manage to take all of the conventional category that you could put photographic work in at that time and then crosswire them without short-circuiting them. She open the door so you can be a photographer and have the high art aspirations.” After decade of intense examination of her work and life , perhaps there be room to understand Arbus a a woman drive by artistic vision as well a personal compulsion , and her photograph a document of empathy as well a exploitation. Arbus herself hint at the difficulty of understand and interpret images. “A photograph be a secret about a secret , ” she said. “The more it tell you the less you know.” James Estrin be a Times staff photographer and a co-editor of Lens , the Times photography column .