December 10 , 1971 OBITUARY Dr. Bunche of U.N. , Nobel Winner , Dies By ROBERT D. MCFADDEN Dr. Ralph J. Bunche , former United Nations Under Secretary General for Special Political Affairs and winner of the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize , die early yesterday in New York Hospital. He be 67 year old. Dr. Bunche , who suffer from a kidney malfunction , diabetes , heart disease and near blindness , be frequently hospitalize in recent months. He enter the hospital for the final time last Tuesday and die at 12:40 A.M. yesterday. Dr. Bunche have be with the United Nations since it founding and through year of crisis. His world be full of bias , misunderstand and belligerence , yet capable in his view of tolerance and accord. Its pole be war and peace , and between these he seek the balance of justice through diplomacy. Like his world , Dr. Bunche be a man of many face and talent , full of paradox and struggle. By training and temperament , he be an ideal international civil servant , a black man of learn and experience open to men and idea of all shades. At the United Nations , he have be a key diplomat for more than two decade since his triumphal success in negotiate the difficult 1949 armistice between the new state of Israel and the Arab states. As the architect of the Palestine accord , he win the Nobel Peace Prize of 1950. And many of his associate at the Secretariat and in government around the world could cite his accomplishment and accolade , mention their contact with him proudly. But in spite of his stature and reputation , Dr. Bunche be essentially a private man , eschew personal publicity and disclaim political ambition. Few people , save those close to him , know the detail of his middle-class childhood in Detroit , his youth a an orphan in the care of a grandmother , his adventure a a young stowaway and seaman , his toil in menial job in work his way through college and his real ambition a a young man -- to be a teacher. Nor could many recount his confrontation with racism , include his close escape from a lynch mob in Alabama , where he and Gunnar Myrdal , the Swedish sociologist , be gather material in 1938 for `` An American Dilemma , '' the book that forecast many development in race relation in this country. It be indeed difficult to say how the color barrier he encounter at hotel and restaurant -- even a a high official in the nation 's capital -- lace themselves into the fabric of his personality and skill a a mediator. At a negotiate conference table , he usually give the outward appearance of be calm , soft- spoken , unflappable. But there be sign , for those who would note them , of the deep turmoil in the man ; the chain-smoked cigarette , the darkening circle under his grave eye , the hoarseness in his baritone voice. Energy and Timing He could haggle , bicker , hairsplit and browbeat , if necessary , and occasionally it was. But the art of his compromise lay in his seemingly boundless energy and the order and timing of his moves. His diplomatic skill -- a masterwork in the practical application of psychology -- become legendary at the United Nations , for which he direct peace-keeping effort in the Suez area in 1956 , the Congo in 1960 and Cyprus in 1964. At his unannounced retirement last June , he be Under-Secretary General for Special Political Affairs -- Secretary General U Thant 's most influential political adviser. As such , he be the high American figure in the world organization and , incidentally , the most prominent black man of his era whose stature do not derive chiefly from racial militance or endeavor specifically in behalf of his race. He be deeply sensitive to racial problem , and often speak bluntly about them. But his perspective be above the day-to-day trial of discrimination ; indeed , he recognize that emphasize his light-skinned blackness could have damage his role a a mediator and neutral peace-keeper -- role in which he find more often than not an advantage in his blackness. Thrust Into Role The apex of his diplomatic career -- and , perhaps , the best example of his negotiate psychology- -came during the Palestinian talk on the island of Rhodes in 1948 and 1949. He have be thrust into the role of chief mediator after the assassination of the original appointee , Count Folke Bernadotte of Sweden , who be cut down by a terrorist fusillade in Jerusalem. The negotiating problem be vastly complex , century old , rife with racial and religious prejudice and overlaid with combustible economic and political frictions. A truce demand by the Security Council have break down. Large-scale fighting be under way. Thousands of life in the Middle East lay in the balance , and so do the very life of the fledgling United Nations , whose peace-keeping capacity be on the line. The Israeli and Arab delegation from the start be cautious , aloof and occasionally hostile. Dr. Bunche meet with both side separately to determine what kind of agenda to draw up , then call the delegation together to approve the agenda. These preliminary move seem simple and straightforward , but there be more to them than meet the eye. `` There be a double purpose , '' Dr. Bunche later explained. `` Primarily , it be to get both side to meet -- but also , I want them both to get accustom to take formal action , and to sign something. '' It do n't matter what -- just anything that look official , he explained. `` Whenever they get together , '' Dr. Bunche recall , `` you 'd always find that there be a gap between them. It be always a matter of timing , always a matter of find out when it would be appropriate to reduce a discussion to a formal , write draft of one point. We never would throw a whole draft at them at the beginning -- that would have scar them to death. '' At one exasperate point in the 81-day negotiating marathon , an impatient Israeli delegate hurl a pencil on the table , and it bounce up and hit an Arab delegate. The talk almost blew up. But Dr. Bunche privately reprimand the Israeli and get him to apologize. It be always touch-and-go. On another occasion , an Arab delegate refuse to shake hand with an Israeli leader. This nearly wreck the negotiation too. But Dr. Bunche , after much talk that smack of foreign intrigue , arrange what amount to a secret rendezvous between the two men who , it turn out , be grateful for the opportunity. `` This time they act like long-lost brother , '' Dr. Bunche recalled. `` Pretty soon they start to speak Arabic -- and then they apologize to me because they know I do n't speak the language. I say , 'Hell , speak your Arabic -- do n't bother -- about me. ' '' Eventually , the force of Dr. Bunche 's personality melt the frigid atmosphere of the talks. There be thousand of page of document , draft and counterdrafts , hundred of compromise and ultimatums. But ultimately , an armistice be signed. `` He drive himself and his staff night and day , '' an aide say afterward. `` He plunge into every problem a though his life depend on get it solved. He have an uncanny ability for grasp a situation and size it up completely. '' Despite the arduous negotiation and the pressure , Dr. Bunche take time off occasionally to play billiards , at which he be adept. `` Now you know how I spend my youth , '' he say once after a dazzling shot. His work day be 18 to 20 hour long , and he sometimes work 48 hour at a stretch. If he despair -- a occasionally he must have -- there be never any outward sign of it. When it be all over , Col. Mohammed Ibrahim Seif el-Dine , of Egypt , call Dr. Bunche `` one of the great men in the world. '' Dr. Walter Eytan , of Israel , say the mediator 's effort have be `` superhuman. '' Dr. Bunche give full credit to the two delegation and to his staff. The Nobel Prize Committee think otherwise , in make it first peace award to a black man. In a 1969 interview , Dr. Bunche say : `` The Peace Prize attract all the attention , but I 've have more satisfaction in the work I 've do since. I have be in charge of the U.N. peace-keeping operation in various part of the world -- the Congo , the Middle East , Kashmir. The Suez operation he call `` the single most satisfying work I 've ever do , '' primarily because `` for the first time we have find a way to use military men for peace instead of war. '' 'Bias Against Bigotry' Dr. Bunche make friend easily and a be a good conversationalist of an evening , mix story with a few whiskies. But his most serious word be not reserve for friends. In a speech at the Waldorf Astoria , he once say a great deal about himself and his conviction : `` I have a number of very strong biases. I have a deep-seated bias against hate and intolerance. I have a bias against racial and religious bigotry. '' `` I have a bias against war , a bias for peace. I have a bias which lead me to believe in the essential goodness of my fellow man , which lead me to believe that no problem of human relation be ever insoluble. And I have a strong bias in favor of the United Nations and it ability to maintain a peaceful world. '' For the author of these conviction , the road to greatness have be steep and rut with obstacles. Ralph Johnson Bunche be bear in Detroit on Aug. 7 , 1904 , the son of Fred Bunche , a barber , and Olive Agnes Johnson Bunche , a musically inclined woman who contribute much to what her son call a household `` bubbling over with idea and opinions. '' In 1915 , after the birth of Ralph 's sister , Grace , his mother develop rheumatic fever and the family move to Albuquerque , N.M. , for the hot , dry air and sunshine. But Mrs. Bunche die in a short time , and three month later her husband died. At the age of 13 , Ralph be an orphan. He and his sister be leave in the care of their maternal grandmother , Mrs. Lucy Taylor Johnson , a tiny woman with a towering will and what Ralph consider the wisdom of a sage. She take the child to Los Angeles , where they live in a bungalow in a mostly white neighborhood , and enrol them in local public schools. At the 30th Street intermediary school , the principal advise that Ralph be enrol in a commercial training course. But Mrs. Johnson would n't have it. `` My grandson be go to college , '' she tell the principal. The youth be a brilliant student. He be valedictorian of the class of '22 at Jefferson High School , whose academic honor society deny him admission at the time and try to correct the matter , to Dr. Bunche 's amusement , 30 year later. College on Scholarship After high school , he continue work a a janitor and carpet-layer , job he have obtain to help support the family. But at the insistence of his grandmother , he accept an academic scholarship and enrol at the University of California at Los Angeles. As in high school , he a a star in football and basketball at U.C.L.A. , but sustain a knee injury that bother him for the rest of his life. Nevertheless , he always carry three little gold basketball , reminder of three championship year on the varsity , and a United Nations associate say he think they be Dr. Bunche 's proud possessions. His passion for baseball and football also remain with him. Some United Nations official never guess that a few of the scribbled message hand to him by security guard during meeting contain the score of ball games. To support himself in college , the young man spend his summer work on ships. The job begin in 1923 when he stow away on a ship to save the cost of railroad fare to a Reserve Officers Training Corps summer camp. He be catch and put to work to earn his passage , but he like the job so much that he work ship for the next three summers. Married His Student He receive his Bachelor of Arts degree with Phi Beta Kappa honor in 1927 , and go on to Harvard to take a Master of Arts in 1928 and his doctorate in government and international relation in 1934. He later do advanced work in anthropology at Northwestern University , the London School of Economics and the University of Capetown. Dr. Bunche join the faculty of Howard University in Washington in 1928 , and there , a year later , he meet Ruth Harris of Montgomery , Ala. , one of his student , who also be teach in an elementary school. They be marry on June 23 , 1930 , and move to Harvard , where he be begin his doctoral studies. From 1938 to 1940 , Dr. Bunche collaborate with Gunnar Myrdal in his research on `` An American Dilemma. '' Their question about interracial sex relation arouse a mob of angry white who chase them across Alabama one night. When the United States enter World War II , Dr. Bunche be reject for military service because of his damage knee and hearing impair by a mastoid operation. But he join the War Department a an analyst of African and Far Eastern affair and quickly rise through the rank of Strategic Services. In 1944 , he move to the State Department and become head of the Division of Dependent Area Affairs , deal with colonial problems. By the war 's end , he be in the mainstream of planning for the organization that be to become the United Nations. In 1944 , he be at Dumbarton Oaks , lay the groundwork. In 1945 , he be at San Francisco , draw up the trusteeship section of the United Nations Charter. In 1946 , he be in the United Nations delegation to the first General Assembly in London. At Lie 's Request Later that year , he go on loan to the United Nations at the request of Secretary General Trygve Lie , and in 1947 he quit the State Department to join the permanent Secretariat of the new world body. In the Secretariat , he direct the operation of the Trusteeship Division and set out the guide principle under which numerous territory achieve statehood. His expertise on African affair and the problem of the emerge African nation be broad and acquire first-hand , for he travel extensively on that continent. The year after his stun success in the negotiation at Rhodes , he be offer -- but reject -- the post of Assistant Secretary of State. `` Frankly , '' he say at the time , `` there 's too much Jim Crow in Washington for me -- I would n't take my kid back there. '' By 1955 , Dr. Bunche hold the title of Under Secretary and two year later Under Secretary for Special Political Affairs. During those year , he be the principal troubleshooter for Dag Hammarskjold. Among his task be the United Nations program on the peaceful us of atomic energy and research on the effect of radiation. When the United Nations manage to halt the British-French-Israeli invasion of the Suez area in November , 1956 , Dr. Bunche organize and direct the deployment of a 6,000-man neutral force that act a a buffer between the belligerents. This force be his special responsibility until 1967 , when President Gamal Abdel Nasser of the United Arab Republic demand it withdrawal. In 1960 , he direct another peace-keeping force in the Congo , prevent the new republic 's total collapse after the secession of Katanga province. When the United Nations force in Cyprus be set up in March , 1964 , Secretary General Thant put Dr. Bunche in charge of the 6,000 troop that stand between Cypriotes of Greek and of Turkish origin. In all these effort , Dr. Bunche view the use of troop a part of the large work of bring war people to the conference table and hatred under control. For his work , there be award -- score of them , a torrent of medal , prize and more than 50 honorary doctorates. He become a trustee of Oberlin College in 1950 , a member of the Harvard board of overseer from 1959 to 1965 , president of the American Political Science Association in 1953-54 and a trustee of the Rockefeller Foundation in 1955. In 1963 , President John F. Kennedy give him the Medal of Freedom , the nation 's high civilian award. The Bunches have live since 1953 in a Tudor-style home in Kew Gardens , Queens. Until his eyesight begin fail , Dr. Bunche drive his own car to work daily. He love the theater and the opera , and on occasion the star he admire visit his 38th-floor office in the Secretariat building. Tennis Club Rebuff In 1959 , he be involve in a much-publicized incident in which he and his son , Ralph Jr. , be refuse membership in the West Side Tennis Club at Forest Hills. Dr. Bunche take up the cudgel and receive an apology , and the club official responsible for the rebuff resigned. Dr. Bunche then decline an offer of membership. He be anger because the change appear to be base on his personal prestige , and not on any principle of racial equality. `` No Negro American can be free from the disability of race in this country until the lowly Negro in Mississippi be no longer disadvantage because of his race , '' he said. There be other occasion on which he be move to protest racial discrimination. He first walk a picket line for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in Washington in 1937. In 1965 , though not in the best of health , he participate in march on Selma and Montgomery , Ala. He serve a an active member of the N.A.A.C.P. board of director for 22 year until his death. In the last year Dr. Bunche become seriously ill. In June , a month after be hospitalize , he retire from his United Nations post. The retirement be not announce until later because Mr. Thant have hop Dr. Bunche would recover and be able to return to his duties. But this be not to be. Dr. Bunche be survive by his widow ; son , Ralph Jr. ; daughter , Joan , and three grandchildren. Another daughter , Mrs. Burton Pierce , die in 1966. Dr. Bunche 's body may be view by the public at Frank E. Campbells , Madison Avenue , and 81st Street start at 7 tonight. The Rev. Ernest T. Campbell will conduct the funeral service at the Riverside Church at noon Saturday. Private burial service will follow at the Woodlawn Cemetery .