December 19 , 1971 OBITUARY Bobby Jones , Golf Master , Dies ; Only Player to Win Grand Slam By FRANK LITSKY In the decade follow World War I , America luxuriate in the Golden Era of Sports and it great collection of super-athletes : Babe Ruth and Ty Cobb in baseball , Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney in boxing , Bill Tilden in tennis , Red Grange in football and Bobby Jones in golf. Many of their record have be break now , and others be destine to be broken. But one , sport expert agree , may outlast them -- Bobby Jones 's grand slam of 1930. Jones , an intense , unspoiled young man , start early on the road to success. At the age of 10 , he shoot a 90 for 18 holes. At 11 he be down to 80 , and at 12 he shoot a 70. At 9 he play against men , at 14 he win a major men 's tournament and at 21 he be United States Open champion. At 28 he achieve the grand slam -- victory in one year in the United States Open , British Open , United States Amateur and British Amateur championships. At that point , he retire from tournament golf. A nation that idolize him for his success grow to respect him even more for his decision to treat golf a a game rather than a way of life. This respect grow with the years. `` First come my wife and child , '' he once explained. `` Next come my profession -- the law. Finally , and never a a life in itself , come golf. '' His record , aside from the grand slam , be magnificent. He win the United States Open championship four time ( 1923 , 1926 , 1929 and 1930 ) , the British Open three time ( 1926 , 1927 and 1930 ) and the United States Amateur five time ( 1924 , 1925 , 1927 , 1928 and 1930 ) . `` Jones be a truly the supreme artist of golf a Paderewski be the supreme artist of the piano , '' George H. Greenfield write in The New York Times in 1930. Felt the Tension Success do not come easily. Though Jones be cool and calculate outwardly , he seethe inside. He could never eat properly during a major tournament. The best his stomach would hold be dry toast and tea. The pressure of tournament competition manifest itself in other way too. Everyone expect Jones to win every time he play , include Atlanta friend who often bet heavily on him. He escape the unending pressure by retire from competition. `` Why should I punish myself like this over a golf tournament ? '' he once asked. `` Sometimes I 'd pass my mother and dad on the course , look at them and not even see them because I be so concentrated on the game. Afterward , it make a fellow feel a little silly. '' The quality of the man project itself , too. He be worship a a national hero in Scotland , the birthplace of golf. Scots would come for mile around to watch him play. In 1936 , on a visit , he make an unannounced trip to the Royal and Ancient Golf Club at St. Andrews for a quiet morning round with friends. There be 5,000 spectator at the first tee and 7,000 at the 18th. Businesses close a word spread that `` Our Bobby be back. '' In 1927 , when he tap in his final putt to win the British Open there , an old Scot stood by the green and mutter : `` The man canna be human. '' Off the course , Jones be convivial in a quiet way. He be a good friend and always the gentleman , though he have full command of strong language when desired. He have a fine sense of humor , and he laugh easily. He smoke cigarette and drank bourbon. He be besiege by people who want to play a social round of golf with him. When they talk with him , it be always golf. He manage to tolerate their one-sided approach to life. He also learn to put up with the name of Bobby , which he hat ( he prefer Bob ) . He be not always so serene. As a youngster , he have a reputation for throw club when everything be not go right. When Jim Barnes , the 1921 United States Open champion , watch him let off steam , he say : `` Never mind that club-throwing and the beating he 's taking. Defeat will make him great. He 's not satisfy now with a pretty good shot. He have to be perfect. That 's the way a good artist must feel. '' The defeat Barnes spoke of be frequent in the early years. For young Jones , though he have the game of a man , have the emotion of a grow boy. He never win the big tournament until he get his temper under control. At 18 , he learn that his great opponent be himself. He be play at Toledo one day with Harry Vardon , the great English professional , and be his usual brash self. They be about even when Jones dribble a shot into a bunker. Hoping to ease his embarrassment , he turn to Vardon and ask : `` Did you ever see a bad shot ? '' `` No , '' reply the crusty Vardon. It a the only word he speak to Jones all day. Jones mature , so much so that O. B. Keeler , an Atlanta sport writer and his long-time Boswell , once write : `` He have more character than any champion in our history. '' He also have the dream of every golfer -- a picture swing. No one teach it to him , for he never take a golf lesson in his life. He learn the swing by watch Stewart Maiden , a Scottish professional at the Atlanta Athletic Club course. He would follow Maiden for a few hole , then run home and mimic the swing. His put be famous. So be his putter , a rusty , goosenecked club know a Calamity Jane. His strength be drive , put and an ability to get out of trouble. He be an imaginative player , and he never hesitate to take a chance. In fact , he seldom hesitate on any shot , and he earn an unfair reputation a a mechanical golfer. The game often baffle him. `` There be time , '' he once say , `` when I feel that I know less about what I 'm do on a golf course than anyone else in the world. '' When he be an infant , doctor be not sure that he would survive , let alone play golf. He have a serious digestive ailment until he be 5 , and he stay home while other child played. In his late year , he be cripple by syringomyelia , a chronic disease of the spinal cord , and he have circulation and heart trouble. Robert Tyre Jones Jr. ( name for his grandfather ) be bear on St. Patrick 's Day , 1902 , in Atlanta. His father be a star outfielder at the University of Georgia , and the youngster 's first love be baseball. He also try tennis. At the age of 9 he settle down to golf. His parent have take up the game after move to a cottage near the East Lake course of the Atlanta Athletic Club. Young Bobby would walk around the course , watch the old folk play and learn by example. He be only 6 year old , a scrubby youngster with skinny arm and leg , when he win a six-hole tournament. At 9 he be the club 's junior champion. In Philadelphia Tourney He be 14 when he journey to the Merion Cricket Club near Philadelphia for his first United States Amateur championship. He be a chunky lad of 5 foot 4 inch and 165 pound and somewhat knock-kneed. He be wear his first pair of long trousers. After qualify for match play , he defeat Eben M. Byers , a former champion , in the first round. He beat Frank Dyer , a noted player at the time , in the second round , after lose five of the first six holes. Then he lose to Robert A. Gardner , the defend champion , 5 and 3. In 1922 he reach the semifinal of the United States Amateur before losing. That end what he call his seven lean years. Next come what Keeler call `` the eight fat year '' a Jones finally achieve the heights. All this time , golf be a sidelight to education. Jones want to be an engineer , and he earn bachelor 's and master 's degree in engineering at Georgia Tech. Then he decide to become a lawyer. He go to Harvard and earn another bachelor 's degree , then to Emory University in Atlanta for a Bachelor of Laws degree. In 1928 , he join his father 's law firm in Atlanta. In 1924 , Jones decide that he be worry too much about his opponent in match-play ( man against man ) competition. He vow to play for par and forget about his opponent. This be a turning point in his career. He start to win match-play competition. That year , at Merion , Pa. , he win the United States Amateur for the first time. In the final , he defeat George Von Elm by the overwhelming score of 9 and 8. Also in 1924 , he marry Mary Malone , his high school sweetheart. In 1929 Jones have a close call in the United States Open at the Winged Foot Golf Club , Mamaroneck , N.Y. He sink a 12-foot sloping , sidehill putt on the last green to tie Al Espinosa. The next day , Jones win their 36-hole title playoff by 23 strokes. Then come 1930 and the grand slam. Lloyds of London quote odds of 50 to 1 that Jones would n't win the world 's four major tournament that year. He win them. First come the British Amateur. He start his open match by shoot 3 , 4 , 3 and 2. In the final he beat Roger Wethered , 7 and 6. Next be the British Open at Hoylake , England , and his 72-hole score of 291 win that championship. Back home , Jones get his stern test of the year in the United States Open at Interlachen near Minneapolis. There be 15,000 spectator in the gallery a he play the par-4 18th hole. He get a birdie 3 by sink a 40-foot undulating putt , and his 287 win by two strokes. He have become the first man to win three of the four major title in one year. The last of the grand-slam tournament , the United States Amateur at Merion , be almost anticlimactic. No one doubt for the moment that Jones would win. He capture the qualifying medal. He rout Jess Sweetser , 9 and 8 , in the semifinal round , and in the final he defeat Gene Homans , 8 and 7. The crowd surge around him so wildly that it take a detachment of United States Marines to get him out safely. Soon after , he retire from tournament play and make a series of golf motion picture , the only time he ever make money from the game. Later , he become a vice president of A. G. Spalding & Bros. , the sport good manufacturer. He become a wealthy lawyer and soft-drink bottler and a business and social leader in Atlanta. He never play serious tournament golf again. He do n't seem to mind. `` Golf be like eat peanut , '' he said. `` You can play too much or too little. I 've become reconciled to the fact that I 'll never play as well a I use to. '' A few year later , Jones and the late architect , Alister Mackensie , design the Augusta National Golf Course in Georgia. In 1934 the Masters tournament be start there , and in Jones 's lifetime many golf people consider it the most important tournament of all. Jones play in the first Masters and in several thereafter , but he be never among the leaders. He always wear his green jacket , signify club membership , at victory ceremony , and he serve a club president. He become strong enough to rip a pack of play card across the middle , but his health deteriorated. He undergo spinal surgery in 1948 and 1950. He be force to use one cane , then two cane and then a wheelchair , and his weight drop to less than 100 pounds. He last saw the Masters in 1967. He be a close friend of Dwight D. Eisenhower , and the President often use his cottage adjacent to the Augusta National course for golf vacations. During his first term in office , the President paint a 40-by-32-inch oil portrait of Jones at the peak of his game. On the back be print by hand : `` Bob -- from his friend D.D.E. 1953. '' In January of 1953 , three month after a heart attack , Jones be honor at Golf House , the United States Golf Association headquarters in Manhattan. Augusta National member , include General Eisenhower , have donate another oil portrait to be hang at Golf House. A highlight of the ceremony be the reading of a letter from the President. `` Those who have be fortunate enough to know him , '' the letter say , `` realize that his fame a a golfer be transcend by his inestimable quality a a human being. . .His gift to his friend be the warmth that come from unselfishness , superb judgement , nobility of character , unwavering loyalty to principle. '' Bobby Jones listen and cry .