July 7 , 1971 OBITUARY Louis Armstrong , Jazz Trumpeter and Singer , Dies By ALBIN KREBS Louis Armstrong , the celebrated jazz trumpeter and singer , die in his sleep yesterday morning at his home in the Corona section of Queens. He have observe his 71st birthday Sunday. Death be attribute to a heart attack. Mr. Armstrong have be at home since mid-June when he be discharge from Beth Israel Medical Center after 10 week of treatment for heart , liver and kidney disorders. He seem in good health during an interview June 23 , in which he play his trumpet and announce his intention to return to public performances. President Nixon release this statement : `` Mrs. Nixon and I share the sorrow of million of Americans at the death of Louis Armstrong. One of the architect of an American art form , a free and individual spirit , and an artist of worldwide fame , his great talent and magnificent spirit add richness and pleasure to all our lives. '' Tributes to Mr. Armstrong also come from a number of lead musician , include Duke Ellington , Gene Krupa , Benny Goodman , Al Hirt , Earl ( Fatha ) Hines , Tyree Glenn and Eddie Condon. Mr. Ellington comment : `` If anybody be Mr. Jazz it be Louis Armstrong. He be the epitome of jazz and always will be. He be what I call an American standard , an American original. '' `` He could play a trumpet like nobody else , '' Mr. Condon say , `` then put it down and sing a song like no one else could. '' Mr. Hines , who frequently say he have take his piano style from Mr. Armstrong 's trumpet style , remark : `` We be almost like brothers. I 'm so heartbroken over this. The world have lose a champion. '' In Washington , the State Department , note that Mr. Armstrong have tour Africa , the Middle East and Latin America on it behalf , say : `` His memory will be enshrine in the archive of effective international communications. The Department of State , for which he travel on tour to almost every corner of the globe , mourn the passing of this great American. '' The entertainer 's final appearance be last February , when he play a two-week engagement at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. Last month , note that his leg be weak from his hospitalization , he say , `` I 'm go back to work when my treaders get in as good shape a my chops. '' A master showman know to million a Satchmo , Mr. Armstrong live by a simple credo. Putting it into word a couple of year ago , he say : `` I never try to prove nothing , just always want to give a good show. My life have be my music , it 's always come first , but the music ai n't worth nothing if you ca n't lay it on the public. The main thing be to live for that audience , 'cause what you 're there for be to please the people. '' Mr. Armstrong be first and most importantly a jazz trumpet player without peer , a virtuoso soloist who be one of the most vivid and influential force in the development of American music. But he be also know to delight million around the world for his ebulliently sandpapery singing voice , his merry mangling of the English language and his great wide grand-piano keyboard of a smile. Jazz music , probably the only art form ever wholly originate in America , and Louis Armstrong grow up together in New Orleans. It be in a seamy slum there that Mr. Armstrong learn to love and play jazz in the company of gambler , pimp and prostitutes. But in time he be to play his trumpet and sing in command performance before royalty and , through his numerous worldwide tour , to become known unofficially a `` America 's ambassador of goodwill. '' Recognized for Role Jazz expert , even the purist who criticize Mr. Armstrong for his mugging and showmanship , more often than not agree that it be he , more than any other individual , who take the raw , gutsy Negro folk music of the New Orleans funeral parade and honky-tonk and build it into a unique art form. Over the year , his life and his artistry change radically. He leave New Orleans for Chicago in the early nineteen-twenties , when he be still play the cornet , and before 1930 make some of his most memorable recording -- with his Hot Five or Hot Seven groups. Mr. Armstrong win his initial fame play an endless grind of one-night stands. Under constant pressure to put on a show that make the customer tap their foot and cry for more , he do not hesitate to exploit a remarkable flair for showmanship. His mugging , his wisecracking and most of all his willingness to constantly repeat program that have go over well in the past win him the cheer of his audience , along with the disapprove cluck of some of his fellow musician and jazz specialists. The criticism that he no longer improvised enough , innovate enough , matter little to Mr. Armstrong. He dismiss the more `` progressive '' jazz approve of by some lead critic a `` jujitsu music. '' He do not mind be call `` commercial '' because he follow popular music trend , and he deliberately introduce into his repertory crowd-pleasers such a `` Mack the Knife '' and `` Hello , Dolly ! , '' which put his recording on the bestseller chart when he be in his 60's. Like 'Sandpaper Calling' As his ability to play his horn exceptionally well wan with the year , Mr. Armstrong supplant his trumpet solo with his sing voice. An almost phenomenal instrument in it own right , it have be compare to iron filing and to `` a piece of sandpaper call to it mate. '' Just watch an Armstrong performance could be an exhilarating experience. The man radiate a jollity that be infectious. Onstage he would bend back his stocky frame , point his trumpet to the heaven joyfully blast out high C's. When he sing he fairly bubble with pleasure. And a he swab away at the perspiration stir up by his performing exertion , Satchmo grin his famous toothy smile so incandescently that it seem to light up the auditorium. `` I never do want to be no big star , '' Mr. Armstrong say in 1969 , in an interview for this article. `` It 's be hard goddam work , man. Feel like I spend 20,000 year on the plane and railroad , like I blow my chop off. Sure , pop , I like the ovation , but when I 'm low , beat down , wonder if maybe I have n't of be good off stay home in New Orleans. '' Mr. Armstrong 's early year spend in New Orleans , be mark by extreme poverty and squalor , but he emerge able to recall them without self-pity and even with good humor. `` I be a Southern Doodle Dandy bear on the Fourth of July , 1900 , '' say Daniel Louis Armstrong. 1 `` My mother Mary Ann -- we call her Mayann -- be live in a two-room shack in James Alley , in the Back O ' Town color section of New Orleans. It be in a tough block , all them hustler and their pimp and gambler with their knife , between Gravier and Perdido Streets. '' Mr. Armstrong 's father , Willie Armstrong , who stoke furnace in a turpentine factory , leave Mrs. Armstrong when the boy be an infant. Leaving the child with his paternal grandmother , Mrs. Armstrong go to live in the Perdido-Liberty Street area , which be line with prostitute ' cribs. `` Whether my mother do any hustling I ca n't say , '' Mr. Armstrong said. `` If she do , she keep it out of my sight. '' However , Louis , who rejoin his mother when he be 6 year old , recall that for many year afterward there be always a `` stepfather '' on the premise and that before his mother `` get religion and give up men '' around 1915 , `` I could n't keep track of the stepdaddies , there must have be a dozen or so , 'cause all I have to do be turn my back and a new pappy would appear. '' Some of them , he add , `` like to beat on little Louis. '' However , Mr. Armstrong be always intensely fond of his mother , and he care for her until her death in the early nineteen-forties. Dippermouth , a he be call a a child , and his friend often sing for penny on the streets. To help support his mother and a sister , Barbara , Louis deliver coal to prostitute ' crib and sell food pluck from hotel garbage cans. The night of Dec. 31 , 1913 , Louis celebrate the New Year by run out on the street and fire a .38-caliber pistol that belong to one of his `` stepfathers. '' He be arrest and send to the Colored Waifs Home for Boys. `` Pops , it sure be the great thing that ever happen to me , '' Mr. Armstrong said. `` Me and music get marry at the home. '' Played in Home 's Band Peter Davis , an instructor at the home , teach Louis to play the bugle and the cornet. Soon the boy become a member of the home 's brass band , which play at social , picnic and funeral for a small fee. Louis be in the fifth grade when he be release from the home after spend 18 month there. He have no other formal education. The youth work a a junkman and sell coal , while grab every chance he could to play cornet in honky-tonk bands. The great jazz cornetist Joe ( King ) Oliver befriend him , give him a cornet and tutor him. `` I be foolin ' around with some tough one , '' Mr. Armstrong recall in 1969. `` Get pay a little money , and a beeline for one of them gamble houses. Two hour , man , and I be a broke cat , broker than the Ten Commandments. Needed money so bad I even try pimping , but my first client get jealous of me and we get to fuss about it and she stab me in the shoulder. Them be wild times. '' In 1918 , Mr. Armstrong marry a 21-year-old prostitute name Daisy Parker. Since Daisy `` would n't give up her line of work , '' Mr. Armstrong say , the marriage be both stormy and short-lived. The same year he be marry , Mr. Armstrong join the Kid Ory band , replace King Oliver , who have move to Chicago. In the next three year he march with Papa Celestin 's brass band and work on the riverboat Sidney with Fate Marable 's band. Dave Jones , a mellophone player with the Marable band , give him his first lesson in read music. By then Mr. Armstrong 's fame be spread among New Orleans musician , many of whom be move to Chicago. In 1922 King Oliver send for his protege. Mr. Armstrong become second cornetist in Mr. Oliver 's by then famous Creole Jazz Band. The two-cornet team have one of the most formidably brilliant attack ever heard in a jazz group. Mr. Armstrong 's first recording be make with the Oliver band in 1923. The pianist in the band be Lilian Hardin , whom Mr. Armstrong marry in 1924. Miss Hardin have have training a a classical musician , and she give him some formal musical education. Mrs. Armstrong , convince that as long a her husband stay in the Oliver band he would remain in the shadow of his popular mentor , persuade him to leave the band in 1924 to play first cornet at the Dreamland Cafe. The same year he join Fletcher Henderson 's orchestra at the Roseland Ballroom in New York. For the first time , Mr. Armstrong find himself in the company of musician of an entirely different stripe from those he have know in New Orleans and Chicago who , like himself , have fight their way up out of the back alley and be largely unschooled in music. From these men , many of whom have conservatory education , he learn considerable musical discipline. Moving back to Chicago in 1925 , Mr. Armstrong again play at the Dreamland Cafe , where his wife , Lil , have her own band , and with Erskine Tate 's `` symphonic jazz '' orchestra at the Vendome Theater. It be at that point that he give up the cornet for the trumpet. `` I be hire to play them hot chorus when the curtain go up , '' Mr. Armstrong recalled. `` They put a spotlight on me. Used to hit 40 or 50 high C 's -- go wild , screamin ' on my horn. I be crazy , Pops , plain nuts. '' Billed a 'World 's Greatest' During his second Chicago period , Mr. Armstrong double in Carroll Dickerson 's Sunset Cabaret orchestra , with billing a the `` World 's Greatest Trumpeter. '' The proprietor of the Sunset be Joe Glaser , who become Mr. Armstrong 's personal manager and act in that capacity for the rest of his life. Mr. Glaser die on June 6 , 1969. In that Chicago period , Mr. Armstrong begin to make record under his own name , the first be `` My Heart , '' record Nov. 12 , 1925. Louis Armstrong 's Hot Five ( and later Hot Seven ) record , over a three-year span , a series of jazz classic , with Earl ( Fatha ) Hines on the piano. These record earn Mr. Armstrong a worldwide reputation , and by 1929 , when he return to New York , he have become an idol in the jazz world. While play at Connie 's Inn in Harlem , Mr. Armstrong also appear on Broadway in the all- Negro review `` Hot Chocolates , '' in which he introduce Fats Waller 's `` Ai n't Misbehavin , ' '' his first popular-song hit. ( He later appear a Bottom in `` Swingin ' the Dream , '' a short-lived travesty on `` A Midsummer Night 's Dream. '' Over the year he appear in many movie , include `` Pennies From Heaven , '' `` A Song Is Born , '' `` The Glenn Miller Story '' and `` High Society. '' ) For several year , Mr. Armstrong `` front '' big band assemble for him by others. By 1932 , the year he be divorce from Lil Hardin Armstrong , he have become so popular in Europe , via recording , that he finally agree to tour the Continent. It be while he be star at the London Palladium that Mr. Armstrong acquire the nickname Satchmo. A London music magazine editor inadvertently invent the name by garble an early nickname , Satchelmouth. One for the King While he be in London , Mr. Armstrong demonstrate memorably that he have little use for the nicety of diplomatic protocol. During a command performance for King George V , Mr. Armstrong ignore the rule that performer be not suppose to refer to member of the Royal Family while play before them and announce on the brink of a hot trumpet break , `` This one 's for you , Rex. '' ( Many year later in 1956 , Satchmo play before King George 's granddaughter , Princess Margaret. `` We 're really gon na lay this one on for the Princess , '' he grin , and launch into `` Mahogany Hall Stomp , '' a sort of jazz elegy to a New Orleans bordello. The Princess love it. ) One of Mr. Armstrong 's pre-World War II European tour last 18 months. Over the year his tour take him , to the Middle East and the Far East , to Africa and to South America. In Accra , Ghana , 100,000 native go into a frenzied demonstration when he start to blow his horn , and in Leopoldville , tribesman paint themselves ochre and violet and carry him into the city stadium on a canvas throne. His 1960 African tour be denounce by the Moscow radio a a `` capitalist distraction , '' which make Mr. Armstrong laugh. `` I feel at home in Africa , '' he say during the tour. `` I 'm African-descended down to the bone , and I dig the friendly way these people go about things. I get quite a bit of African blood in me from my grandmammy on my mammy 's side and from my grandpappy on my pappy 's side. '' Played With Big Bands Before the war , Mr. Armstrong work with several big band , include the Guy Lombardo orchestra , concentrate on New Orleans standard such a `` Muskrat Ramble '' and `` When the Saints Go Marchin ' In '' and on novelty such a `` I 'll Be Glad When You 're Dead , You Rascal You. '' He do duet with Ella Fitzgerald and he accompany Bessie Smith. After 1947 he usually perform a leader of a sextet , work with such musician a Jack Teagarden , Earl Hines , Joe Bushkin and Cozy Cole. He be a favorite at all the jazz festival , in this country and abroad. Mr. Armstrong lose track of the number of recording he make , but it have be estimate there as many a 1,500. Dozens have become collector ' items. The jolly Mr. Armstrong be quite inure to his fame a a jazz immortal. Not too many year ago , he be interview backstage by a disk jockey who begin with the announcement , `` And now we bring you a man who come all the way from New Orleans , the Crescent City , to become a Living American Legend. '' The Living American Legend , who be change his clothes , drop his trouser and begin the interview with the observation , `` Tee hee ! '' `` Tee hee '' be part of a uniquely Armstrong vocabulary , which include Satchmo-coined word such a `` commercified '' and `` humanitarily. '' In his speech he arbitrarily insert hyphen in the middle of word ( `` ar-tis-try '' and `` en-ta-TAIN-uh '' ) and , unable to remember name too well , pepper his conversation with friend and interview with salutation such a `` Daddy '' and `` Pops. '' Despite the hard life he lead -- travel most of the time , sleep too little , live out of suitcase , eating and drinking too much or not enough -- Mr. Armstrong , even into his 60 's , be still go strong. His chest be broad and powerful , and his 5-foot-8-inch frame carry a weight that vary between 170 and 230 pounds. He be , however , keenly aware of his health. `` I 'm one of them hy-po-CHON-dree-acs , '' he would say with a delighted laugh. He be afraid of germ and always carry his trumpet mouthpiece in a carefully fold handkerchief in his back pocket. He like to talk at length about his physic , a herbal mixture call Swiss Kriss , while at the same time he recount how unwisely he sometimes eat , especially when his favorite food , New Orleans-style red bean and rice , be set before him. Although in latter year he suffer from a kidney ailment , Mr. Armstrong 's great worry be chronic leukoplakia of the lip , what amount to a tough corn that result form blow his horn. He use a special , import salve to soothe his lips. `` If you do n't look out for your chop and pipe , '' he say , `` you ca n't blow the horn and sing. Anything that 'll get in my way doin ' that , out it goes. That trumpet come first , before everything , even my wife. Got to be that way. I love Lucille , man , but she understand about me and my music. '' He be refer to the former Lucille Wilson , whom he marry in 1942. He love all form of music. When ask what he think of the country-and-Western and folk music so favor by the young , he reply , `` Pops , music be music. All music be folk music. I ai n't never hear no horse sing a song. '' Some Negro militant criticize Mr. Armstrong for his earthy speech and his habit of roll his eye and flash his toothy grin while performing. They say he be use stereotyped characteristic of the happy-go-lucky Negro and play the Uncle Tom. Mr. Armstrong ignore the charges. Comment on Selma Nevertheless , Mr. Armstrong , on learn in 1965 that the police in Selma , Ala. , have take violent action against freedom-marching Negroes in that city , tell an interviewer : `` They would beat Jesus if he be black and marched. Maybe I 'm not in the front line , but I support them with my donations. My life be in my music. They would beat me on the mouth if I march , and without my mouth I would n't be able to blow my horn. '' For many year , Mr. Armstrong refuse to perform in New Orleans , his hometown , because of segregation there. He do not return until 1965 , after passage of the Civil Rights Act. On that occasion he triumphantly play with an integrate band in the city 's Jazz Museum. Reflecting on his more than 50 year a a musician , Mr. Armstrong say , `` There ai n't go to be no more cat in this music game that long. '' There be no doubt that he be the most durable of the great jazzman , nor that million of people hold him in great affection. His fellow musician , many of whom be influence by his artistry , look upon him with awe. Miles Davis , a contemporary jazz star , have assert that `` you ca n't play anything on a horn that Louis have n't played. '' Teddy Wilson , who play piano with Mr. Armstrong in 1933 , have call him `` the great jazz musician that 's ever been. '' And Leonard Feather , the eminent jazz critic and author of `` The Encyclopedia of Jazz , '' write of Mr. Armstrong : `` It be difficult. . .to see in correct perspective Armstrong 's contribution a the first vital jazz soloist to attain worldwide influence a trumpeter , singer , entertainer , dynamic show business personality and strong force in stimulate interest in jazz. `` His style , melodically and harmonically simple by the standard of late jazz trend , achieve in his early record an unprecedented warmth and beauty. His singing , lack most of the traditional vocal quality accept outside the jazz world , have a rhythmic intensity and guttural charm that induce literally thousand of other vocalist to imitate him , just at countless trumpeter through the year reflect the impact of his style. `` By 1960 , Armstrong , set in his way , improvise comparatively little ; but he retain vocally and instrumentally many of the quality that have establish him , even though entertainment value , but his own admission , mean more to him than the reaction of a minority of musician and specialists. '' As for Mr. Armstrong , it be please his listener that really mattered. `` There 's three generation Satchmo have witness , '' he say , `` the old cat , their child and their child 's child , and they still all walk up and say , 'Ol ' Satch , how do you do ! ' I love my audience and they love me and we just have one good time whenever I get up on the stage. It 's such a lovely pleasure. '' Mr. Armstrong be survive by his widow , the former Lucille Wilson , and by an adopted son , Clarence Hatfield of New York. He also leave a sister , Mrs. Beatrice Collins of New Orleans and two half-brother , Henry and William Armstrong , both of New Orleans. The Armstrongs ' home in Corona be at 34-56 107th Street. A funeral service will be hold Friday at 1 P.M. at the Corona Congregational Church , 34th Avenue and 103d Street. Burial will be in the Flushing Cemetery. The honorary pallbearer will include Governor Rockefeller , Mayor Lindsay , Bing Crosby , Ella Fitzgerald , Guy Lombardo , Duke Ellington , Dizzy Gillespie , Pearl Bailey , Count Basie , Harry James , Frank Sinatra , Ed Sullivan , Earl Wilson , Alan King , Johnny Carson , David Frost , Merv Griffin , Dick Cavett and Bobby Hackett. Mrs. Armstrong request that flower and card be omit and say those wish to do so could send contribution in her husband 's memory to the Kidney Research Foundation and to the Sickle Cell Anemia Foundation , which promote research on a disease that mainly afflict blacks. 1 According to Gary Giddins , the author of `` Satchmo , '' Armstrong 's birth certificate show that he be in fact bear on Aug. 4 , 1901 .