October 13 , 1971 OBITUARY Architect of Postwar Policy , Acheson Advocated Containment of the Soviet Union By ALDEN WHITMAN One of the principal molders of the American posture in the postwar world , Dean Gooderham Acheson , an urbanely elegant , sharp-minded and even sharper-tongued lawyer , help to create what he call `` half a world , a free half '' through containment of the Soviet Union by American military power and political alliances. As a member of the State Department almost continuously from 1941 to 1953 -- for the final four year he be President Harry S. Truman 's Secretary of State -- Mr. Acheson articulate a policy and practice that assume that the Soviet Union be bend on world conquest and , negotiation be virtually useless , could be deter only by overwhelm United States economic , political and arm aid to country on the perimeter of the Communist bloc. Some of his chief achievement be : The Bretton Woods agreement , which lead to the establishment of the World Bank. The Truman Doctrine of assistance to Greece and Turkey. Spade work for the Marshall Plan of bolster Europe. Shaping atomic policy. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization agreement. The Japanese peace treaty. The diplomacy of the Korean conflict. Nonrecognition of Communist China and aid to Chiang Kai-shek in Taiwan. Creating and rearm West Germany. Bipartisanship in foreign policy. As one so intimately associate with the strategy and tactic of the cold war , Mr. Acheson be the target of much contention. To Mr. Truman he be `` among the great Secretaries of State this country had. '' To Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , he be soft on Communism for harbor security risk in the State Department and for asserted lack of foresight in deal with China before 1949. To more moderate critic , he be blind to the reputed advantage of negotiate with the Russians. To revisionist historian of the nineteen-sixties , he be `` the Commissar of the Cold War '' who invent , or at least exaggerated , Soviet world ambition and who promote the United States a a supercolonial power. And to himself he be `` the faithful first lieutenant '' to Mr. Truman ( `` the captain with a mighty heart '' ) who be serenely certain that `` our effort for the most part leave condition well than when we find them. '' Earthy in Private Although Mr. Acheson tend to be formal and school-teacherish in his public manner , in private he be colloquial and earthy. Reminiscing about his career in an interview for this article in the spring of 1970 , he tick off his views. Of Mr. McCarthy he say : `` He be a very cheap , low scoundrel. To denigrate him be to praise him. '' On the United Nations a a forum for negotiation : `` I never think the U. N. be worth a damn. To a lot of people it be a Holy Grail , and those who set store by it have the misfortune to believe their own bunk. '' Of the Korean conflict , which the United States enter without Congressional approval : `` I do n't think there be any alternative to go into Korea. It be a perfectly simple thing to do. '' And of the revisionist criticism : `` I think it 's stupid. Ill-formed be the polite way I can express it. '' Mr. Acheson , however , have no riposte to President Nixon ( whose Indochina policy he warmly support ) , although Mr. Nixon in 1952 have lash out at `` Dean Acheson 's College of Cowardly Communist Containment. '' He indicate that President Nixon have `` go ahead do what we do '' in combat Communism. Enjoyed Capitol Politics As a broker in power who help to pilot many of his plan through Congress , Mr. Acheson recall his enjoyment of Capitol politics and his fondness for Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg , the Republican leader , and Senator Tom Connally , his Democratic counterpart. Some of his happy moment , he say , be spend in the Capitol backroom with these and other cronies. `` Some of my bad enemy on the Hill be my best friend , '' he remarked. To facilitate a bipartisan foreign policy , Mr. Acheson go on , he have on occasion so drafted bill that the Republicans could `` correct '' them to their glory , in the name of bi- partisanship. And once he go so far a to write a speech for a critic of the Bretton Woods bill. `` It be the best attack on the bill ever deliver , '' he recall with a merry laugh. The personal touch that make Mr. Acheson a Capitol favorite be also the key to his dealing with many foreign diplomats. `` The best diplomacy be on the personal level , '' he say , add : `` I get along with everybody who be housebroken. But I be never very close to the Russians. They be abusive ; they be rude. I just do n't like them. '' Toward those he like , Mr. Acheson have a gentleman-of-the-old-school loyalty. One example be his friendship with Alger Hiss , a former State Department official who be convict of perjury in a sensational spy-ring case. Mr. Hiss be a friend of long standing and be already under some suspicion when Mr. Acheson be confirm a Secretary of State. He restate at that time his tie to Mr. Hiss ( `` And my friendship be not easily give , nor be it easily withdraw '' ) and later , after Mr. Hiss 's conviction , when many of his friend vanish , Mr. Acheson meet the situation baldly by tell a news conference , '' I do not intend to turn my back on Alger Hiss. '' `` Congress , '' Mr. Acheson write in `` Present at the Creation , '' `` fly into a tantrum and the press get all excited. '' Nevertheless , and with perhaps a touch of arrogance , Mr. Acheson stand by Mr. Hiss. With much the same tenacity , he decline to dismiss John Carter Vincent , a State Department official under fire from Mr. McCarthy , or O. Edmund Clubb. Students of Mr. Acheson have suggest that his defense of Mr. Hiss , Mr. Vincent and Mr. Clubb spring , in part at least , from his Brahminlike contempt for Mr. McCarthy 's right-wing attack -- that Mr. Acheson have `` lose '' China , pursue a `` non-win '' policy in Korea and `` coddle '' Communists in government. Picture of a Diplomat And indeed , Mr. Acheson be a lofty in physique a he be in manner. Tall , erect , with wavy hair , bushy eyebrow and a guardsman 's mustache , he look , in his impeccably tailor clothes and black homburg , every inch the formidable diplomat. Added to that be an Ivy League voice and a bright mind 's disdain for what he call `` ninnies. '' Many wonder how the immaculate and patrician Mr. Acheson be able to form an almost perfect union with the small , perky , Midwestern Mr. Truman , a creature of rough- and-tumble Missouri politics. In `` Present at the Creation , '' Mr. Acheson give an answer , say : `` As only those close to him know , Harry S. Truman be two men. One be the public figure -- peppery , sometimes belligerent , often didactic , the 'give-'em-hell ' Harry. The other be the patient , modest , considerate and appreciative bos , helpful and understanding in all official matter , affectionate and sympathetic in any private worry or sorrow . . .Mr. Truman 's method reflect the basic integrity of his own character. '' Another factor be that Mr. Acheson , with all his mature cocktail-circuit charm and quick grasp of complex issue , be rear in fairly modest circumstances. Born April l1 , 1893 , in Middletown , Conn. , Dean Gooderham ( pronounce `` goodrum '' ) Acheson be the son of an English-born clergyman and a mother whose family be Canadian whisky distillers. Edward Acheson have enter the Anglican ministry , emigrate to Canada and then to the United States , where he become Episcopal Bishop of Connecticut. To Yale and Harvard Dean be submit to the fashionable rigor of Groton under the stern Endicott Peabody and go on to Yale , from which he be graduate in 1915. After marry Alice Stanley , a painter , in 1917 , he gain a Harvard law degree in 1918 and spend his first two year out of school a law secretary to Supreme Court Justice Louis D. Brandeis. Mr. Brandeis `` be like a father to me , '' Mr. Acheson recall in 1970. That Justice and Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes greatly influence his legal thinking , just a do his very close friend of late year , Justice Felix Frankfurter , with whom he often stroll about Washington. The two be congenial on all issue except Israel , which by mutual consent they never discussed. The Justice , a Zionist , favor the State of Israel , while his friend be disquiet by it a upset the Mideast balance. Their friendship , though , be such that Mr. Acheson dedicate one of his book , `` Morning and Noon , '' to `` F.F. '' In 1921 Mr. Acheson join the capital firm of what be now Covington & Burling , of which he become senior partner. One of Washington 's large law establishment , it give Mr. Acheson a comfortable life -- a house in Georgetown , a farm in Maryland -- and a clientele that include 200 of the nation 's large corporations. When he be not in government , he practice law. A Democrat , Mr. Acheson support Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932 and be appoint Under Secretary of the Treasury in 1933 , a post he hold for six months. He break temporarily with the New Deal when he find himself unable to approve devalue the gold content of the dollar. He think that do it by Executive order be unconstitutional , and he learn from newspaperman that his `` resignation have be accepted. '' His personal relation with the President , however , remain good , and he support him in 1936 and 1940. Judgeship Declined Just before the 1940 campaign , Mr. Roosevelt offer to appoint him to the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia , a step below the Supreme Court. `` I tell the President I just ca n't sit on my tail and listen to foolishness , '' he recall in his 1970 interview. `` Then the President offer to make me a special Assistant Attorney General. But I tell him no , I could do him more good on the outside [ he be active in the Committee to Defend America by Aiding the Allies ] and that I would write campaign speech , which I did. Well , then the war come along and I go into the State Department. '' As Assistant Secretary of State in 1941 ( Cordell Hull be the Secretary ) , Mr. Acheson be intimately concern with a number of undertaking that accompany America 's emergence a the world 's great capitalist power. His initial duty involve international economics. He help to elaborate the Lend-Lease arrangement that pour $ 39-billion in American war good and civilian item into land resist Fascism and Japanese warlords. He be also liaison man with Congress , and have a vigorous hand in develop postwar international organization , include the Food Agricultural Organization , the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Agency , the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( World Bank ) and the International Monetary Fund. After Mr. Hull step down , Mr. Acheson serve under Secretary Edward R. Stettinius Jr. , a man , he say in his memoir , who `` have go far with comparatively modest equipment. '' Then he be Under Secretary of State when the department be head by James F. Byrnes and by Gen. George C. Marshall. When Mr. Truman become President in April , 1945 , Mr. Acheson form bond with him that be to last for their lives. Among his first chore for Mr. Truman be obtain Senate approval for United States membership in the United Nations. `` I do my duty faithfully and successfully , '' he write in hismemoirs , `` but always believe that the Charter be impractical. '' Mr. Acheson be Under Secretary for almost two year , from August , 1945 , to July , 1947 , but much of that time , owe to the absence of his chief abroad , he act a the Secretary. His intractable definition of Soviet policy be elucidate at this time. Stalin , in early 1946 , speak out for Soviet preparedness in what he saw a a hostile world. Analyzing the speech in a telegram to the State Department , George F. Kennan , then charge d'affaires in Moscow , conclude that Soviet policy would be to use every mean to infiltrate , divide and weaken the West. Mr. Kennan 's proposal for come to term with the Russians do not , however , appeal to Mr. Acheson. `` To seek a modus vivendi with Moscow would prove chimerical , '' he write in his memoir , add in another place that `` Soviet authority be not move to agreement by negotiation. '' Meanwhile , Mr. Acheson be busy , with David E. Lilienthal of the Tennessee Valley Authority and a group of scientist , draft a policy paper on international atomic matters. At the time , the United States believe it hold a monopoly , and propose that `` no nation would make atomic bomb or the material for them. '' Instead , there would be an international authority , with inspection control and other check to assure peaceful us of nuclear energy. Many of the proposal appear in what be call the Baruch plan , name for Bernard M. Baruch , who be not in Mr. Acheson 's pantheon. `` I protest the generally hold view that this so-called 'adviser of Presidents ' be a wise man , '' he later wrote. `` My own experience lead me to believe that his reputation be without foundation in fact and entirely self-propagated. '' As Mr. Acheson perceive event in 1946-47 , the Soviet Union be embark on an `` offensive against the United States and the West '' in the Balkans and the Mideast , which be to reach a crescendo in Korea in 1950. He discern special danger spot in Greece and Turkey. And in early 1947 , when the British report they could no longer afford to support the royalist Greek regime , he shape the Truman Doctrine , by which $ 400- million in emergency military and economic aid be provide those two country -- in Greece to counter `` Communist '' insurgent and in Turkey to strengthen her armed forces. Heart of the Doctrine The heart of the Truman Doctrine be the assertion that `` it must be the policy of the United States to support free people who be resist attempt subjugation by armed minority or by outside pressures. '' Then and later , however , such commentator a Walter Lippmann question whether this be not a formula for America a a world policeman and whether it do not involve repression of legitimate nationalist or revolutionary movements. In Mr. Acheson 's view , however , `` the corruption of Greece would infect Iran and all to the East. '' `` It would also , '' he add , `` carry infection to Africa through Asia Minor and Egypt , and to Europe through Italy and France , already threaten by the strong Communist party in Western Europe. '' Critics of this foreign policy have ask whether his ideological division of the world correspond with reality , whether `` freedom '' should be equate with American strategic and political interest , whether the domino theory be justify and whether Communism be equivalent to `` Soviet imperialism. '' After persuade Congress to approve Greek-Turkish aid , Mr. Acheson voice the outline of what become the Marshall Plan in a speech on May 8 , 1947. His speech , he say , be a `` reveille '' to the American people to avert the economic collapse of Western Europe and to prevent it fall into the Communist orbit. Officially , General Marshall be father to the European Recovery Plan , but there be little doubt that Mr. Acheson , with Will Clayton , a State Department official , do most of the work. The Marshall Plan , in the view of historian such a Louis J. Halle , contribute to the Berlin blockage and Soviet absorption of Czechoslovakia in 1948. Stalin , this argument hold , saw the plan a a design to plant American influence and military power in Western Europe , and he react by tighten his vise on Eastern Europe. For 18 month after the Marshall Plan be offer , Mr. Acheson be out of the State Department at his request to return to a more financially reward law practice. `` I be tire , '' he explained. In this period , however , his personal relationship with the President and other lead Washington figure continue to be close. And he be back a Mr. Truman 's Secretary of State in January , 1949. Stating his feeling about Communism in his confirmation hearing , Mr. Acheson say : `` It be my view that Communism a a doctrine be economically fatal to a free society and to human right and fundamental freedom. Communism a an aggressive factor in world conquest be fatal to independent government and to free peoples. '' Although such a statement might appear to be unequivocal evidence of Mr. Acheson 's anti-Communism , it fail to satisfy many on the far right , include Senator McCarthy , Senator William F. Knowland , the Republican leader , and Representative Richard M. Nixon , then aspire to national prominence. And he be hector for four year a an insufficiently sterling anti-Red. The China affair , especially painful to Mr. Acheson , be touch off in the summer of 1949 by a 1,000-page White Paper design to explain the victory of the Communists despite more than $ 2-billion of American assistance to Chiang Kai-shek. The Acheson document describe the Chiang regime a `` corrupt , reactionary and inefficient , '' and add : `` The unfortunate but inescapable fact be that the ominous result of the civil war in China be beyond the control of the government of the United States. Nothing that this country do or could have do with the reasonable limit of it capability could have change that result. . . . It be the product of internal Chinese force , force which this country try to influence but could not. '' The attack on Mr. Acheson ( and , through him , on General Marshall , who have try to compose Chiang-Communist difference ) be fuel largely by the China Lobby , Chiang 's vociferous partisan in this country. And the cry be take up by Senators McCarthy and Knowland and others who insist that State Department aide have be covertly sympathetic to the Communists. The attack produce more headline than substance , but it bedevil Mr. Acheson 's year , and leave many convince that Chiang be a victim of American perfidy. Mr. Truman , however , be stout in his defense , retort to one ouster demand by say , `` Communism -- not our country -- would be serve by lose Dean Acheson. '' The attack `` of the Primitives , '' a he term them , make it seem that Mr. Acheson be insensitive to Asia. But it be he who establish the policy of nonrecognition of the Communist Chinese and support military and other aid to Chiang on the island of Taiwan , where he flee in 1949. Furthermore , In May , 1950 Mr. Acheson seek and obtained economic and military aid for France in Indochina to help battle Ho Chi Minh , thus set America 's fateful role in Vietnam. `` I could not then or later think of a good course , '' he said. Additionally , his Japanese peace treaty contain provision for American military base in Japan. In Europe , meantime , Mr. Acheson 's theme be to build up area of strength to counter the Soviet Union. And under his guidance , NATO , or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization of West European nation , Canada and the United States , come into be in 1949. It be the first military alliance every join by the United States in peacetime. One consequence of NATO be Mr. Acheson 's renew interest in West Germany , whose institutionalization a a Federal Republic he advance and whose arm he promoted. He be on good term with Konrad Adenauer , the Chancellor , recall him fondly in 1970 a `` a most delightful person. '' The separate German state be not wholly praise , however. In the opinion of Mr. Kennan , for example , it solidify the division of Europe by `` arous [ ing ] keen alarm among the Soviet leaders. '' One of the most troublesome of Mr. Acheson 's problem be Korea , where conflict between North and South erupt in June , 1950. `` Plainly , this attack [ from the North ] do not amount to a casus belli against the Soviet Union , '' he said. `` Equally plainly , it be an open , undisguised challenge to our internationally accept position a the protector of South Korea , an area of great importance to the security of American- occupy Japan. '' Mr. Acheson decide that `` we must settle ourselves to the use of force. . .to see that the attack failed. '' His method be to work through the United Nations Security Council , then be boycott by the Soviet Union. The Council call the attack `` an unprovoked act of aggression , '' and it be under this authority that American troop , with Gen. Douglas MacArthur in command , move onto the Korean peninsula in a `` police action '' to repulse the North Koreans. Critical of MacArthur The `` police action '' be suppose to be limit , but General MacArthur apparently exceed his instruction by push the North Koreans to the Yalu River ( when the Chinese enter the conflict ) and have to be recalled. A storm break out over both Mr. Truman and Mr. Acheson. Recalling the episode in his 1970 interview , Mr. Acheson say , `` MacArthur be a jackass. If he 'd do what he have be tell to do , the war would have be finish early , but he want to be spectacular , and he loused it up. '' Out of office in 1953 , Mr. Acheson be a scornful critic of John Foster Dulles 's policy of `` massive retalliation '' to Soviet actions. `` This do n't make any sense at all , '' he recall afterward. `` We have very few nuclear weapons. '' But he do approve Mr. Dulles 's continuation of his policy of American shouldering of global responsibilities. When Mr. Acheson return to private life , he comment , `` To leave position of great responsibility and authority be to die a little. '' However , not only be he active in Washington in the fifty , but also he be a White House adviser of Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson. His protege , Dean Rusk , be Secretary of State in those Administrations , and Mr. Acheson be often call upon for informal help. He counsel President Kennedy , for example , to bomb the Soviet missile sit in Cuba in 1962 ; and he back President Johnson 's handling of the Vietnam war. He be also call in by President Nixon , with whose Indochina and ABM missile policy he enthusiastically agreed. He most recently figure in the news last July when Life magazine print excerpt of an interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation in which Mr. Acheson say President Kennedy be `` out of his depth '' in the Presidency. In that interview , Mr. Acheson say that Mr. Kennedy `` do not seem to me to be in any sense a great man. I do not think he know a great deal about any of the matter which it 's desirable that a chief of state or a President of the United States should know about. He be not decisive. '' In retirement , Mr. Acheson also take to the typewriter , produce six book , include `` Present at the Creation , '' an account of his State Department year that win the Pulitzer Prize in 1970. In the last year he write several article for the Op Ed page of The New York Times. In one , discuss the publication of selection from the Pentagon Papers by The Times , he write : `` We need a severe Official Secrets Act to prevent irresponsible or corrupt transfer of secret paper from the Government to publisher , a commission of the quality of the Royal Commission recently create in Britain under the chairmanship of Lord Franks , to determine how this present disclosure come about and what law and procedure we use to prevent it repetition and for the fast declassification and release of such papers. '' In the concluding page of `` Present at the Creation , '' Mr. Acheson write his own epitaph in these word : `` In 1914 Kaiser Wilhelm II refer to 'Britain 's contemptible little army. ' When it have teach him to revise that opinion , it survivor often refer to themselves a 'the old contemptibles. ' I be happy to greet my comrade of President Truman 's State Department with his affectionate appellation and assure them , a they look back upon their service under his leadership during those puzzle and perilous time , that they play a vital role in set the main line of American foreign policy for many year to come and that they may feel in their heart that it be nobly do . ''