April 7 , 1971 OBITUARY Igor Stravinsky , the Composer , Dead at 88 By DONAL HENAHAN Igor Stravinsky , the composer whose `` Le Sacre du Printemps '' explode in the face of the music world in 1913 and blow it into the 20th century , die of heart failure yesterday. The Russian-born musician , 88 year old , have be in frail health for year but have be release from Lenox Hill Hospital in good condition only a week before his death , which come at 5:20 A.M. in his newly purchase apartment at 920 Fifth Avenue. Stravinsky 's power a a detonate force and his position a this century 's most significant composer be sum up by Pierre Boulez , who become musical director of the New York Philharmonic next season : `` The death of Stravinsky mean the final disappearance of a musical generation which give music it basic shock at the beginning of this century and which bring about the real departure from Romanticism. `` Something radically new , even foreign to Western tradition , have to be find for music to survive , and to enter our contemporary era. The glory of Stravinsky be to have belong to this extremely gifted generation and to be one of the most creative of them all. '' George Balanchine , head of the New York City Ballet and a fellow Russian and longtime friend , say : `` I feel he be still with us. He have leave u the treasure of his genius , which will live with u forever. We must have do 20 ballet together , and I hope to do more. '' Planning begin immediately for memorial programs. The New York Philharmonic , although unable to change it rehearsal schedule to include Stravinsky music this week , announce that the concert would be dedicate to his memory. The New York City Opera dedicate last night 's performance of `` Don Rodrigo '' to the composer. With Stravinsky at his bedside be his wife , Vera ; his musical assistant and close friend , Robert Craft ; Lillian Libman , his personal manager , and his nurse , Rita Christiansen. Mr. Craft , accord to Miss Libman , be too shake by the death to speak to caller , but wish it know that he have `` lose the dear friend he ever had. '' Mr. Craft , who have be Arnold Schoenberg 's secretary before that composer 's death , go to work for Stravinsky in 1947. The composer have return in August , `` much refresh , '' after a vacation of two and a half month at Evian , France , Miss Libman say , but have enter Lenox Hill Hospital here with pulmonary edema on March 18. His stay there be extend somewhat , she say , because his new 10-room apartment overlook Central Park be be decorated. He do not go home until March 30. The last word Miss Libman could remember Stravinsky 's saying , she say , be , `` How lovely. This belong to me , it be my home , '' a his nurse give him a tour of the apartment in his wheelchair. The cosmopolitan musician , she say , have move around the world so much -- Russia , Paris , Hollywood , New York -- that his yearning for a home have be strong. Was Composing Recently Stravinsky know his friend to the last , accord to Miss Libman. `` Two and a half month ago he be play the piano and composing -- orchestrate two prelude from Bach 's 'Well-Tempered Clavier , ' '' she said. His death come a a surprise , since he apparently have rally on Monday night from breathe complication that develop over the weekend. Dr. Theodore Lax , the composer 's physician throughout his recent illness , be not present at the time of death. He arrive soon thereafter and rule the cause a heart failure. Since 1967 , Stravinsky have suffer several arterial stroke , Miss Libman say , and have be in and out of hospital since then. Besides his widow , Stravinsky be survive by a daughter , Mrs. Milena Marion of Los Angeles , and two son , Soulima , a pianist and teacher who live in Urbana , Ill. , and Theodore , of Geneva. The composer 's body be take to Frank E. Campbell 's at Madison Avenue and 81st Street. A Russian Orthodox service will be hold there Friday at 3 P.M. , with the Rev. Alex Schmenin officiating. Burial in Venice In accordance with Stravinsky 's wish , burial will be in Venice , in the Russian corner of the cemetery of San Michele. The composer have long be fond of the Italian city , where several of his work include `` The Rake 's Progress '' be first perform , and where Diaghliev be buried. It be Diaghliev the Russian ballet impresario , who produce the first performance of `` Le Sacre du Printemps '' on May 29 , 1913 , thereby give Stravinsky his chance to turn music upside down. Stravinsky 's more recent activity have be a a writer and dealer in his own memorabilia. The complete , correct manuscript score of `` Le Sacre , '' about 7,600 additional page of manuscript and 17,000 document be put on the market at an ask price of $ 3.5-million last December. No purchase have be reported. In recent year , in spite of his feeble health , Mr. Stravinsky continue to be a fountain of wit and acidulously put wisdom. In an article in The New York Review of Books last February , he comment wryly on Leonard Bernstein 's athletic podium style : `` I have never see him jump in 'Les Noces ' and regret miss his performance last fall. '' Igor Stravinsky : An 'Inventor of Music ' Whose Works Created a Revolution During World I , Igor Stravinsky be ask by a guard at the French border to declare his profession. `` An inventor of music , '' he said. It be a typical Stravinsky remark : flat , self-assured , flagrantly antiromantic. The composer who revolutionize the music of his time be a dapper little man who pride himself on keep `` banker 's hour '' at his work table. Let others wait for artistic inspiration ; what inspire Igor Stravinsky , he say , be the `` exact requirement '' of the next work. Between the early piece , write under the eye of his only teacher , Nikolai Rimsky- Korsakov , and the composition of Stravinsky 's old age , there be more than 100 work : symphony , concerto , chamber piece , song , piano sonata , opera and , above all , ballets. The influence of these work be profound. As early a 1913 , Claude Debussy be praise Stravinsky for have `` enlarge the boundary of the permissible '' in music. Forty year later , the tribute of Lincoln Kirstein , director of the New York City Ballet , be remarkably similar : `` Sounds he have find or invent , however strange or forbid at the outset , have become domesticate in our ears. '' Aaron Copland estimate that Stravinsky 's work have influence three generation of American composer ; a decade later Copland revise the estimate to four generation , and add European composer a well. In 1965 the American Musicological Society vote Stravinsky the composer bear after 1870 who be most likely to be honor in the future. He be not unanimously honor during his lifetime. Three colorful work of his young manhood -- '' L'Oiseau de Feu '' ( `` The Firebird '' ) , `` Petrushka '' and `` Le Sacre du Printemps '' ( `` The Rite of Spring '' ) -- be generally admit to be masterpieces. But about his conversion to the austerity of neoclassicism in the nineteen-twenties , and his even more startling conversion to a cryptic serial style in the nineteen-fifties , there be critical disagreement. To some , his late work be thin and bloodless ; to others , they show a mastery only hint at in the vivid early pieces. Figure of Fascination To all , Stravinsky the man be a figure of fascination. The contradiction be dazzling. The composer march through a long career with the self-assurance of a Wagner -- and be so nervous when perform in public that he thrice forget his own piano concerto. He once refuse to compose a liturgical ballet for his early patron , Serge Diaghliev , `` both because I disapprove of the idea of present the mass a a ballet spectacle and because Diaghliev want me to compose it and 'Les Noces ' for the same price. '' His Charles Eliot Norton lecture at Harvard in 1939-40 be dignified paper , deliver in French , on the high seriousness of the artist 's calling. Three year later he write a polka for an elephant in the Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey Circus. He have many friend -- Claude Debussy , Maurice Ravel , Pablo Picasso , Vaslav Nijinsky , Andre Gide , Jean Cocteau -- and many home : Russia until 1914 ; Switzerland ( 1914- 1920 ) , France ( 1920-1939 ) , the United States ( 1939 until his death ) . In every home he be restless at night unless a light burn outside his bedroom. That be how he sleep , he explain , a a boy in St. Petersburg ( now Leningrad ) . Igor Feodorovich Stravinsky be bear in a suburb of St. Petersburg -- Oranienbaum , a village where his parent be spend the summer -- on June 17 , 1882 : St. Igor 's Day. He be the third of four son bear to Anna Kholodovsky and Feodor Ignatievitch Stravinsky. His father be the leading bass singer at the Imperial Opera in St. Petersburg. The composer once describe his childhood a `` a period wait for the moment when I could send everyone and everything connect with it to hell. '' For his family he felt only `` duties. '' At school he make few friend and prove only a mediocre student. Music be a bright spot. At the age of 2 he surprise his parent by hum from memory a folk tune he have hear some woman singing. He date his career a a composer from the afternoon a few year later when he try to duplicate on one of the two grand piano in the family 's drawing room the blare of a marine band play outside. `` I try to pick out the interval I have heard. . .but find other interval in the process I like well , which already make me a composer , '' Stravinsky said. At 9 , Igor start piano lesson and prove a good student , but no prodigy. Nevertheless , his interest in music grew. An uncle -- '' the only one in the family who believe I have any talent '' -- encourage him. As a teen-ager he haunt his father 's rehearsal at the Maryinsky Theater. To his parent , the boy 's interest in music be `` mere amateurism , to be encourage up to a point , without take into consideration the degree to which my aptitude might be developed. '' They agree to let him study harmony with a private teacher -- on the condition that he also study law at the University of St. Petersburg. In four year a the university , Stravinsky recall , `` I probably do not hear more than 50 lectures. '' For by this time he have take the first step toward become a composer. A Refusal at First One of his classmate be a son of the great Russian composer Rimsky-Korsakov. In 1902 Stravinsky visit the elder man , give him some of his early piano piece for criticism and ask to become his pupil. The composer look at the score and reply noncommittally that the young man would need more technical preparation before he could accept him a a student. Crestfallen at first , Stravinsky decide to take this a encouragement. After a year 's outside study , he apply again to the master and be accepted. It be under the supervision of Rimsky-Korsakov that Stravinsky 's first orchestral works- -a symphony , a suite ( `` Le Faune et la Bergere '' ) , the Scherzo Fantastique -- be compose and performed. In 1908 , a few day after he have mail his teacher the score of a new orchestral piece , `` Fireworks , '' the package be return to the young composer with the note : `` Not deliver on account of death of addressee. '' Stravinsky 's formal education be over. Later that year Stravinsky meet Serge Diaghliev , then assemble a company of Russian dancer for a season in Paris. Impressed with the composer 's first work , Diaghliev have a job for him : to orchestrate two piano piece by Chopin for the ballet `` Les Sylphides. '' The commission be gratefully accept -- Stravinsky now have a wife and two child -- and impressively fulfilled. A year later there be a more important Diaghliev commission : a ballet on a Russian folk tale , `` The Firebird , '' for the Russian Ballet 's second season at the Paris Opera House. Somewhat apprehensively -- '' I be still unaware of my own capability '' -- Stravinsky set to work. The flashing , vigorous `` Firebird '' be a great success : so great a success that Stravinsky , in his late year , thought of it a an albatross around his neck. Arranged a an orchestral suite , it be play all over the world ; the composer be ask to conduct it everywhere ; it be the work the man-in-the-street most associate with the name Stravinsky. ( On a train the composer meet a man who call him `` Mister Fireberg. '' ) The irony be that because Russia have no international copyright protection , `` The Firebird '' bring him few royalties. The next Stravinsky-Diaghliev production be `` Petrushka '' ( 1911 ) , a brash , colorful ballet about puppet come to life. To signify the insolence of one of the puppet , Stravinsky put some of the music in two key at once. The combination of an F sharp major arpeggio ( all black note on the piano ) and a C major arpeggio ( all white note ) be to be know ever afterward a `` the Petrushka '' chord : it be the first important use of bitonality in modern music. The ballet , with Nijinsky in the title role , be another popular success. More important , say the composer , `` it give me absolute conviction of my ear. '' While complete `` The Firebird , '' Stravinsky have a daydream about a pagan ritual in which a young girl dance herself to death. This be the genesis of `` The Rite of Spring , '' a revolutionary work whose premiere on May 29 , 1913 , cause one of the noisy scandal in the history of music. An open dress rehearsal have go quietly , but protest against the music -- barbarous , erotic , unlike anything Paris have ever hear -- begin almost as soon a the curtain go up on open night. Soon the Theatre de Champs-Elysees be in an uproar. Stravinsky hurry backstage to find Diaghliev flick the house light in an attempt to restore order and Nijinsky , the choreographer , bawl count at the dancer from the wings. Stravinsky be furious ; Diaghliev , who know the value of publicity , say afterward that the crowd 's reaction have be `` exactly what I wanted. '' Less than a year later , Pierre Monteux conduct a concert version of the score in Paris and Stravinsky receive a hero 's ovation. World War I separate the composer permanently from his homeland ( he do not see Russia again until a tour in 1962 ) and temporarily from Diaghliev. It also mark the start of a new style for Stravinsky -- a leaner , more astringent , less colorful musical idiom that critic be to label `` neoclassical. '' Economy Was Necessity An early work in the new manner be `` Histoire du Soldat '' ( `` The Soldier 's Tale '' ) , write in 1918. This be a jazzy theater piece with only seven instrumentalists. The economy of orchestration be less a matter of esthetic choice than of practical necessity -- Stravinsky and his collaborator , down on their luck in Switzerland , want a work that would tour cheaply -- but the composer find austerity to his liking. In the year that follow Stravinsky 's postwar move to Paris , the `` Apollonian principle '' ( a he like to call them ) of order and restraint replace the Dionysian ecstasy of the big early works. `` One be tire of be saturate with timbre , '' he decided. `` One want no more of this overfeeding. '' `` Les Noces '' ( 1923 ) , a throb Russian wedding cantata , seem a throwback to the Dionysian style. Actually , most of it have be compose before the war and could be see , in retrospect , a part of the transition from opulence to severity. Representative of another aspect of the new style be `` Pulcinella '' ( 1920 ) , a ballet at Diaghliev 's suggestion. This work employ themes attribute to the 18th-century composer Giovanni Battista Pergolesi , with contemporary gloss by Stravinsky. The composer call it `` my discovery of the past. '' Stravinsky now look to the past for his model ; the trick , he say , would be `` to make use of academic forms. . .without become academic. '' A piano concerto compose for his first American tour , in 1925 , evoke Bach and the baroque. `` Oedipus Rex '' ( 1926 ) suggest a Handel oratorio. `` Le Baiser de la Fee '' ( 1928 ) be an explicit tribute to Tchaikovsky. `` Apollon Musagete '' ( 1928 ) be a ballet score for string alone. `` Capriccio '' for piano and orchestra ( 1929 ) remind some of an up-to-date Carl Maria Von Weber. `` Persephone '' ( 1933 ) wear the pastel of the impressionists. The form have be use by others. The content be unquestionably new and unquestionably Stravinsky 's -- complicate , tic-like rhythm ; harmonies no less audacious for be utter in a moderate tone of voice. During this period the composer be often accuse of antiquarianism , but no one ever call him old-fashioned. Purely Instrumental In his middle year , Stravinsky turn more and more to purely instrumental music , include the `` Dumbarton Oaks '' Concerto for chamber orchestra ( 1938 ) , the Symphony in C ( 1940 ) , the Symphony in Three Movements ( 1946 ) . His dogged productivity do not lessen with increase age. Having move to the United States in 1939 , Stravinsky arrange `` The Star-Spangled Banner '' for a performance in Boston -- and bring in the police , who almost arrest him for tamper with the national anthem. Then he move to Los Angeles , where he compose the rest of his works. `` Danses Concertantes '' ( 1942 ) , a chamber piece , be commission by the Werner Janssen Symphony Orchestra of that city. `` Orpheus '' ( 1948 ) be a ballet choreograph by an old friend , George Balanchine. As a young man Stravinsky have write two opera : `` The Emperor 's Nightingale '' ( 1908- 1914 ) and `` Mavra '' ( 1922 ) . After World War II he begin a third. `` The Rake 's Progress , '' with libretto by W. H. Auden and Chester Kallman , be a deliberate re-creation of Mozartean 18th-century style. First perform in 1951 , it receive the composer 's usual mixed reviews. `` You never see the change when you be drive along , '' Stravinsky tell an interviewer in 1948. `` A little curve in the road and suddenly you be proceed east. . . . '' Donning the monk 's cloth of neoclassicism have be such a change for the composer ; an even more unexpected one be to come. For year Stravinsky and Arnold Schoenberg be think to divide the world of contemporary music between them. Stravinsky be head of the tonal camp : those whose work , dissonant or not , inhabit a universe of harmonic gravity ; the world of `` key. '' Schoenberg and his disciple belong to the 12-tone camp : a world where all note of the scale be in free fall , none have more harmonic weight or status than another. It be a style of composition , Stravinsky have say , `` essentially different '' from his own. Soon after `` The Rake 's Progress , '' however , Stravinsky himself become a 12-tone composer : more precisely , a `` serial '' composer , who base each work on a series of note state a a `` tone row '' in the opening measures. Robert Craft , a young musician whom Stravinsky have hire a an assistant in 1947 , unquestionably have much to do with the composer 's conversion to serialism. It be also apparent that Stravinsky , to whom obstacle be inspiration , be attract by what he call the `` dogmatism '' of the row. Whatever the reason , the tone row be the spine of his last work , among them `` Agon , '' a ballet ( 1957 ) ; `` Movements for Piano and Orchestra '' ( 1960 ) ; and `` Abraham and Isaac , '' a `` sacred ballad '' ( 1964 ) . The change keep him a controversial composer to the last. This do not bother Stravinsky. `` I do n't mind my music go on trial , '' he write in 1957. `` If I 'm to keep my position a a promising young composer I must accept that. '' What Stravinsky could not accept be `` the professional ignoramus , the journalist- reviewer pest. '' His battle with music critic become legendary. At first he be above battling. In 1929 he state grandly that his music `` be not to be discuss or criticized. '' `` One do not criticize somebody or something that be in a functional state. The nose be not manufactured. The nose is. Thus also my art , '' he said. Thirty year later he be name the `` pests. '' Winthrop Sargeant , music critic for The New Yorker magazine , be , to Stravinsky , `` W. S. Deaf. '' Paul Henry Lang 's unfavorable review of Stravinsky 's ballet `` The Flood '' ( 1962 ) , compose for television , bring a telegram from the composer to The New York Herald Tribune accuse the critic of `` gratuitous malice. '' But Stravinsky 's scorn be not reserve for writer only. He dislike showy performer and conductor ( `` Stokowski 's Bach ? Bach 's Stokowski would be more like it '' ) . The dislike turn to loathe when the performer be catch mis- '' interpreting '' ( a word the meticulous composer consider a personal affront ) one of his pieces. To show musician exactly how his composition be to be perform , especially a to their tempo , Stravinsky make piano-roll transcription of his work for the Pleyel Company in the early nineteen-twenties. For the same purpose , he sign an exclusive contract with Columbia Records in 1928. Well before his death , Stravinsky and his assistant , Mr. Craft , have record nearly all his work for Columbia. During the twenty Stravinsky also begin to conduct and perform his work in public. Never a virtuoso pianist and scarcely train at all in conducting , he suffer acute stage fright before his first appearance and seldom perform without a score. Stravinsky be a small , wiry man ( 5 foot 3 inch , 120 pound ) whose morning regimen , until he be 67 , start with a set of `` Hungarian calisthenics '' ( include walk on his hand ) . A renowned hypochondriac , accord to his friend , the composer would visit his Los Angeles doctor almost every day -- and then hike two mile home. Sketch Caused Furor Stravinsky 's remarkable face -- long-lobed ear , hood eye , large nose , small mustache , full lip -- tempt portrait from many artists. A straightforward Picasso sketch of the composer once cause a furor at the Italian border. A guard refuse to let it out of the country on the suspicion that it be not a portrait at all but a mysterious , and probably subversive , `` plan. '' `` It be a plan of my face , '' Stravinsky protested. But the sketch have to leave the country in a diplomatic pouch from the British Embassy. To Stravinsky , compose music be a process of solve musical problem : problem that he insist on define before he start to work. Before write `` Apollon Musagete , '' for example , he write to Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge , who have commission the ballet , for the exact dimension of the hall in which it would be perform , the number of seat in the hall , even the direction in which the orchestra would be facing. `` The more constraint one imposes , the more one free one 's self , '' he would say. `` And the arbitrariness of the constraint serve only to obtain precision of execution. '' He work like a craftsman in a room that look like a laboratory , organize down to the very label on the gum eraser and the pen for different-colored inks. He work almost every day , behind closed door ( `` I have never be able to compose unless sure that no one would hear me '' ) . Unlike many composer , he work directly at the piano. Some take this to indicate that Stravinsky 's `` ear '' be not as acute a one might have expected. He defend the practice : `` Fingers be not to be despised. . . [ they ] often give birth to subconscious idea that might otherwise never come to life. . . . I think it be a thousand time well to compose in direct contact with the physical medium of sound than to work in the abstract medium produce by one 's imagination. '' `` Our Igor , '' Diaghliev use to sigh. `` Always money , money , money. '' It be a frequent criticism of the composer that he not only work like a businessman but also charge like one. Stravinsky coolly agree that he have never `` regarded poverty a attractive '' and that his ambition be `` to earn every penny that my art would enable me to extract '' from a society that have let Mozart and Bartok die in poverty. Most of his work be write on commission -- '' the trick , '' he once write , `` be to compose what one want to compose and get it commission afterwards '' -- and the fee be handsome. But they do not affect his artistic independence. Many of Stravinsky 's work , especially during his last year , be base on religious theme -- '' Symphony of Psalms '' ( 1930 ) , `` Canticum Sacrum '' ( 1956 ) , `` Threni '' ( 1958 ) and others. To write good church music , the composer maintain , one have to believe , literally , in what the church stand for : `` the Person of the Lord , the Person of the Devil and the Miracles of the Church. '' He be himself such a believer. Born into the Russian Orthodox Church , he leave it in 1910. Later he discover `` the necessity of religious belief '' and be a regular communicant from 1926 to 1939. Thereafter his churchgoing lapse a bit. ( The music , he complain , all sound `` like Rachmaninoff '' and once in confession the priest have ask him for his autograph. ) Fascinated by Words But to the end he consider himself stanchly Russian Orthodox , tempt at time by Roman Catholicism -- he write a Roman Catholic mass in 1948 -- but remain with the faith of his father `` for linguistic reasons. '' Words fascinate Stravinsky. Beside Russian he could hold forth , and make pun , in French , German and English. `` When I work with word in music , my musical saliva be set in motion by the sound and rhythm of the syllable , '' he said. Stravinsky write his own libretto for two work -- '' Renard '' ( 1915 ) and `` Les Noces '' -- and write several book a well. `` Chronicle of My Life '' ( 1936 ) and `` Poetics of Music '' ( 1948 ) , the latter his Harvard lecture , expound Stravinsky 's idea about music with dry , episcopal confidence : `` Music be by it very nature essentially powerless to express anything at all. . . . The sensation produce by music be that evoke by contemplation of the interplay of architectural forms. . . . The more art be control , limited , work over , the more it be free. '' No less controversial but far more lively be the book write with the help of Mr. Craft : `` Conversations with Igor Stravinsky '' ( 1958 ) ; `` Memories and Commentaries '' ( 1959 ) ; `` Expositions and Developments '' ( 1962 ) ; `` Dialogues and a Diary '' ( 1963 ) ; `` Themes and Episodes '' ( 1966 ) and `` Retrospections and Conclusions '' ( 1969 ) . These `` disguise monologue '' combine contradictory recollection of the past , domestic trivia , name-dropping anecdotage , gratuitous insult , handsome compliment , bad pun and stun insight into life , art and self. They be a portrait of the composer that few artist would have dare paint , and Stravinsky be proud of them. Stravinsky marry twice. His first wife , Catherine Nossenko ( `` my dear friend and playmate '' ) , be his first cousin. Married in 1906 , they have four child : Theodore , Ludmilla , Sviatoslav Soulima and Maria Milena. Ludmilla die in 1938 and Mrs. Stravinsky in 1939 , both of tuberculosis. In 1940 Stravinsky marry Vera de Bossett , a painter. They have no child .