September 25 , 1971 OBITUARY Justice Black Dies at 85 ; Served on Court 34 Years By United Press International WASHINGTON , Saturday , Sept. 25 -- Retired Associate Justice Hugo L. Black , whose liberal philosophy influence the Supreme Court through 34 year of social change , die early today. He be 85 year old. Justice Black enter Bethesda Naval Hospital on Aug. 28 and retire Sept. 17. He suffer a severe stroke just two day later. `` Justice Hugo Black die peacefully at 1 A. M. this morning of inflammation of the artery and stroke , '' the hospital 's administrative officer said. The officer , Archie Stahl , say no further detail be available immediately. To Justice Black , who many observer believe influence American life more than any of his colleague in modern time , the Constitution be his bible. A well-thumbed copy be always in his pocket. When challenge about the effect of unpopular decision , he would say simply : `` The Court do n't do it. The Constitution do it. '' When Justice Black retire from the Supreme Court a week ago , his 34 year of service be the third long in the nation 's history. He fight for civil liberty , civil right , freedom of the press , freedom of religion. He argue -- and prevailed time and again -- that the 14th Amendment require every state to obey every part of the Bill of Rights. Devoted to Constitution `` Where 's my Constitution ? '' Justice Black ask , ruffle through his pocket and spread out the paper on his desk. `` I always keep my Constitution in my coat pocket. What could have happen to it ? Have you get one on you ? '' he ask of a visitor a few year ago. `` You ought to keep one on you all the time , '' he say , buzz for his secretary. `` Where 's my Constitution ? '' The woman search his desk drawer and scan the library shelf in the spacious Supreme Court chamber , but find no Constitution. `` I like to read what it says. I like to read the word of the Constitution , '' Justice Black say in a slight Southern drawl , after dispatch the secretary to fetch one. `` I 'm a literalist , I admit it. It 's a bad word these day , I know , but that 's what I am. '' Shortly , the Constitution be delivered. Hugo LaFayette Black , then 81 year old and complete his 30th year on the United States Supreme Court , lay it tenderly on his lap and open it to the Bill of Rights. `` Now , '' he say with a warm smile , `` now let 's see what it says. '' Perhaps as well a anything else , the incident illustrate what form Chief Justice Earl Warren call the `` unflagging devotion '' of Mr. Black to the Constitution of the United States. Perhaps no other man in the history of the Court so revere the Constitution a a source of the free and good life. Few articulate so lucidly , simply and forcefully a philosophy of the 18th- century document. Less than a handful have the impact on constitutional law and the quality of the nation a this self-described `` backward country fellow '' from Clay County , Alabama. `` I believe that our Constitution , '' Justice Black once say , `` with it absolute guarantee of individual right , be the best hope for the aspiration of freedom which men share everywhere. '' Champion of Liberties He come to the Supreme Court from the United States Senate , vilify a a Ku Klux Klanner after take his seat in 1937. But he discomfit his critic , make his mark a a champion of civil right and liberties. The Bill of Rights be his holy writ , a set of `` absolute '' erect by the framer to shield and nurture individual freedom. Of these , he consider the First Amendment the cornerstone of liberty , and freedom of speech a the heart of the First Amendment. `` My view be , without deviation , without any ifs , buts , or whereases , that freedom of speech mean that you shall not do something to people whether for the view they have or the view they express or the word they speak or write , '' he say in a rare news conference in New York in 1962. Despite this libertarian affirmation , Justice Black also live long enough to be accuse , in the twilight of his career , of `` go conservative , '' of `` turn his back on the Negro , '' of inconsistency and even of senility by many old admirer who be shock and sadden by his position on civil right protest , poll tax , anti-birth control law and electronic eavesdropping. 'I Have n't Changed' But Justice Black deny that there have be a change of direction. `` I have n't change a jot or tittle , '' he say in 1967. On another occasion , he draw a sharp distinction between speech and many type of civil right activities. Just a he view his interpretation of the Bill of Rights a cut down incursion on personal freedom , he also saw the Constitution a give the great leeway to Government in the economic sphere. Born poor , largely self-educated , Mr. Black be a Southern liberal , his view root in the Populist-Progressive credo of John Peter Altgeld , the elder Robert La Follette and George W. Norris. A stanch New Dealer in the Senate , Mr. Black support Franklin D. Roosevelt 's `` court- packing '' plan , design to overcome the `` nine old men , '' a majority of whom be strike down the President 's anti-Depression legislation. As the first Roosevelt appointee to the Supreme Court , Justice Black take the position -- hold throughout his career -- that judge have no power to veto legislation or executive action merely because it conflict with their concept of right and wrong. This theme , that court have no power to dilute or expand constitutional provision , be readily accept by the New Deal Supreme Court in economic case , and indeed have long be espouse by such Justices a Oliver Wendell Holmes , Louis D. Brandeis and Benjamin N. Cardozo. But in Bill of Rights case it cause great consternation , first among conservative , then -- much later and for far different reason -- among liberals. It be a controversial philosophy , combine Justice Black 's doctrine of `` absolute '' -- that liberty protect by the Bill of Rights be absolutely insulate from Government action -- with his view that the 14th Amendment , forbid the state to take `` life , liberty or property without due process of law , '' apply the same protection against state action. The Bill of Rights , a write by the founder , apply only to the Federal Government. In sum , his position be that neither Federal nor state action could pass constitutional muster if it collide with the Bill of Rights. And the Amendments be to be read with literalness , fuse with life-giving liberality so a not to dilute their force and effect. For more than 20 year Justice Black joust fiercely with the dominant , so-called `` judicial self- restraint '' wing of the Court , whose view be that individual right have to be `` balanced '' against the need of government. The most famous , intellectually bloody fight be with Justice Felix Frankfurter , particularly during the McCarthy era. For most of this time , Justice Black be in dissent , but by 1961 the tide have turn , and after Justice Frankfurter 's retirement in 1962 , Justice Black 's view virtually prevailed. In one case after another , Justice Black 's dissent be transform into the law of the land. And while the Court do not fully accept his application of the entire Bill of Rights to the state , it in fact apply most of their provision , piecemeal , during his lifetime. These include the right of the indigent to free counsel ( the Sixth Amendment ) ; the right to counsel and silence during police interrogation ( the Fifth and Sixth Amendments ) ; the right of protection against self- incrimination ( the Fifth ) ; the right of confrontation of witness ( the Sixth ) ; the Fourth Amendment 's protection against illegal search and seizure , and the Eighth 's proscription against cruel and unusual punishment. And although a majority refuse to support his view that the First Amendment protect all speech , include libel , slander and obscenity , the ruling in effect do away with most suppression. Moreover , the Court accept Justice Black 's long-held view of `` one man , one vote , '' always bitterly oppose by Justice Frankfurter , who wish to keep out of the `` political thicket. '' Turning Seen in 1960's But by the late nineteen-sixties , a number of Supreme Court observer felt that Justice Black have turn in a conservative way. They cite such opinion of his a one in 1966 in which the Court approve the first conviction of Negro antisegregation demonstrator ; a subsequent dissent in which he hold that no group , however just their cause , have a constitutional right to demonstrate in a public place , and a vehement dissent from a 1969 decision in which the Court rule that public school official could not interfere with student ' right to express political opinion in a nondisruptive way during school hours. Justice Black be unperturbed by the criticism , for in his view he have remain faithful to his principles. As he declare in a 1968 television interview : `` I 've never say that freedom of speech give people the right to tramp up and down the street by the thousand , either say thing that threaten others , with real literal language , or that threaten them because of the circumstance under which they do it. `` The First Amendment protect speech. And it protect writing. And it protect assembly. But it do n't have anything that protect a man 's right to walk around and around and around my house , if he want to ; to fasten my people -- my family -- up into the house , make them afraid to go out of door , afraid that something will happen. '' On another occasion , he tell a Colombia Law School audience , `` I know they 're say [ about me ] , 'Well , he use to be all right. He be young then , but he 's get old and mellow and forget the idea he have when he be a young man. ' Well , I do n't think I 'm old yet. And I think I can state categorically that I have not change my basic constitutional philosophy in at least 40 years. '' This be say in 1968 , when Justice Black be 82. At another time , in 1967 , he declare that he believe , `` in a write Constitution that limit the power of government , all government , include the judiciary. '' And he add : `` When the judge here begin to say that a thing be so bad it have to be unconstitutional , that 's when I leave 'em. I 've be against poll tax all my life but they 're not unconstitutional. I think Connecticut 's anti-birth control law be silly , but if a girl ca n't get an abortion the Constitution ca n't give her one. Same with eavesdropping. I know about all the public furor and I do n't favor eavesdropper but it 's not forbid in the Constitution. '' Justice Black have occasionally upset liberal in the past. By far the big shock be his opinion uphold the evacuation of Japanese-Americans from the West Coast in World War II. But for all the contradiction , real or superficial -- and they be astonishingly few a Justices go- -his place be secure , and he will stand with the top luminary of the Court -- John Marshall , Holmes , Brandeis. One of Eight Children Hugo LaFayette Black be bear Feb. 27 , 1886 , in a crossroad cabin in the small-farm cotton country of Alabama. He be the eighth and last child of William LaFayette Black , a onetime volunteer in the Confederate Army , and his wife , the former Martha Ardellah Toland. His father be a poor farmer who , when Hugo be 3 , buy a general store in nearby Ashland , a county seat of 350 people. A quick , energetic boy , Hugo work in the weekly newspaper 's print shop when he be not otherwise busy pick cotton. In 1962 , when honor by the American Jewish Congress in New York for his 25th anniversary on the Supreme Court , he recall his meager beginnings. `` Seventy year ago , when I be a boy , '' he say , `` perhaps no one who know me think I would ever get beyond the confines of the small country county in which I be born. There be no reason for them to suspect that I would. But we have a free country and the way be open to me. '' Nor would he forget , accord to his old friend Irving Dilliard , who edit a volume of his opinion in 1961 , the fact that a Negro lad he have play with in Ashland be kill by a white youth , who be acquit although clearly guilty. The country-boy element never completely leave him. Lunching at the basement cafeteria in the Supreme Court Building -- he be the only Court member to do so regularly -- he tell a story that illustrate this. `` They 've get lot of good restaurant in New York , have n't they , '' Justice Black said. `` Expensive , though. I remember about 20 year ago a doctor friend take my wife and me to the 23 Club -- or be it the 21 ? -- anyway , it be some place. Must have cost him a fortune. He have 50 single dollar bill in his pocket when we walk in , and not one leave when we walk out. And that do n't include the bill ! `` Well , he just keep give those dollar bill away. Even the butter boy get one. And the salad boy , and I 'm sure the headwaiter get 10 , at least. Well , he be a very successful doctor , do ear operations. `` But even so , when he try to give a dollar to the hat-check girl to retrieve my hat , I have to stop him. 'I resent that , ' I tell him , 'My wife 's be try to get me to throw out that old fedora for 15 year now , and nobody 's go to pay to get it back. Give the dollar to me. ' '' From Medicine to Law As a youth Hugo Black , under the influence of his physician brother , decide to study medicine. But after a year he switch to the University of Alabama Law School , graduate in 1906. He hang up a shingle in Ashland , but within a year move to Birmingham after a fire have destroy his office. There he handle a variety of work , mostly small negligence cases. In 1910 he be appoint police court magistrate of Birmingham , serve for 18 month while at the same time expand his law practice. Many year later an expert would occasionally point to Justice Black 's police court experience a the reason for his pro-law enforcement interpretation of the Fourth Amendment. He scoff at this , however. `` When I be a judge , '' he say , `` I throw out plenty of application for warrants. I always insist that the cop have probable cause before I sign one. '' It be possible , however , that his very care make him look more kindly on magistrate afterward. For he add , `` How much can you review the decision of a magistrate ? '' More revealing , perhaps , be his dismissal of disorderly-conduct charge against 22 Negroes arrest at a dance the police have stopped. Magistrate Black tell the arrest officer that he have `` no more right to break up that dance than any other. '' In 1960 , write for a unanimous Supreme Court , Justice Black reverse the loitering and disorderly-conduct conviction of Sam Thompson , a Louisville black who have be arrest and fin $ 20 by a police court judge for shuffle his foot to jukebox music in a bus-stop cafe. Three year after leave the police court , Hugo Black be elect county solicitor , or prosecutor , of Jefferson Country. In his campaign speeches the young lawyer promise to abolish the fee system whereby sheriff and jailer be pay a per-diem fee for each prisoner in their custody. The system lead to trial postponement and mainly affect poor blacks. `` The people , '' Mr. Black say in his campaign , `` be tire of have hundred of Negroes arrest for shoot crap on payday and crowd the jail with these petty offenders. '' One of his first act after take office be to release 500 prisoner hold for undue period under the fee system. Investigated Brutality More spectacular , and more prophetic in term of Mr. Black 's career on the Supreme Court , be his investigation of police brutality in Bessemer. Noting an inordinate number of confession , particularly from black , the prosecutor convene a grand jury and present evidence of vicious third-degree method , include bloody buckle-strap beatings. As a result of the investigation and the ensue grand jury condemnation ( write by Mr. Black ) , the barbarism be eliminated. Throughout his year on the Supreme Court he be consistently against the confession system of justice. Indeed , his first statement on the subject be describe a one of his best opinions. It come in 1940 and he speak for a unanimous Court in Chambers v. Florida , a highly publicize murder case in which four Negro tenant farmer be convict on confession extract after six day of nonstop questioning. In reverse the conviction , Justice Black , then in his third Court term , write one of his most widely quote line : `` Under our constitutional system , court stand , against any wind that blow , a haven of refuge for those who might otherwise suffer because they be helpless , weak , outnumber , or because they be nonconforming victim of prejudice and public excitement. '' The decision be announce on Lincoln 's Birthday. The following day President Roosevelt suggest at a news conference that the newspaper apologize to Justice Black for the slur they have cast upon him because of his membership in the Ku Klux Klan in the early nineteen- twenties. The episode to which the President refer be this : Mr. Black have join the Robert E. Lee Klan No. 1 of Birmingham on Sept. 11 , 1923 , and remain for two years. At the time he be a prosperous Birmingham trial lawyer , represent labor union , include the United Mine Workers , and argue personal injury cases. The blossoming of his law practice come after he leave the prosecutor 's post to join the Army in 1917. On Sept. 13. 1937 , one month after the Senate have approve , 63 to 16 , his nomination to the Supreme Court , The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette charge that Mr. Black not only have be a member of the Klan but also be still in the organization. The story be leak by the Klan. Series Won Prize The series win a Pulitzer Prize for Ray Sprigle , the reporter , although most of the revelation have appear year before in the Alabama press. Mr. Sprigle 's first article begin : `` Hugo L. Black , Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court , be a member of the hooded brotherhood that for 10 long , blood-drenched year rule the Southland with lash and noose and torch , the Invisible empire , Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. He hold his membership in the masked and oath-bound legion a he hold his office on the nation 's supreme tribunal -- for life. '' The reporter 's assertion that the new Justice still belong to the Klan be base on a `` grand passport '' that Mr. Black have be give after his 1926 primary victory for the Senate. The document say nothing about life membership , but Mr. Sprigle make much of the fact that it contain no expiration date. Since Mr. Black accept the passport personally a year after his resignation from the Klan , the reporter conclude that the resignation be fraudulent. Vacationing in Europe at the time , Justice Black refuse to comment on the reports. When he return , however , he ask for and receive free radio time , not want his word to be distort by what be then an extremely hostile press. On the night of Oct. 1 , 1937 , Mr. Black make his first and last public remark on the issue to an audience estimate at 50 million. He admit that he have be a member of the Klan , but categorically deny that he still be , say that the `` unsolicited card '' give to him after his Senate nomination be not consider by him to be `` membership of any kind. '' `` I never use it , '' he said. `` I do not even keep it. Before become a Senator I drop the Klan. I have have nothing to do with it since that time. . . . I have no sympathy with any group which , anywhere or at any time , arrogate to itself the un-American power to interfere in the slight with complete religious freedom. '' Assailed by Newspapers The newspaper be unimpressed. The New York Herald Tribune call him a `` coward , '' the columnist David Lawrence say he be `` . . .an insult to the million of Catholics , Protestants , Jews , white and colored citizen , '' and the magazine American Mercury describe him a `` a vulgar dog. '' `` At every session of the Court , '' The New York Times say editorially , `` the presence on the bench of a Justice who have wear the white robe of the Ku Klux Klan will stand a a living symbol of the fact that here the cause of liberalism be unwittingly betrayed. '' Justice Black never publicly explain why he have join the Klan. But in a 1967 interview with The New York Times , which he understand would not be publish until his death , he give the following account : `` The Klan in those day be not what it become later. There be a few extremist in it , but most of the people be the cream of Birmingham 's middle-class. It be a fraternal organization really. It be n't anti-Catholic , anti-Jewish or anti-Negro. '' `` In fact it be a Jew , my close friend , Herman Beck , who ask me to join , say they need good people in the Klan. He could n't be in it , of course , but he want me to be in it to keep down the few extremists. You know , when I say on the radio that some of my best friend be Jews they tell me later that be an anti-Semitic remark. Except that in my case it be true. `` Anyway , the only reason I do n't join before I do be I be too busy with other organization , Knights of Pythias , Odd Fellows , others. But before I finally agree to join , on the night I be suppose to join , I get up first and spoke and tell 'em I be against hate , I like Negroes , I like Jews , I like Catholics , and that if I saw any illegality goin ' on I would n't worry about any secrecy , I 'd turn 'em into the grand jury. `` Well when I finish they cheer and they say to me that 's what you 're obligate to do under our rules. And they be right , that 's what the rule say , anything illegal , no secrecy. '' Then Justice Black lean back in his chair and say with a boyish grin : `` You want to know the main reason I join the Klan ? `` I be try a lot of case against corporation , jury case , and I find out that all the corporation lawyer be in the Klan. A lot of the juror be too , so I figure I 'd well be even-up. '' He chuckle and say , `` I have n't tell that before , but that 's how it was. People think it be politics , but it be n't politics. I want that even chance with the juries. '' First Term in Senate Justice Black come to the Court from the Senate , to which he be first elect in 1926. He be less than a flaming liberal in his first term , offer a bill to suspend immigration and lead a battle against Federal antilynching legislation. But in some area he presage the New Deal , a when with Senator George W. Norris he fight private power interest on what be later to become the Tennessee Valley Authority. And the Klan be unhappy with his fight to safeguard the Negro 's position in Federal legislation on fair labor standards. During his first Senate term Mr. Black begin to seriously add to his slim education with extensive reading , a habit he keep throughout his life. Beginning with Adam Smith 's `` Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations , '' he delve deeply into American , Greek , Roman and European history. He read all of Thomas Jefferson 's writings. He study the record of the Federal Constitutional Convention and of the state ratifying convention , a task that serve him well year later on the Court. He also read philosophy and such 19th-century American writer a Mark Twain , Thoreau and Hawthorne. In his second term , now a senior Senator , Mr. Black blossom forth. In the opening week of the first New Deal session in 1933 , he introduce a bill to limit the work week to 30 hour in an effort to reduce unemployment and stabilize production. It pass the Senate but be hit with a crippling House amendment. As a result , President Roosevelt support instead the National Industrial Recovery Act. But the work-week bill be the precursor of one of Mr. Black 's ranking achievement in the Senate , the Fair Labor Standards Act , or Wage-Hour Act of 1938 , the last piece of New Deal legislation to pass Congress , enact shortly after he join the Court. Mr. Black have vote against the N.R.A. , one of the few occasion in which he oppose the President. He felt it price-fixing provision , among other thing , give too much power to business. The bill be later declare unconstitutional. Another major accomplishment in the Senate be the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 , which could not have pass without Mr. Black 's investigation of the utility lobby. The act be design to break up utility hold company systems. The utility lobby fight hard to kill the bill -- too hard , a it turn out. Senator Black 's tenacious investigation , which make him a national figure , bring out the fact that the lobby have corrupt newspaper and send a flood of spurious telegram and letter to Congressmen. Supported Roosevelt Plan In the Senate , too , Mr. Black be a leader in President Roosevelt 's fight to add six Justices to the Supreme Court , the so-called `` court-packing '' plan. The issue deeply divide the country in 1937. Republicans and conservative Democrats accuse the President of attempt a naked power grab , and many liberal argue that the plan would set a dangerous precedent. On the other hand , there be many in the Depression-ridden nation who agree with Mr. Black that the Court be distort the Constitution and freeze the country into a 19th-century economy. They argue that the Court be impose it own view on the nation by interpret the Fifth Amendment 's due process clause to insulate business and property from Federal regulation and the 14th Amendment 's due process clause to prevent state government from relieve Depression hardships. The Roosevelt plan finally die in the Senate , but not before the Court , probably under the political pressure of the attack , switch it course , by one vote , in a couple of key state case and in two major Federal case , validate the National Labor Relations Act and the Social Security Act. In the meantime , Mr. Black soon to be name to the Court , develop his antipathy to the concept of `` substantive due process , '' an antipathy he maintain throughout his life. Under that concept the Court could receive the `` reasonableness of state and Federal legislation , balance the pubic interest against private property right in determine the validity of social and regulatory legislation. As a result , over a 50-year period precede Mr. Black 's appointment , the Court have knock out child-labor law , minimum-wage law and other state legislation design to help the poor. Federally , it have declare unconstitutional such New Deal program a the N.I.R.A. and the Agricultural Adjustment Act. `` That 's why I come on the Court , '' Justice Black say in 1967. `` I be against use due process to force the view of judge on the country. I still am. I would n't trust judge with that kind of power and the Founders do not trust them either. '' His appointment be consider a stroke of Rooseveltian genius. Coming on the heel of the defeat of the Court bill , it might have be stop in the Senate , since the President be at the moment unpopular with the legislator over the pressure exert to pass the bill. Moreover , Mr. Black be a liberal , indeed a radical in 1937 term , and outspokenly against the trend of the Court. But Senatorial courtesy prevail , a the President must have expect , and Mr. Black take the seat of the retire Willis Van Devanter , one of the so-called `` Four Horsemen of Reaction. '' Possibly because of his fear of unbridled judicial power , Justice Black develop his controversial theory , first state in a lengthy , scholarly dissent in 1947 , that the due process clause apply the first eight amendment of the Bill of Rights to the states. He come within a vote of swing the Court to that view in Adamson v. California , a case in which he argue that the Fifth Amendment 's privilege against self-incrimination forbade a prosecutor to comment on a defendant 's failure to take the witness stand. While the Court be never fully win over to the Black idea , it accept most of it across the year and overthrow the Adamson ruling in 1965. Justice Black 's argument in Adamson be criticize , at time even by close friend , a `` an advocate 's history , '' but he be always convince that the men who draw up the amendment have in mind and have so inform the Congress that the 14th would `` pick up '' the Bill of Rights and apply it to the states. For two year before he write his monumental dissent , he study the history of the 14th Amendment , and later he say : Called Others Activists `` If I do n't find that this be their view , my career on the Court would have be entirely different. I would not have go with due process and I 'd be consider the most reactionary judge on the Court. '' Ironically , for all his distaste for judicial lawmaking , Justice Black be know through most of his career a the dean of the `` judicial activist , '' a term connoting , at least popularly , the heavy use of judicial fire-power. And indeed , the `` active '' Court be a proper description of what he stand for and forge during his career , but it must be see in the context of his view of the Constitution. His abide belief be that it framer have work well , that they have create a balance under which the country could grow economically while preserve the basic individual freedoms. For the Court , then , to strike down legislation or official act that violate these freedom be to him an obligation , a `` sacred trust , '' more important even than the Court 's duty to refrain from intrude on the rightful , i.e. economic and social , province of legislators. Thus he could say in 1967 : `` I think of myself a be less of an activist than anyone on the Court. '' His view be that such `` self-restraint '' Justices a Frankfurter and John Marshall Harlan be in truth the activist , since they would toy with the word of the Constitution and interpose a judge 's view of `` reasonableness '' between an act and the great charter. That this be more than semantics be dramatically show when Justice Black refuse to support the Negro civil disobedience movement , vote to uphold the Virginia poll tax and decline to overthrow the Connecticut anti-birth control statute. Aside from these latter-day vote , there be few time in his career when he disappoint libertarians. In the nineteen-fifties he stand , often only with Justice Williams O. Douglas , `` against any wind that blow '' when McCarthyism nearly engulf the country. `` Public opinion be what it now be , '' he write in his famous dissent in the Dennis case , in which the Court uphold the conviction of 11 top American Communists on the ground that they have conspire to advocate overthrow of the Government , `` few will protest the conviction of these Communist petitioners. There be hope , however , that in calmer time , when present pressure , passion , and fear subside , this or some late Court will restore the First Amendment liberties to the high preferred place where they belong in a free society. '' To a considerable extent `` some late Court '' do , largely a a result of Mr. Black 's teaching and forceful campaigning among the Justices. Opinion Drew Wide Criticism Justice Black never express any doubt regard his most heavily criticize opinion for the Court , in the 1944 case of Korematsu vs. U. S. In this he uphold the right of the military to evacuate Japanese-American citizen from the West Coat after the attack on Pearl Harbor. `` Such exclusion , '' Justice Murphy say in dissent , `` go over the very brink of constitutional power and fall into the ugly abyss of racism. '' Justice Black 's opinion be consider by many to be one of the most antiliberal judgment in Supreme Court history. But in 1967 , it author have this to say about it : `` I would do precisely the same thing today , in any part of the country. I would probably issue the same order be I President. We have a situation where we be at war. People be rightly fearful of the Japanese in Los Angels , many loyal to the United States , many undoubtedly not , have dual citizenship -- lot of them. `` They all look alike to a person not a Jap. Had they [ the Japanese ] attack our shore you 'd have a large number fight with the Japanese troops. And a lot of innocent Japanese-Americans would have be shoot in the panic. Under these circumstance I saw nothing wrong in move them away from the danger area. '' However dismayed Justice Black 's admirer be by the Korematsu case , they could and do view it a aberrational. Not so , however , his vote and opinion over the year on the Fourth Amendment 's proscription against unreasonable search and seizures. He almost invariably upset and perplexed libertarian with his narrow view of the amendment 's scope. For year he hold , with Justice Frankfurter , that evidence illegally seize by the police be not excludable from state trials. When he finally switch on this , in 1961 , he do so only because he find it to be a violation of the Fifth Amendment 's bar against self-incrimination. Warrant Procedures Upheld Moreover , in case after case , he vote to uphold questionable warrant procedures. Finally , in 1967 , he say that the Fourth Amendment be no protection whatever against electronic eavesdropping. His rationale be generally that the amendment prohibit only `` unreasonable '' search and seizure and that it do not of itself , include a rule exclude fruit of an illegal seizure from evidence. While this rationale could be consistently read with his often-stated view that the Constitution must be take literally , it do not square with the fact that he have consistently interpret the rest of the Bill of Rights with what one expert call `` that spirit which giveth life. '' `` I 'm oriented towards the Bill of Rights , '' Justice Black say a few year ago , `` in the direction of give the prohibitory clauses a liberal interpretation to bring about what should be bring about. But I just ca n't do it with the Fourth Amendment. '' Justice Black marry twice. His first wife , whom he wed in 1921 , be Josephine Foster , a Birmingham minister 's daughter. The couple have three child , Hugo Jr. and Sterlin Foster , who both become lawyer , and Mrs. Martha Josephine Pesarisi , the wife of a New Jersey psychiatrist. Mrs. Black die in 1951. In 1957 , Justice Black marry his secretary , Mrs. Elizabeth Seay DeMeritte , a fellow Alabaman. Both be fine dancer and excellent hosts. The Justice teach her to play tennis and they regularly use the court behind their 18th-century home in Alexandria , Va .