January 28 , 1972 OBITUARY Mahalia Jackson , Gospel Singer , And a Civil Rights Symbol , Dies By ALDEN WHITMAN Mahalia Jackson , who rise from Deep South poverty to world renown a a passionate gospel singer , die of a heart seizure yesterday in Little Company of Mary Hospital in Evergreen Park , Ill. , a Chicago suburb. She be 60 year old , and have be in poor health for several years. Closely associate for the last decade with the black civil right movement , Miss Jackson be choose to sing at the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. 's March on Washington rally at the Lincoln Memorial in 1963. `` I be 'buked and I be scorned/ I 'm gon na tell my Lord/ When I get home/ Just how long you 've be treat me wrong , '' she sing in a full , rich contralto to the throng of 200,000 people a a preface to Dr. King 's `` I 've get a dream '' speech. The song , which Dr. King have request , come as much from Miss Jackson 's heart a from her vocal cords. The granddaughter of a slave , she have struggle for year for fulfillment and for unprejudiced recognition of her talent. She receive the latter only belatedly with a Carnegie Hall debut in 1950. Her following , therefore , be largely in the black community , in the church and among record collectors. Although Miss Jackson 's medium be the sacred song drawn from the Bible or inspire by it , the word -- and the `` soul '' style in which they be deliver -- become metaphor of black protest , Tony Heilbut , author of `` The Gospel Sound '' and her biographer , say yesterday. Among black , he go on , her favorite be `` Move On Up a Little Higher , '' `` Just Over the Hill '' and `` How I Got Over. '' Singing these and other song to black audience , Miss Jackson be a woman on fire , whose comb fly out of her hair a she performed. She move her listener to dance , to shout , to ecstasy , Mr. Heilbut said. By contrast , he assert , Miss Jackson 's television style and her conduct before white audience be far more placid and staid. Mrs. King in Tribute Miss Jackson give score of benefit performance for black , and she be closely identify with the work of Dr. King. In tribute yesterday , Dr. King 's widow , Mrs. Coretta King , say that `` the cause of justice , freedom and brotherhood have lose a real champion whose dedication and commitment know no midnight. '' President Nixon , in a White House statement , say : `` America and the world , black people and all people , today mourn the passing of Mahalia Jackson. She be a noble woman , an artist without peer , a magnetic ambassador of goodwill for the Untied States in other land , an exemplary servant of her God. `` All her year she pour out her soul in song and her heart in service to her people. Millions of ear will miss the sound of the great rich voice 'making a joyful noise unto the Lord , ' a she like to call her work -- yet her life story itself sing the Gospel message of freedom , and will not cease to do so. '' To Harry Belafonte , the singer who be a close friend , Miss Jackson be `` the single most powerful black woman in the United States. Explaining that she be `` the woman- power for the grass root , '' he say that there be not `` a single field hand , a single black worker , a single black intellectual who do not respond to her '' civil right message. Miss Jackson do indeed have a world audience , through her recording and her concert tours. Last year she tour Japan , India and Europe. In India she give a three-hour concert to a cheering throng that include Prime Minister Indira Gandhi , for whom she sing , a a final encore , `` We Shall Overcome , '' the unofficial civil right anthem. Many of Miss Jackson 's song be evocation of religious faith and be intend , in keep with her own profound belief in God , to be devotional. Her rhythm might be syncopate , but her soaring voice aim to obey the psalmist 's injunction to `` make a joyful noise unto the Lord. '' Miss Jackson 's song be not hymns , nor be they jazz. Convinced that everything she say or do rest on the word of God , she resist effort of the late Louis Armstrong and other jazz or blue musician to transform her into a jazz singer. 'The Songs of Hope ' `` Blues be the song of despair , '' she declared. `` Gospel song be the song of hope. When you sing gospel you have the feeling there be a cure for what 's wrong , but when you be through with the blue , you 've get nothing to rest on. '' Seeking to communicate her faith , which be nontheological , Miss Jackson do a great deal of her singing , especially in the early day , in store-front church , revival tent and ballrooms. A massive , stately , even majestic , woman , she possess an awesome presence that be apparent in whatever milieu she choose to perform. Whether sing at the inauguration of President John F. Kennedy or at Constitution Hall in Washington , or at Philharmonic Hall here , or in prison , hospital and child 's home , Miss Jackson always command respect. But she never forget her origins. Born in New Orleans on Oct. 26 , 1911 , she be the third of six child of a man who be a longshoreman by day , a barber by night and a clergyman on Sunday. Her home , leave motherless when she be 6 , be impoverish but respectable. She be rear by Aunt Duke , a religious woman , who take her to a Baptist church on Sunday and who fulminate against the profane rhythm that emanate from a nearby dance hall. `` We Baptists sing real sweet and do beautiful thing with our hymn and anthem , '' Miss Jackson recalled. `` When those sanctify people light into 'I 'm So Glad Jesus Lifted Me , ' they sing out with a real jubilant expression. '' Miss Jackson , who never learn to read music , join in `` because I be lonely. '' She be also poor , and be oblige to leave school in the eighth grade to work a a cook and washerwoman. In 1928 , she depart New Orleans for Chicago to live with an uncle. There she work a a hotel maid and a laundress and babysitter. She also join the Greater Salem Baptist Church , where her voice soon stand out in the church chorus and she become a soloist. Recorded a Hymn In the early nineteen-thirties she take part in a cross-country gospel crusade and begin to attract attention in the black community with such song a `` He 's Got the Whole World in His Hands , '' `` I Can Put My Trust in Jesus '' and `` God Gon na Separate the Wheat From the Tares. '' This be her first recording , in 1934. At the outset , however , Miss Jackson experience difficulty in get her music accept in the large , more middle-class black church because of the bounce and vigor with which she performed. But a her fame spread , these church open their door to her , especially when she sing some of the more traditional song , such a `` Just a I Am '' and `` I Have a Friend. '' Bible Gave Her Strength Meantime , Miss Jackson be become know in the white community through her record , which sell in the millions. Finally , on Oct. 4 , 1950 , she appear before a packed house at Carnegie Hall , the first of a series of annual performance there. As she do before every performance , she read selection from her Bible `` to give me inner strength. '' With money earn from recording and later from concert , Miss Jackson open a beauty parlor and a florist shop in Chicago and invest in real estate. She be account astute in business dealings. Following her New York debut Miss Jackson appear on radio and television and begin her tour abroad in 1952. She be particularly popular in France and Israel. Her celebrity be enhance in this country with appearance at the Newport ( R. I. ) Jazz Festival. In one of these , in 1958 , she be with Duke Ellington and his band in a gospel interlude of his `` Black , Brown and Beige. '' Between tour Miss Jackson live in a $ 40,000 brick , ranch-style house on the South Side of Chicago. There be a racial dispute when she move into the all-white neighborhood , and a bullet be fire through a window of her home. But overt antagonism eventually subsided. Since 1964 Miss Jackson be in and out of hospitals. Physicians warn her of exhaustion from her demand itineraries. She be hospitalize in the fall of 1967 for heart trouble and again last fall. She persevere in performing , however , because , she explain : `` I have hope that my singing will break down some of the hate and fear that divide the white and black people in this country. [ MISSING TEXT ] husband be Isaac Hockenhall , a chemist , from whom she be divorce in 1943. In 1964 she be marry to Ministers Galloway , a contracting salesman. That union also end in divorce. She have no children. Singing the Glory of God An Appraisal By JOHN S. WILSON Whenever Mahalia Jackson pour the power and the majesty of her voice into one of her favorite song , `` I Believe , '' there could never be any doubt that she mean it , mean every word. She do believe. She believe in her God and she believe in herself. And the sincerity of her belief rang through every note that she sang. Because of her belief , she cut a very straight , direct path through life and she hold to it all the way. There be no deviation , no compromise. She sing the Gospel. She sing the glory of God. This , despite the fact that she have what might have be the great blue voice since Bessie Smith. She grow up idolize Miss Smith but , once she have decide on the direction she would take , she turn away from the blue and throughout her life refuse to sing in any situation that she felt be incompatible with the song she sang. Sang Within Limits So , although one of her major achievement be in take traditional gospel singing to audience beyond the church and beyond the black follower of gospel , she set strict limit on the mean of reach these new and wider audiences. She would not sing in a nightclub or any place where liquor be served. She would not sing blue and she would not sing jazz. But she be not so inflexible that she could not bend a little when she felt the circumstance be right. She be induce to make her first appearance at the Newport Jazz festival in 1957 only because an entire Sunday afternoon be set aside for gospel singing. She return the following year to appear in an evening program with Duke Ellington 's orchestra to sing Mr. Ellington 's sacred song , `` Come Sunday , '' a part of his `` Black , Brown and Beige '' suite. Spread the Word The joy and exultation that Miss Jackson bring to the traditional art of gospel singing be a vital factor in communicate an appreciation of gospel to a vast , previously untapped body of listeners. She spread the word and the sound through her concert appearance and through such album of recording a `` Mahalia Jackson , '' Columbia CS 8759 , `` Bless This House , '' Columbia CS 8761 , `` I Believe , '' Columbia CS 8349 , and `` Newport 1958 , '' Columbia CS 8071. Three of her most famous song -- '' I Will Move On Up a Little Higher , '' `` When I Wake Up in Glory '' and `` Just a Little While to Stay Here , '' be include in a two-volume disk collection ; `` Gospel Sounds , '' Columbia G 31086. Her legacy live on in these recording and , in a slightly different form , in the universal acceptance of that very large and important part of today 's popular music that be base on gospel roots. It be , to a great extent , because of the groundwork lay by Mahalia Jackson -- the ear she open -- that Aretha Franklin can command a large a following a she do today .