October 25 , 1972 OBITUARY Jackie Robinson , First Black in Major Leagues , Dies By DAVE ANDERSON Jackie Robinson , who make history in 1947 by become the first black baseball player in the major league , suffer a heart attack in his home in Stamford , Conn. , yesterday morning and die at Stamford Hospital at 7:10 A.M. He be 53 year old. As an all-round athlete in college and later the star infielder of the Brooklyn Dodgers , he become the pioneer for a generation of black in the major professional sport after World War II. Mr. Robinson , who be honor at the World Series in Cincinnati a week ago Sunday , have be in fail health for several years. He recover from a heart attack in 1968 but then lose the sight of one eye and the partial sight of the other a a result of diabetes. He remain active , though , in national campaign against drug addiction -- from which his son , Jackie Jr. , have be recover before he be kill in 1971 in an automobile accident. In fact , Mr. Robinson plan to attend a drug symposium yesterday sponsor by the business community in Washington. When he be stricken at home , an emergency call be make to the Stamford police by his wife , Rachel , who be an associate professor of psychiatric nursing at the Yale School of Medicine. They apply external massage and oxygen before a Fire Department ambulance take him to the hospital. For sociological impact , Jack Roosevelt Robinson be perhaps America 's most significant athlete. As the first black player in major-league baseball , he be a pioneer. His skill and accomplishment result in the acceptance of black in other major sport , notably professional football and professional basketball. In late year , while a prosperous New York businessman , he emerge a an influential member of the Republican party. His dominant characteristic , a an athlete and a a black man , be a competitive flame. Outspoken , controversial , combative , he create critic as well a loyalists. But he never deviate from his opinions. Commented on Debut In his autobiography , `` I Never Had It Made , '' to be publish next month by G. P. Putnam 's , he recall the scene in 1947 when he stand for the National Anthem at his debut with the Brooklyn Dodgers. He write : `` . . .but a I write these word now I can not stand and sing the National Anthem. I have learn that I remain a black in a white world. '' Describing his struggle , he write : `` I have to fight hard against loneliness , abuse and the knowledge that any mistake I make would be magnify because I be the only black man out there. Many people resent my impatience and honesty , but I never care about acceptance as much a I care about respect. '' His belligerence flare throughout his career in baseball , business and politics. `` I be tell that it would cost me some award , '' he say last year. `` But if I have to keep quiet to get an award , it be n't worth it. Awards be great , but if I get one for be a nice kid , what good be it ? '' To other black ballplayer , though , he be most often salute a the first to run the gantlet. Monte Irvin , who play for the New York Giants while Robinson be with the Dodgers and who now be an assistant to the commissioner of baseball , say yesterday : `` Jackie Robinson open the door of baseball to all men. He be the first to get the opportunity , but if he have not do such a great job , the path would have be so much more difficult. `` Bill Russell say if it have n't be for Jackie , he might not ever have become a professional basketball player. Jack be the trail-blazer , and we be all deeply grateful. We say , thank you , Jackie ; it be a job well done. '' `` He mean everything to a black ballplayer , '' say Elston Howard , the first black member of the New York Yankees , who be now on the coaching staff. `` I do n't think the young player would go though what he did. He do it for all of u , for Willie Mays , Henry Aaron , Maury Wills , myself. `` Jack say he hop someday to see a black manager in baseball. Now I hope some of the owner will see how important that would be a the next step. '' Elected to Hall of Fame After a versatile career a a clutch hitter and dare base runner while play first base , second base , third base and leave field at various stage of his 10 season with the Brooklyn Dodgers , he be elect to baseball 's Hall of Fame in 1962 , his first year of eligibility for the Cooperstown , N.Y. , shrine. Despite his success , he minimize himself a an `` instrument , a tool. '' He credit Branch Rickey , the Brooklyn Dodger owner who break professional baseball 's color line. Mr. Rickey sign him for the 1946 season , which he spend with the Dodger 's leading farm , the Montreal Royals of the International League. `` I think the Rickey Experiment , a I call it , the original idea , would not have come about a successfully with anybody other than Mr. Rickey , '' he often said. `` The most important result of it be that it produce understand among white and it give black people the idea that if I could do it , they could do it , too , that blackness be n't subservient to anything. '' Among his disappointment be the fact that he never be afford an opportunity to be a major -league manager. `` I have no future with the Dodgers because I be too closely identify with Branch Rickey , `` he once said. `` After the club be take over by Walter O'Malley , you could n't even mention Mr. Rickey 's name in front of him. I consider Mr. Rickey the great human be I have ever known. '' Robinson keep baseball in perspective. Ebbets Field , the Brooklyn ballpark that be the stage for his drama , be level shortly after Mr. O'Malley move the Dodger franchise to Los Angeles in 1958. Apartment house replace it. Years later , ask what he felt about Ebbets Field , he reply : `` I do n't feel anything. They need those apartment more than they need a monument to the memory of baseball. I 've have my thrills. '' He also have his heartbreak. His old son , Jackie Jr. , die in 1971 at the age of 24 in an automobile accident on the Merritt Parkway , not far from the family 's home in Stamford. Son Became Drug Addict Three year earlier , Jackie Jr. have be arrest for heroin possession. His addiction have begin while he serve in the Army in Vietnam , where he be wounded. He be convict and order to undergo treatment at the Daytop drug abuse center in Seymour , Conn. Cured , he work at Daytop , help other addict , until his fatal accident. Robinson and his wife , Rachel , have two other child -- David and Sharon. `` You do n't know what it 's like , '' Robinson say at the time , `` to lose a son , find him , and lose him again. My problem be my inability to spend much time at home. I think my family be secure , so I go run around everyplace else. I guess I have more of an effect on other people 's kid than I do my own. '' With the Dodgers , he have other problems. His arrival in 1947 prompt racial insult from some opponent , an abort strike by the St. Louis Cardinals , an alleged deliberate spiking by Enos Slaughter of the Cardinals and stiffness from a few teammate , notable Fred ( Dixie ) Walker , a popular star from Georgia. `` Dixie be very difficult at the start , '' Robinson acknowledge , `` but he be the first guy on the ballclub to come to me with advice and help for my hitting. I know why -- if I help the ballclub , it put money in his pocket. I know he do n't like me any more in those few short month , but he do come forward. '' A Cautioning by Rickey As a rookie , Robinson have be warn by Mr. Rickey of the insult that would occur. He also be urge by Mr. Rickey to hold his temper. He complied. But the following season , a an establish player , he begin to argue with the umpire and duel verbally with opponent in the traditional give-and-take of baseball. As the year pass , Robinson develop a close relationship with many teammates. `` After the game we go our separate way , '' he explained. `` But on the field , there be that understanding. No one can convince me that the thing that happen on the ballclub do n't affect people. The old Dodgers be something special but of my teammate , overall , there be nobody like Pee Wee Reese for me. '' In Boston once , some Braves ' player be taunt Robinson during infield practice. Reese , the popular shortstop , who come from Louisville , move to the rescue. `` Pee Wee walk over and put his arm on my shoulder , a if to say , `` This be my teammate , whether you like it or not , ' '' Robinson said. `` Another time , all our white player get letter , say if they do n't do something , the whole team will be black and they 'll lose their jobs. On the bust to the ballpark that night , Pee Wee bring it up and we discuss it. Pretty soon , we be all laugh about it. '' In clubhouse debate , Robinson 's voice have a sharp , angry tone that rise with his emotional involvement. `` Robinson , '' he once be tell by Don Newcombe , a star pitcher , who be also black , `` not only be you wrong , you 're loud wrong. '' As a competitor , Robinson be the Dodgers ' leader. In his 10 season , they win six National League pennant -- 1947 , 1949 , 1952 , 1953 , 1955 and 1956. They lose another in the 1951 playoff with the New York Giants , and another to the Philadelphia Phillies on the last day of the 1950 season. In 1949 , when he bat .342 to win the league title and drive in 124 run , he be vote the league 's Most Valuable Player Award. In 1947 , he have be vote the rookie of the year. Batted .311 Lifetime `` The only way to beat the Dodgers , '' say Warren Giles , then the president of the Cincinnati Reds , later the National League president , `` be to keep Robinson off the bases. '' He have a career batting average of .311. Primarily a line drive hitter , he accumulate only 137 home run , with a high of 19 in both 1951 and 1952. But on a team with such famous slugger a Duke Snider , Gil Hodges and Roy Campanella , who be also black , he be the cleanup hitter , fourth in the batting order , a tribute to his ability to mover along teammate on base. But his personality flare best a a baserunner. He have a total of 197 stolen bases. He steal home 11 time , the most by any player in the post-World War II era. Ran Like Football Player `` I think the most symbolic part of Jackie Robinson , ball player , '' he once reflect , `` be make the pitcher believe he be go to the next base. I think he enjoy that the most , too. I think my value to the Dodgers be disruption -- make the pitcher concentrate on me instead of on my teammate who be at bat at the time. '' In the 1955 World Series , he steal home against the New York Yankees in the opening game of Brooklyn 's only World Series triumph. Pigeon-toed and muscular , wear No. 42 , he run aggressively , typical of his college football training a a star runner and passer at the University of California at Los Angeles in 1939 and 1940. He rank second in the Pacific Coast Conference in total offense in 1940 with 875 yards- -440 rushing and 435 passing. Born in Cairo , Ga. , on Jan. 31 , 1919 , he be soon take to Pasadena , Calif. , by his mother with her four other child after his father have desert them. He develop into an all-round athlete , compete in basketball and track in addition to baseball and football. After attend U.C.L.A. , he enter the Army. He be commission a second lieutenant. After his discharge , he join the Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro National League a a short stop. `` But if Mr. Rickey have n't sign me , I would n't have play another year in the black league , '' he said. `` It be too difficult. The travel be brutal. Financially , there be no reward. It take everything you make to live off. '' If he have quit the black league without have be sign by Mr. Rickey , what would he have do ? `` I more than likely would have go to coach baseball at Sam Houston College. My minister have go down there to Texas a president of the college. That be about the only thing a black athlete have leave then , a chance to coach somewhere at a small black college. '' Instead , his presence turn the Dodgers into the favorite of black people throughout the nation. `` They pick up 20 million fan instantly , '' say Bill Russell , the famous center of the Boston Celtics who be professional basketball 's first black coach. `` But to most black people , Jackie be a man , not a ballplayer. He do more for baseball than baseball do for him. He be someone that young black athlete could look up to. '' As the Dodgers tour the National League , they set attendance records. But the essence of Robinson 's competitive fury occur in a 1954 game at Ebbets Field with the rival Giants. Sal Maglie , the Giants ' ace who be know a `` The Barber '' because of his tendency to `` shave '' a batter 's head with his fast ball and sharp-breaking curve , be intimidate the Dodger hitters. In the Dodger dugout , Reese , the team captain , speak to the 6-foot , 195-pound Robinson. `` Jack , '' say Reese , `` we get to do something about this. '' Robinson soon be kneel in the on-deck circle a the next Dodger batter. With him be Charlie DiGiovanna , the team ' adult batboy who be a confidant of the players. `` Let somebody else do it , Jack , '' DiGiovanna implored. `` Everytime something come up , they call on you. '' Robinson agree , but once in the batter 's box , he change his mind. Hoping to draw Maglie toward the first-base line , Robinson bunted. The ball be field by Whitey Lockman , the first baseman , but Maglie do n't move off the ground. Davey Williams , the second baseman , cover the base for Lockman 's throw. Knocked Over Williams `` Maglie would n't cover , '' Robinson recalled. `` Williams get in the way. He have a chance to get out of the way but he just stand there right on the base. It be just too bad , but I knock him over. He have a Giant uniform on. That 's what happens. '' In the collision , Williams suffer a spinal injury that virtually end his career. Two inning later , Alvin Dark , the Giants ' captain and shortstop , retaliate by try to stretch a double into a third-base collision with Robinson. Realizing that Dark hop to avenge the Williams incident , Robinson step aside and tag him in the face. But his grip on the ball be n't secure. The ball bounce away. Dark be safe. `` I would 've tear his face up. '' Robinson once recalled. `` But a it turn out , I 'm glad it do n't happen that way. I admire Al for what he do after I have run down Williams. I 've always admire Al , despite his racial stands. I think he really believe that white people be put on this earth to take care of black people. '' Ironically , after the 1956 season , Robinson be trade to the rival Giants , but he announce his retirement in Look magazine. Any chance of his change his mind end when Emil ( Buzzy ) Bavasi , then a Dodger vice president , imply that after Robinson have be pay for the by-line article , he would accept the Giants ' offer. Succession of Executive Posts `` After Buzzy say that , '' Robinson later acknowledge , `` there be no way I 'd ever play again. '' He join Chock Full O'Nuts , the lunch-counter chain , a an executive. He later have a succession of executive post with an insurance firm , a food-franchising rim and an interracial construction firm. He also be chairman of the board of the Freedom National Bank in Harlem and a member of the New York State Athletic Commission. In politics Mr. Robinson remain outspoken. He support Richard M. Nixon in the 1960 Presidential election. When Mr. Nixon and Spiro T. Agnew form the 1968 Presidential ticket , however , he resign from Governor Rockefeller 's staff , where he be a Special Assistant for Community Affairs , to campaign for Hubert H. Humphrey , the Democratic nominee. Mr. Robinson describe Mr. Nixon 's stand on civil right in 1960 a `` forthright '' but denounce the Nixon-Agnew ticket a `` racist. '' Mr. Robinson 's niche in American history be secure -- his struggle predate the emergence of `` the first black who '' in many area of the American society. Even though he understandably need a Branch Rickey to open the door for him , Branch Rickey need a Jackie Robinson to lead other black through that door. In addition to his wife , a fellow-student at U.C.L.A. whom he marry in 1946 , Mr. Robinson leave a son , David ; a daughter , Mrs. Sharon Mitchell of Washington ; a sister , Mrs. Willie Mae Walker , and two brother , Mack and Edgar , all of Pasadena , Calif. A funeral service will be hold Friday at noon at the Riverside Church , Riverside Drive and 122d Street. Visiting hour will be from noon to 9 P.M. at the church tomorrow .