May 28 , 1972 OBITUARY The Duke of Windsor Dies at 77 By Reuters LONDON , Sunday , May 28 -- The Duke of Windsor , who give up the British throne in 1936 to marry an American divorcee , die in his home near Paris early today , a Buckingham Palace spokesman announce here. The Duke be 77 year old. A statement from Buckingham Place , the official residence of Queen Elizabeth , the Duke 's niece say : `` It be announce with deep regret that his Royal Highness , the Duke of Windsor , have die at his home in Paris at 2:25 A.M. , Sunday , May 28 , 1972. `` A further announcement from the Palace will be make later about the funeral arrangements. '' The death announcement reach New York shortly after 1:10 A.M. Eastern daylight time. The Duke , who reign for 10 month a King Edward VIII before abdicate , have be ill for some time. The Duke defy the British Establishment to marry Mrs. Bessie Wallis Warfield Simpson , a twice-divorced American. The couple live in virtual self-exile from Britain since the abdication. Queen Elizabeth visit her ailing uncle at his Paris home during her state visit to France earlier this month. The Duke , who would have be 78 on June 23 , be too ill to leave the first-floor sitting room of the house overlook the Bois de Boulogne. The Duke undergo a hernia operation earlier this year. One of his personal physician , Dr. Arthur Antenucci , of the Roosevelt Hospital in New York City , fly to Paris to see him two day ago. In Paris , a spokesman for the Duke say : `` He die peacefully. '' Asked what have be the cause of death , the spokesman -- the Duke 's longtime secretary , John Utter -- say : `` Just natural causes. '' Two week before the Queen , Prince Phillip and the Prince of Wales make their teatime call on the Duke and Duchess at their home near Longchamp Racecourse during the royal visit to France this month , the Duke be report to be `` in need of a long rest. '' After the 40-minute royal visit , the Duke be say to be in good spirits. Later the Duke 's secretary say he be be treat at home for an illness , but it nature and his treatment be not disclosed. Abdicated in 1936 `` But you must believe me when I tell you that I have find it impossible to carry the heavy burden of responsibility and to discharge my duty a King , a I would wish to do , without the help and support of the woman I love. '' With these word , deliver with sadness over the radio on Dec. 11 , 1936 , to his subject in Britain , Edward VIII , later the Duke of Windsor , become the first monarch in British history to voluntarily abdicate his throne , which he do 11 month after assume it. A popular king , Edward VIII touch off a sensation at home and abroad with the announcement that he intend to leave the throne to marry Mrs. Bessie Wallis Warfield Simpson , an American who have be twice divorced. 'I Lay Down My Burden' Edward have be determine to marry Mrs. Simpson , although Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin have try to dissuade him , on the ground that the King , a head of the Church of England , would be violate the church 's doctrine against divorce. In the absence of legislation that would permit the marriage , King Edward choose to abdicate. He be succeed by his brother , the Duke of York , who become King George VI. The new King make his predecessor the Duke of Windsor. `` I now quit altogether public affair , and I lay down my burden , '' Edward say in his broadcast the day after the act of abdication have be signed. Then , on Dec. 12 , at 2 A.M. , he leave England. He marry Mrs. Simpson six month later in France. He remain in virtual exile from Britain ever since , estrange from the royal family until recently. It be not until 1965 that Queen Elizabeth II meet the Duchess of Windsor at the bedside of the Duke while he be in London for eye operations. Two year later , the Duke and Duchess be formally receive by the Queen at a memorial ceremony for Edward 's mother , Queen Mary. Last May 18 , Queen Elizabeth visit her ailing uncle at his Paris home. After the abdication , the Duke and Duchess attract wide publicity a they travel about. They often attend charity ball and other event in New York , where they stay at the Waldorf- Astoria. The Duke perform some official duty in World War II , when he be appoint governor and commander in chief of the Bahamas. Called David at Home Much of the time in recent year be spend at their home in the Bois du Boulogne on the edge of Paris , where the Duke enjoy gardening and occasionally received visitor , include Emperor Hirohito of Japan on his world tour last year. Edward be bear on June 23 , 1894 , in the 57th year of the reign of his great-grandmother Queen Victoria. His mother be the former Princess Victoria Mary of Teck , later to be Queen Mary , and his father be the Duke of York , later to become King George V. He be christen Edward Albert Christian George Andrew Patrick David of the House of Saxe- Coburg-Gotha. In 1917 , George V renounce the German name and proclaim it the House of Windsor. Edward -- whom the royal family refer to by his last give name , David -- spend much of his childhood at Sandringham in Norfolk , in a household where his father insist on stern discipline. `` I have often think , '' the Duke later write , `` that my father like child only in the abstract. '' Served in France In 1907 , Edward enter the Royal Naval College at Osborne on the Isle of Wight , where the discipline be rigorous. With the death of his grandfather , Edward VII , in 1910 , and the ascension of George V , Edward become heir apparent and be send to Magdalen College at Oxford for a broad education. Edward do not excel in academic , but he enjoy college life , engage in such extracurricular pursuit a dancing and play the banjo. When World War I begin , he be transfer to the Grenadier Guards. As a result of his own persistence he be eventually send to France , where he serve on the staff of the commander of the British Expeditionary Force. He be never permit on the front line for long , but be under fire several times. After the war , the Prince of Wales take a series of royal tour around the world that attract great attention. He be accord a particularly thunderous welcome in New York in 1919 , and newspaper carry headline stress his eligibility a a bachelor. The Prince 's genuine friendliness , which allow him to mingle with people , combine with a somewhat shy , almost wistful manner , convince those who saw him that he would be a popular king. In 1930 the Prince meet Mrs. Ernest Simpson , wife of an American maritime broker. Mrs. Simpson 's first marriage , to E. Winfield Spencer , have end in divorce. `` In character , '' the Duke later write in his memoir , `` Wallis be , and still remain , complex and elusive , and from the first I look upon her a the most independent woman I have ever met. This refresh trait I be incline to put down a one of the happy outcome of the event of 1776. '' About the time that the Prince of Wales decide that he want to marry Mrs. Simpson , his father , George V , die , on Jan. 20 , 1936. Two day later , Edward VIII be proclaim King. In his 11 month on the throne , Edward make it clear through his personal style that his would be an unorthodox approach to the monarchy. But a it become clear that a marriage to Mrs. Simpson , who have receive a preliminary divorce decree that October , could not be accommodate with his own position , Edward VIII decide to abdicate before his coronation. The marriage take place June 3 , 1937 , at the Chateau de Cande at Monts , near Tours , France. `` I do not value the crown so lightly that I give it away hastily , '' he later explained. `` I value it so deeply that I surrender it , rather than risk any impairment of it prestige . ''