May 3 , 1972 OBITUARY J. Edgar Hoover Made the F.B.I. Formidable With Politics , Publicity and Results By CHRISTOPHER LYDON ashington , May 2 -- When J. Edgar Hoover amble through the Mayflower Hotel after one of his ritual fruit-salad-and-coffee lunch late last year , he pass almost unnoticed. The once ruddy face be puffy and pale. The brushed-back , gray-brown hair be straight and thin -- not the wiry dark curl of a few year ago. He walk stiffly , although his figure be trim and erect. Behind his glass , his dark brown eye look fix , and he seem to be daydreaming. At the age of 77 , the legendary G-man -- in his 48th year a director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation -- the most enduring and perhaps , if there be such a thing a a cumulative total , the most powerful official in the long span of the American Government -- look deceptively like any other old gentleman in the hotel lobby. In one of his rare reflection on mortality a few year ago , Mr. Hoover tell a reporter , `` The great enemy be time. '' Time 's advance against this seemingly indestructible official have become obvious. But then , Mr. Hoover be always more human than he or the myth admitted. Mr. Hoover 's power be a compound of performance and politics , publicity and personality. At the base of it all , however , be an extraordinary record of innovation and modernization in law enforcement -- most of it in the first decade or so of his tenure. The centralized fingerprint file ( the print total pass the 200-million mark this year ) at the Identification Division ( 1925 ) and the crime laboratory ( 1932 ) be landmarks in the gradual application of science to police work. The National Police Academy ( 1935 ) have train the leadership elite of local force throughout the country. Mr. Hoover 's recruitment of lawyer and accountant , although they now make up only 32 percent of the special agent corp , set a world standard of professionalism. The National Crime Information Center enable 4,000 local law enforcement agency to enter record and get question answer on a network of 35 computer system , with it headquarters at the F.B.I. office here. From the start , Mr. Hoover get results. His bureau round up the gangster in the nineteen- thirties. It make the once epidemic crime of kidnap a rarity ( `` virtually extinct , '' a the director 's friend like to say ) . It arrested German saboteur within day after their submarine land them on the Atlantic Coast. And , in one of it most sensational coup , the F.B.I. seize the slayer of Mrs. Viola Gregg Liuzzo only hour after the civil right worker 's shotgun death in Alabama in 1965. The F.B.I do not catch everybody , and it be sometimes many month before any of it `` most wanted '' suspect be arrested. But Mr. Hoover execute enough seemingly miraculous swoop to make any specific criticism perilous. Mr. Hoover always understand the subtle current of power among official in Washington good than anyone know him. Not a New Dealer at heart , he have nonetheless dazzle President Franklin D. Roosevelt with his celebrated success against kidnappers. He Got Results Roosevelt like him ; he slap the F.B.I. director 's back and laugh when Mr. Hoover confess that an agent have be catch in the act of illegal wiretapping , and he be amuse at the bureau 's temerity in put a spy on Harry Hopkins , Roosevelt 's counselor , in London. Roosevelt 's assignment of counter-espionage duty to the F.B.I. a war loom in 1936 expand the bureau 's size and heighten Mr. Hoover 's prestige. But , when the Republicans win the White House again in 1952 , Mr. Hoover 's loyalty swung immediately to the new team. The more awesome Mr. Hoover 's power grow , the more plainly he would state , for the record , that there be nothing `` political '' about it , that the F.B.I be simply a `` fact-finding agency '' that `` never make recommendation or draw conclusions. '' The most pointed such declaration , come in the furor about Harry Dexter White in 1953 , be , paradoxically , one of Mr. Hoover 's most political acts. In a speech in Chicago , Herbert Brownell , President Eisenhower 's Attorney General , say that Mr. White , who have serve a Assistant Secretary of the Treasury under Roosevelt , be name in 1946 a the United States executive director of the International Monetary Fund even though President Truman have be tell that Mr. White be a Soviet spy. Mr. Truman , in retirement , reply that the F.B.I. have contribute to the judgment that it would be safe to keep Mr. White in office , under observation , that to dismiss him. Rushing before Senate investigator , Mr. Hoover do not question the `` conclusion '' that Mr. White be a spy -- although the F.B.I 's evidence have not be enough to persuade a grand jury to indict Mr. White before he die in 1948. As for Mr. White 's promotion to the International Monetary Fund , Mr. Hoover state emphatically that , while he know of Mr. Truman 's reasoning , he have not be in on the decision nor have he approve it. At a time when the Republican party chairman be promise to make Communism in government the central issue of the 1954 Congressional campaign , Mr. Hoover 's eager testimony be take by some to be a boldly partisan move. House Speaker Sam Rayburn be one of many Democrats who never forgive Mr. Hoover and encourage speculation that a Democratic President would find a new F.B.I. director. But Mr. Hoover 's reappointment be virtually the first decision John F. Kennedy announce on the day after his election to the Presidency in 1960. Despite it acrimonious ending the Hoover-Kennedy relationship start out cordially , base apparently on Mr. Hoover 's long acquaintance with the President 's father , the late Joseph P. Kennedy. Robert Kennedy have urge the President-elect to retain Mr. Hoover ; and when John Kennedy weigh assignment for his brother , Mr. Hoover urge him to follow his instinct and make Robert the Attorney General. Later Robert Kennedy and Mr. Hoover fight a long tug-of-war over the assignment of agent to civil right and organize crime cases. Mr. Hoover be not use to have an immediate bos who could block his access to the White House. He be annoy when the Attorney General instal a `` hot line '' between their Justice Department office , and be even more annoyed when Robert Kennedy have the F.B.I. phone move from the desk of Helen Gandy , Mr. Hoover 's long- time secretary , to the director 's desk. Robert Kennedy never forgive Mr. Hoover for the cold telephone call that bring the first word of his brother 's assassination. Mr. Hoover 's voice , Robert Kennedy tell William Manchester , the author , be `` not quite as excite a if he be report the fact that he have find a Communist on the faculty of Howard University. '' Later , accord to William W. Turner , a former agent who write an unflattering book on `` Hoover 's F.B.I. , '' Robert Kennedy call back on the hot line. `` Hoover be in his office with several aide , '' Mr. Turner write , `` when it rang. . .and rang. . .and rang. When it stop ring , the director snap to an aide , 'Now get that phone back on Miss Gandy 's desk. ' '' Although Robert Kennedy remain Attorney General until the summer of 1964 , he and Mr. Hoover never speak again after the President 's assassination. Until Representative Hale Boggs of Louisiana , the House majority leader , criticize Mr. Hoover in the House last spring a a `` feudal baron '' and a wire-tapper , the F.B.I. director have be sacrosanct in Congress ' deference. The case of former Senator Edward V. Long , a Missouri Democrat who denounce government wiretapping and be quickly undone by Life magazine 's disclosure , leak from the F.B.I. , that he be split legal fee with a teamster lawyer in St. Louis , be often cite a an example of the director 's tactics. Mr. Hoover insist that he do not tap the phone or `` bug '' the office of Congressmen , and Mr. Boggs fail notably to prove the contrary. But Mr. Hoover always have other way to keep critic in line anyway. The late Senator Kenneth D. McKellar , a Tennessee Democrat and chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee , harass Mr. Hoover from time to time in the nineteen-thirties , and in the spring of 1936 draw the blushing testimony that the director of the F.B.I. have never make an arrest. Less than a month later , a if by magic , Mr. Hoover lead a raid in New Orleans that capture Alvin ( Kreepy ) Karpis , a star of the Ma Barker mob. By his own account , Mr. Hoover rush up to the un-suspecting Karpis a he sit in a car , threaten him with a gun , then snap out the order to other agent : `` Put the cuff on him , boys. '' In his recently publish memoir , Karpis contend that Mr. Hoover `` hid until I be safely cover by many guns. He wait until he be tell the coast be clear. Then he come out to reap the glory. '' Karpis 's account be obviously suspect , and about 35 year too late to undo Senator McKellar 's embarrassment. When Senator McKellar try to cut $ 225,000 out of the F.B.I. budget that year , Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg of Michigan denounce him , accord to one report of the Senate debate , `` a a miser whose parsimony would cause the threat of kidnapping to hang once more over every cradle in America. '' Mr. Hoover 's full budget request be then pass by a resounding voice vote. Since that time , the Senate have never question the F.B.I. budget a report by the House. And in the House , the veteran chairman of the Appropriations subcommittee that theoretically review the bureau 's spending , Representative John J. Rooney , Democrat of Brooklyn , say that `` I have never cut [ Mr. Hoover 's ] budget and I never expect to. '' As some of the men closest to him volunteer , Mr. Hoover 's primary genius might well have be publicity. He have some famous fight with other police agency -- notably after the capture of Bruno Hauptmann , the Lindbergh kidnapper , in 1933 -- to secure public credit for his bureau , but Mr. Hoover be no ordinary headline grabber. The real foundation of his legend be build on more solid stuff than press relation ; certainly his image be never dependent on the goodwill of newspaperman , to whom Mr. Hoover be normally inaccessible Mr. Hoover never hold a news conference. The close thing to a mouthpiece in the press be not a political pundit or a crime reporter but the late Walter Winchell , the Broadway gossip columnist , who travel with an F.B.I. escort and carry an item about `` G-man Hoover '' almost every day. The making of the Hoover folk hero , in which Mr. Winchell play a large part , be undertake purposefully in the early thirty -- long after the director 's quiet administrative mastery have establish him securely. Speakeasies be the fashion. Gangsterism ravage the land , capture headline , and in a sense , the public fancy. For Mr. Hoover , the last straw be the Kansas City massacre of June 17 , 1933 , in which Charles ( Pretty Boy ) Floyd and his gang kill five men , include an F.B.I. agent and three local policemen. `` If there be go to be publicity , '' the director rag , `` let it be on the side of law and order. '' Looking about for a symbol , Mr. Hoover find himself , and proceed to orchestrate a dazzling range of movie , book , radio drama and comic strips. Mr. Hoover understand pop culture and it evolution. He promote `` junior G-man '' club for boy , and sell two and a half million copy of `` Masters of Deceit , '' a book on Communism. His `` ten most wanted '' list make a lot of seedy drifter into headline material. In the age of television , he shrewdly reserve the right to select the actor ( Efrem Zimbalist Jr. ) who would represent the F.B.I. in million of living room in a popular television series. The late Senator George Norris of Nebraska call Mr. Hoover `` the great hound for publicity on the American continent. '' Even Chief Justice Harlan Fiske Stone , who have appoint the F.B.I. director in 1924 , observe critically that `` one of the great secret of Scotland Yard have be that it movement be never advertised. '' Popularity Was High But Mr. Hoover , once commit to a public fight on crime , play the role with all his fierce energy. He unquestionably make a brilliant success of it. Even after political pot-shots at the director become fashionable in recent year , a Gallup Pol for Newsweek magazine last spring show that 80 per cent of those who have any opinion about Mr. Hoover rat his performance `` good '' or `` excellent. '' Any general accounting of the F.B.I director 's power must also take not of the fact that his personality , as well a his office , have always inspire fear. Francis Biddle , President Roosevelt's Attorney General in the early nineteen-forties , sense that , behind Mr. Hoover 's `` absolute self- control '' be `` a temper that might show great violence if he do not hold it on leash , subject to the domination of a will that be the master of his temperament. '' There be hint of that temper in his passionate criticism -- favorite phrase such a `` mental halitosis , '' and the `` jellyfish '' tag he put on former Attorney General Ramsey Clark. And Mr. Hover have a hair-trigger sensitivity to criticism. When the Warren commission be investigate President Kennedy 's assassination and say that the F.B.I. have not share it intelligence fully with the Secret Service , Mr. Hoover lash out at what he call `` a classic example of Monday morning quarterbacking , '' a charge that gravely displease President Johnson. And when the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. say that Southern black could not turn to their local F.B.I. office with any assurance of sympathy or zeal for civil right , Mr. Hoover call Dr. King `` the most notorious liar in the country. '' Later , Mr. Hoover have his staff invite newsman to hear the taped record of F.B.I. bug in Dr. King 's hotel room a evidence that `` moral degenerate , '' a Mr. Hoover put it , be lead the civil right movement. This be a rare extension of Mr. Hoover 's lifelong practice of entertain Attorneys General and Presidents with spicy detail about the secret life of famous people. Critics within the F.B.I be crush summarily , and men who be think to have be good friend of the director reveal deep level of hostility in casual conversations. `` I 'm afraid of him , '' say a former aide who would seem to have be secure in a new and completely different public career. `` I ca n't imagine what he 'd do to me , but I 'd rather not mess with him. '' John Edgar Hoover be bear in Washington on New Year 's Day in 1895 , the young of three child of Dickerson N. Hoover , an easy-going Federal official , and the former Annie M. Scheitlin , the granddaughter of Switzerland 's first Consul General in America. The Hoovers ' stucco house on Steward Square have be tear down , but Mr. Hoover 's birthplace be memorialize in a stained glass window of the Presbyterian church that stand on the site of the house. Mrs. Hoover , who have be describe a `` old-world strict , '' instill in her son an intense discipline and stern sensitivity to moral issues. By all account , she be the dominant influence on his character. As a boy , he be know a `` Speed '' -- a reference , apparently , to his agile mind , rattle speech and efficiency a a grocery delivery boy in the Capitol Hill section of Washington. Admirers have compare his physique to Babe Ruth 's -- heavy torso , spindly legs -- and indeed , his flatten nose be the result of a hard-hit baseball. But Mr. Hoover be never an athlete. Remembering a day in 1909 when the football coach at Central High School reject the puny volunteer bring twinge ever after. In his disappointment , young Hoover turn all the more intensely to the school 's military drill team , of which he become captain , and to public speaking. According to one biographer , he never have a regular girl friend in high school ; friend tease him , write Mildred H. Comfort , `` and accuse him of be in love with Company A , '' an institutional attachment fore-shadowing his marriage to the F.B.I. As a debater , young Hoover argue `` The Fallacies of Women Suffrage '' with gusto and competitive success. He be valedictorian of his class and be describe in the school yearbook a `` a gentleman of dauntless courage and stainless honor. '' In his high school day , he also be a choir boy and Sunday school instructor. Lessons on Indexing Although the University of Virginia offer him a liberal art scholarship , Mr. Hoover fear that his living expense would be a burden on his father. Instead , he take a $ 30-month clerk 's job at the Library of Congress ( he would apply index lesson to law enforcement later ) , and enrol at George Washington University , where he be able to win his law degree in three years. With a master 's degree in 1917 , Mr. Hoover pass the bar and move into a $ 1,200-a-year job at the Department of Justice -- his only employer over a stretch that exceed 55 years. From the start , accord to Jack Alexander 's 1937 profile of Mr. Hoover in The New Yorker , he stand out from the other young lawyer around him. `` He dress good than most , a bit on the dandyish side , '' Mr. Alexander wrote. `` He have an exceptional capacity for detail work , and he handle small chore with enthusiasm and thoroughness. He constantly seek new responsibility to shoulder , and welcome chance to work overtime. When he be in conference with an official of his department , his manner be that of a young man who confidently expect to rise. '' Mr. Hoover 's first assignment in `` counter-radical activity '' leave a profound mark. This be at the end of President Wilson 's second term , the era of the `` Red raid '' under Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer. Evidently catch up in the official agitation about bomb and Bolshevism , Mr. Hoover take charge of assemble a card file on 450,000 `` radical , '' and build his first informer network -- a controversial tool of police work that he use with dramatic result later against the Communist party and the Ku Klux Klan. Many year later , Mr. Hoover say he have always `` deplored '' the hysterical dragnet arrest of thousand of innocent alien in 1919 and 1920 , but the record be also clear that , a the head of the new General Intelligence Division at the Justice Department , he be responsible for plan the raid , if not their execution. A still darker era follow under President Harding. Within the Justice Department , accord to Alpheus T. Mason , the historian , the Bureau of Investigation `` have become a private secret service for corrupt force within the Government. '' Mr. Hoover nearly quit in disgust. When Harlan Fiske Stone become Attorney General under President Coolidge in 1924 , he determine to rebuild the bureau after the image of Scotland Yard and seek , a his director , a man experience in police work but free of the `` more usual police tradition that it take a crook to catch a crook and that lawlessness and brutality be more to be rely upon than skill and special training. '' Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover , an untainted holdover from the Harding Administration , recommend J. Edgar ( no relation ) a `` a lawyer of uncommon ability and character. '' Attorney General stone , who hold the appointive power , offer him the job. But Mr. Hoover , who be then only 29 year old , do not leap at what be unmistakably the chance of a lifetime. With confidence and cunning that be very much in character , he say he would accept the assignment only if appointment to the bureau be divorce entirely from outside politics and if he would have sole control over merit promotions. Mr. Stone reply that he would not allow Hoover to take the job under any other conditions. And thus in 1924 the modern bureau -- rename the Federal Bureau of Investigation in 1935 -- be born. Organizing Principle From the start , Mr. Hoover 's personal grip on all the important string be the organize principle at the bureau. It have everything to do with discipline and morale ; Mr. Hoover make Siberia assignment and the compassionate transfers. It have a lot to do with the agency 's efficiency and it incomparable record of probity. Under the Hoover inspection system , there be no secret and no independent power center in the F.B.I. In recent year , the system also seem to have inhibit the bureau from take worthwhile risks. `` The first rule , '' accord to one former agent be : `` Do not embarrass the director. '' The insulation from outside politics mean free play for Hoover politics. The 15,000 F.B.I. employee have neither the Civil Service nor a union to inhibit the director 's whims. He shape the bureau in his own Victorian image , and change in the process himself. Personal affair be strictly regulate at the bureau. Women be not allow to smoke on the job. No one get a coffee break. A clerk be once dismiss for play with a yo-yo in the halls. In a case that go to court in 1967 , a 26-year-old clerk be dismiss for keep a girl friend in his apartment overnight. Agents have be reprimand for read Playboy magazine and transfer for be over-weight. Mr. Hoover wear custom-made , Brooks Brothers shirt and suit , and he order his agent to dress carefully , like young businessmen. The unofficial uniform for an agent include a white shirt , dark suit , snap-brim hat and a handkerchief in the jacket pocket. One-man rule also breed sycophancy. Flattery work wonder around Mr. Hoover , accord to an inside student of the director 's office. `` Let 's say you 're an agent , '' he said. `` Go in there and tell him he look well than ever , that you be inspire by his leadership , that he 's save America and you hope he live forever. As soon a you leave there will be a memo from the director say , 'This man have executive ability. ' A lot of agent have catch on. '' Agents admittedly quake at the thought of the director 's disapproval , express typically in the bright blue ink of Mr. Hoover 's stub pen in the margin of their memorandums. His language be vehement ( This be asinine ! '' ) ; the filling of all four border around a typewritten sheet be know a a `` four-bagger. '' Once , it be say , when an assistant 's memorandum so fill the page that Mr. Hoover barely have room for a comment , he wrote. `` Watch the border , '' and his puzzled but obedient aide dispatch agent to patrol the Canadian and Mexican border for a week. Friends and detractor all agree that the system have mirror and feed a colossal ego. In the office , for instance , Mr. Hoover never circulate ; people come to him. He sit amid flag behind a raise , polish mahogany desk at the end of a 35-foot office. Visitors , if they sit , sink into deep leather chair and inevitably look up to the throne director. A day in the life of J. Edgar Hoover testify to his unflagging energy and to the power of habit. The few change in his routine be force on him ; His friend Clyde Tolson , the F.B.I. 's associate director , be not well enough to walk the last few block to the office in recent day , so their morning stroll along Constitution Avenue be abandoned. The old Harvey 's Restaurant be raze so Mr. Hoover and Mr. Tolson have lunch instead at the Mayflower Hotel next door on Connecticut Avenue. Old pattern persisted. The chauffeur pick up Mr. Hoover and then Mr. Tolson , about 9 o'clock every morning , and deliver them to the office about 9:30. At the end the director be still the complete master of the bureau 's huge flow of paper work. He do little sleuthing himself , but he keep abreast of the F.B.I 's major cases. Certain category of business be handle by Mr. Hoover alone , include high-level personnel decision , liaison in other than routine matter with Congress , the Attorney General and the White House , and anything that bring unfavorable publicity on the bureau. He leave for lunch at 11:30 A.M. , return by 12:45 P.M. and usually take work home with him when he leave for the day at 4:30. There be thing he do not do anymore. He outlive the Stork Club in New York where he long enjoy cafe society 's attention and the friendship of Sherman Billingsley , the owner. He no longer tend the azalea around his house. He have to give up his favorite angel food cake and chocolate cream pie to keep his weight down. Once an avid walker , he say that `` condition in this city , '' presumably a reference to the crime rate , keep him out of Rock Creek Park , formerly a favorite stamping ground near his house. Some Continuities Still , the continuity in his life be as noticeable a the change : the Jack Daniel 's whiskey before dinner ; the Miami vacation during the last two week of December and the July break and physical checkup in La Jolla , Calif. , the passion for horse racing ; and above all , the friendship with Mr. Tolson , a fellow bachelor with whom Mr. Hoover have lunch and dinner six day a week since the late nineteen-twenties. Mr. Tolson , who always stay a respectful step behind Mr. Hoover in their famous walk together , lag severely after two stroke and open-heart surgery. But the friendship be a s fast a ever , and through a special personnel device that Mr. Hoover engineer to get around Mr. Tolson 's physical disability , Mr. Tolson remain the bureau 's second-ranking officer. Together they frequent the racetrack around Washington , as well a Gulfstream in Miami and Delmar in La Jolla. Mr. Hoover , who apply the same analytical imagination to the racing chart that he once use on kidnapping ring , be still bother by tout who recognize him and want to tip him on a sure thing. But he bet only $ 2 on each race and would leave in disgust if his loss go over $ 10. Friends say it be Mr. Tolson , not Mr. Hoover , who send junior F.B.I. agent around to the $ 50 and $ 100 window with heavy side bets. Mr. Hoover 's humor usually run to heavy-handed practical jokes. The late Julius Lulley , the restaurateur who always keep a special table set for Mr. Hoover and Mr. Tolson at Harvey 's , once find his Maryland farm dot with F.B.I. `` want '' poster bear Mr. Lulley 's picture. Years ago , when Guy Hottel , a Hoover bodyguard and friend , get marry , the F.B.I. director find out , where Mr. Hottel be go on his honeymoon and conspire with the Virginia State Police to have the newlywed pick up and hold overnight on a fake charge. Mr. Hoover be not always quick to appreciate other people 's jokes. In his saloon-going day in New York , it be say that he avoid Toots Shor 's restaurant because of the insult that be Mr. Shor 's trademark. However , there always be a droll undercurrent in many of Mr. Hoover 's utterance -- a in the W. C. Fields-like defense of racetrack a an outlet for people 's emotion , `` which if they be n't at the track , they might use for less laudable escapades. '' And Mr. Hoover recently take to public kid about himself -- the clear sign of his rejuvenation under President Nixon and Attorney General John N. Mitchell. Why Did He Stay ? At a party for Mr. Mitchell 's wife Martha last summer , Mr. Hoover bring the house down with an impromptu speech. Referring to a recent Life magazine cover that feature a marble bust of his bulldog face and the headline , `` Emperor of the F.B.I , '' Mr. Hoover apologize to those who do not recognize him in a tuxedo. `` We emperor have our problem , '' he said. `` My Roman toga be not return from the cleaners. '' Perhaps the most widely ask question about Mr. Hoover recently be why he stay on the job , but that , too , have be around a while. Even in the nineteen-thirties his long tenure be consider remarkable. During the forty , a former aide recall , `` every year he 'd ask for a computation of his retirement and there 'd be a rumor that the old boy be step down. '' The inside gossip in the fifty be that Mr. Hoover have approve plan for the construction of his retirement villa at La Jolla. After John Kennedy reappointed Mr. Hoover in 1960 , it be think he would bow out around the mandatory retirement age of 70 , which would have come on New Year 's Day , 1965. But as early a May 1964 , President Johnson waive the retirement law. The next obvious milestone be his 75th Birthday in January , 1971 , but that pass without incident , like all the rest. Some people say that Mr. Hoover want to see the completion of the new $ 102-million F.B.I. building on Pennsylvania Avenue -- sometime in 1974. Mr. Hoover say he will stay on the job as long a his physical condition permitted. But why ? `` I 've always be against retire a man by age , '' he said. `` The longer a man be with u , the more valuable he becomes. '' The men around Mr. Hoover point to his egotism -- a sense of his own indispensability -- and to the lack of family and interest that console other men in retirement. `` For him the bureau be everything , '' say a friend .