January 23 , 1973 OBITUARY Lyndon Johnson , 36th President , Is Dead ; Was Architect of 'Great Society ' Program Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES SAN ANTONIO , Tex. , Jan. 22 -- Lyndon Baines Johnson , 36th President of the United States , die today of an apparent heart attack suffer at his ranch in Johnson City , Tex. The 64-year-old Mr. Johnson , whose history of heart illness begin in 1955 , be pronounce dead on arrival at 4:33 P.M. central time at San Antonio International Airport , where he have be fly in a family plane on the way to Brooke Army Medical Center here. A spokesman at Austin say that Mr. Johnson 's funeral would probably be hold Thursday at the National City Christian Church in Washington. He say the body would lie in state at the Johnson Library in Austin from noon tomorrow until 8 A.M. Wednesday , with an honor guard , and then would be take to Washington , where it will lie in state at the Capitol rotunda until the funeral. Mr. Johnson will be bury at the L.B.J. Ranch. Death come to the nation 's only survive former President a the nation observe a period of mourn proclaim less than a month ago for former President Harry S. Truman. A Legacy of Progress Although his vision of a Great Society dissolve in the morass of war in Vietnam , Mr. Johnson leave to the nation a legacy of progress and innovation in civil right , Social Security , education , housing and other program attest to his fundamental affection for his fellow Americans. At Fort Sam Houston , where Brooke Army Medical Center be situate , flag be hoist to full staff and then immediately lower again in respect for the Texan who be thrust into the Presidency on Nov. 22 , 1963 , when an assassin 's bullet take the life of President Kennedy in Dallas. Ironically , Mr. Johnson die in what appear to be the waning day of the Vietnam war. The man who win election in 1964 to a full term a President with the great voting majority ever accord a candidate be transform by that war into the leader of a divided nation. Amid rise personal unpopularity , in the face of the linger war and racial strife at home , Mr. Johnson surprise the nation on March 31 , 1968 , with a television speech in which he announce , `` I shall not seek and I will not accept the nomination of my party a your President. '' Stage Set for Defeat He thus renounce an opportunity to cap with a second full term a career in public life that begin in 1937 with his election to Congress a an ardent New Dealer and lead to the majority leadership of the Senate and to the Vice-Presidency and the Presidency. His renunciation set the stage for Democratic defeat at the poll in 1968. Two day before Mr. Johnson 's death , Richard M. Nixon , the Republican who be elect in 1968 , take the oath of office for his second term a President. Mr. Nixon telephone Mrs. Johnson today at the hospital here to express his sympathy. At a news brief tonight in Austin at KTBC , the Johnson family 's television and radio station , Tom Johnson , executive vice president of the station , who be also a long-time aide to Mr. Johnson , give the following account of the former President 's death : At 3:50 P.M. , while in his bedroom for his regular afternoon nap , Mr. Johnson call the ranch switchboard and ask for Mike Howard , the head of his Secret Service detail , who be out in a car. Bill Morrow , the switchboard operator , try to call Mr. Howard and other Secret Service agents. The first agent he reach be Ed Nowland and Harry Harris. They race to the bedroom with a portable oxygen unit. They find Mr. Johnson lie beside his bed. They say later he have already turn dark blue and appear to be dead. Nevertheless , they begin try to revive him. Mr. Nowland administer mouth-to- mouth resuscitation. Two physician be telephone , Col. George McGranahan of Brooke Hospital and Dr. David J. Abbott of nearby Johnson City. Placed Aboard Plane Mr. Howard reach the bedroom at 3:55 P.M. and begin an external heart massage. At 4:05 P.M. , Mrs. Johnson be call while rid in a car about a block from the L.B.J. Library in Austin , where she have an office. She fly by helicopter from the library to San Antonio. At 4:19 P.M. , Mr. Johnson be place aboard a family plane , a Beech King Air. Also aboard the twin-engined plane be Dr. Abbott ; Mr. Nowland ; Mr. Harris ; Mrs. Dale Malechek , wife of the ranch foreman , and the pilot , Barney Hulett. The plane arrive at 4:33 in San Antonio , where Dr. Abbott pronounce the former President dead. At 4:45 P.M. , Mrs. Johnson arrive from Austin , about 70 mile away. The ranch be about 45 mile from San Antonio. At about the same time , Colonel McGranahan arrive at the airport and confirm the death. Mrs. Johnson , the former Claudia Alta Taylor , know a Lady Bird , return to Austin in the company of Mr. Howard , arrive at 6:45 P.M. local time and go to her penthouse apartment at the family broadcast station. A short time later , she be join by Brig. Gen. James Cross , Air Force , retire , a family friend and former pilot of the Presidential plane , Air Force One. The Johnsons ' two daughter , Mrs. Patrick J. Nugent and Mrs. Charles S. Robb , accompany by their husband , later meet their mother at the ranch. Also present be J. C. Kellam , the general manager of the family business interests. While they discuss funeral plan , the body of the former President be take from Brooke Army Medical Center to Austin by the Weed-Corley Funeral Home of Austin. Mr. Johnson have always make it clear that he want to be bury on the family ranch in Johnson City , in a small , walled burial plot about 400 yard from the ranch house , where his father , mother and other relative have be lay to rest. Colonel McGranahan say tonight that the former President 's death be apparently cause by a coronary thrombosis. An autopsy perform by Col. L. R. Hieger , chief of pathology at Brooke General Hospital , show that Mr. Johnson have be suffer from severe coronary arterial disease. Two of three major artery supply the heart be completely occlude , Colonel Heiger say , and the third artery be 60 per cent occluded. Further evaluation will be make later , he said. At a news briefing tonight Tom Johnson say Mrs. Johnson have tell him that the former President 's health have not alter recently , although she mention that he have be quieter than usual. One of Mr. Johnson 's last formal appearance take place last Tuesday in Austin , where he attend the inauguration of Gov. Dolph Briscoe and Lieut. Gov. William P. Hobby. On the ceremonial platform outside the capitol , Mr. Johnson , look thin , seem to be enjoy an opportunity to see old friend and shake hand with well-wisher who flock around him. Later that day , he take Walter Heller , the former chairman of his Council of Economic Advisers , to Southwest Texas State University , Mrs. Johnson 's alma mater , in San Marcos , for a talk to a group of students. During the question-and-answer session , Mr. Johnson say to the audience , `` Come on , now , make your question quicker , and Walter , you make your answer shorter. '' In a discussion of food and meat price , Mr. Heller predict a rise of 6 to 7 per cent in meat prices. `` I can tell you what 's happen with cattle , '' Mr. Johnson said. `` I pay my dealer $ 92 a ton for feed. The bill go to $ 110 a ton and now it 's cost me $ 156 a ton for food. '' Last Saturday , join Mrs. Johnson in her beautification work , the former President go to Ranch Road 1 , which run across the Pedernales River from the L.B.J. Ranch , and plant a redbud tree , a Texas tree that bloom with red flowers. The tree be the first of 100 to be plant along the road. On that occasion , Mr. Johnson tell a friend that he be not feeling very well and say that that be why he have not go to Washington for the inauguration of President Nixon .