July 8 , 1973 OBITUARY Otto Klemperer ; Conductor Dead at 88 By PAUL L. MONTGOMERY Otto Klemperer , one of the century 's great master of the German musical repertory , die Friday at his home in Zurich , accord to wire services. He be 88 year old. The exact conductor , who conquer a brain tumor and Nazi exile in a full lifetime of music , have be in retirement for nearly a year. His health begin to fail rapidly several week ago. His daughter , Lotte , and his son , Werner , the film and television actor , be with him at his death. They say their father would be bury Tuesday in Zurich 's Jewish Cemetery. Mr. Klemperer , in a life that span the waning day of 19th-century Romanticism and the most severe of 20th-century atonality , have two distinct career in music. In his first career in Germany , before the Nazis come to power in 1933 , he be one of the best-known and most vigorous interpreter of his generation , a gaunt giant of a man who preside over his orchestra like a soar eagle. Then there come a period of exile , illness and severe mental strain. An operation for a brain tumor in 1939 leave him partly paralyze and unsure of gait , and other accident followed. His infrequent appearance be with second-flight orchestra , his career in eclipse. In the middle 1950 's , in the seventh decade of his life , he again begin to make heralded appearance , be hail a Arturo Toscanini 's heir a the world 's leading conductor of the German Romantics. Through a fierce effort of will , the old man , his aquiline face twist into a mask , his massive stature bow , have find a new place at the top. In his last year , Mr. Klemperer , at the head of his Philharmonia Orchestra , be know a a rock of integrity and moral authority in his conducting. His measure tempo and inspired literalness , his iron insistence on correct performance , bring new meaning to his reading of Beethoven , Mahler and others. Mr. Klemperer 's conducting be mark by a strict observance of the text. He be never interested in obvious or flashy effect , and be always in complete command of the orchestra. He have a wonderful sense of orchestral balance , and try with all his power to communicate the central essence of the music. His interpretation could be austere , but they be never dull. They have an uncompromising kind of musical honesty unparalleled in his generation. Otto Klemperer be bear on May 14 , 1885 , in Breslau , Germany ( now Wroclaw , Poland ) . His father , a merchant , and his mother be both musically inclined. His mother give him his first piano lesson at the age of 4 , and he grow to love both the piano and the violin. He be regard by the Nazis a a lead exponent of `` culture-bolshevism '' because of his dedication to new music and contemporary staging technique in the opera. In 1933 , only a few year after he have receive the Goethe Medal from President Hindenburg for his contribution to `` the advancement of German culture , '' he be discharge from his post at the State Opera in Berlin. Subsequently , all his property be confiscate and a warrant be issue for his arrest. Mr. Klemperer be a world-famous conductor when he return to the United States in 1934 , an exile. He lead orchestra in New York , Philadelphia , Pittsburgh and be director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra for six years. Also a Composer Mr. Klemperer , in addition to conducting , be also a composer. Among his work , all root in tonality , be several symphony , a violin concerto , five opera , a mass and many songs. None of his work achieve wide acclaim. In his work with orchestra , Mr. Klemperer be know a a stern taskmaster with a fierce temper. William Steinberg , now director of the Pittsburgh Symphony and Mr. Klemperer 's assistant in Europe for a time , recall that once in a rehearsal he forget momentarily the appropriate tempo in a portion of `` Lohengrin. '' The conductor do not speak to him for a month , Mr. Steinberg said. At 16 , already a gawky giant ( he be 6 foot 5 inch tall ) he go to Berlin to study piano under Kwast Scharwenka and composition under Hans Pfitzner. He be a brilliant and hard-working pupil but grow nervous a a performer , and decide to divert his career to conducting and composing. Impressed Mahler His debut a a conductor be in 1906 , in Max Reinhardt 's `` Orpheus in the Underworld. '' Gustav Mahler be impress by the young man 's work , and recommend him for a job at the German Theatre in Prague. Later , again on Mahler 's recommendation , he go to the Hamburg Opera Company and opera orchestra in Bremen in Strasbourg. In 1917 Mr. Klemperer go to Cologne , where he begin conduct symphony orchestra as well a opera. In 1924 he return to Berlin a opera conductor of the Berlin Volk-soper , and in 1927 go on to head the Kroll Opera under a Government grant. In 1919 , while in Cologne , Mr. Klemperer meet and marry Jennie Gaissler , a soprano in the opera. He be convert from Judaism to Roman Catholicism for the marriage. The conductor 's first appearance in New York be on Jan. 15 , 1926 , when he be guest conductor of the New York Symphony Orchestra for two months. In his time here he introduce Mahler 's Ninth Symphony and Leos Janacek 's `` Sinfonietta. '' Performed New Works Mr. Klemperer 's tenure at the Kroll Opera , which end in 1931 , be the high point of his career until then. Although he pay close attention to the classic , he lose no opportunity to perform the new work of composer like Stravinsky , Hindemith and Schoenberg. In 1939 , Mr. Klemperer undergo an operation for a brain tumor , which leave him partly paralyze on his right side. His appearance in the month after be painful and unsuccessful. In 1941 , after he leave a mental sanitorium in Rye , N.Y. , the police there send out an alarm for him , describe him a `` dangerous and insane. '' Mr. Klemperer be find two day later in Morristown , N.J. , and appear composed. A doctor who examine him say he be `` temperamental and unstrung '' but not dangerous , and he be released. The conductor 's subsequent appearance be few and often involved minor musical organizations. In 1946 , he leave the United States for Budapest , where he be appoint musical director of the opera. Helped by Recordings With the help of recording , his career again appear on the ascendant , but in 1951 , while arrive for an appearance in Montreal , he fell while get off the plane and break his hip. Until 1955 , when he find he could stand again , his conducting be do from a wheel chair. Mr. Klemperer 's rebirth a a world-renowned artist come with the Philharmonia Orchestra in London , which he lead for 14 year and become conductor of for life. With the introduction of long-playing record , he come into great demand a a conductor , specialize in the German classics. The English public , and the critic , regard him with reverence. In 1967 , at a memorable performance of Mahler 's Ninth Symphony , the audience stand in silence a he make his way to the podium. The only other conductor it have stand for be Toscanini , when he make his last appearance in Britain after World War II. Mr. Klemperer 's wife die in 1956 , and thereafter he be devotedly look after by his daughter , Lotte. In 1970 , in an emotional appearance in Israel , he request immigrant status from the Government. Though he live in Switzerland for the late part of his life , he hold both West German and Israeli citizenship. Powerful and Severe Musician An Appraisal By HAROLD C. SCHONBERG In his last day , Otto Klemperer on the podium be a sight that command awe , pity and terror. All but cripple , this massive man would slowly make his way to the front , seat himself , look at the orchestra with the permanent scowl that a brain operation have leave him , and commence beating time with huge fists. As he look , so he conducted. He be not a man to go in for frill , or for any kind of superficial effect. His tempo always tend to be slow , and toward the end they seem to crawl. Yet such be his authority that he could hold the music together , and audience respond with almost a kind of religious communion. Oblivious to everything but the shape of a phrase and the construction of a piece of music , Klemperer throughout his life represent the German school of musicmaking at it most monolithic and severe. He be the last surviving representative of that school. It be , in his case , a school that in his youth be represent by Gustav Mahler , Karl Muck and Richard Strauss , and it extend through such conductor a Felix Weingartner , Leo Blech , Bruno Walter and Wilhelm Furtwangler. All of these conductor represent a tradition that have it root in the 19th century , a tradition of high seriousness ting with a metaphysical approach towards music ; a tradition of make music a honestly , a scrupulously , and as unostentatiously a possible. But if the German tradition be paramount in Klemperer 's approach , his intellectual background be wide enough to encompass the entire ethic of the Western world. The late Wieland Wagner once sum up Klemperer : `` Classical Greece , Jewish tradition , medieval Christendom , German Romanticism , the realism of our own time , make Klemperer the conductor a unique artistic phenomenon. '' The great Mahler himself be so impressed by the work of the young Klemperer that he recommend him a conductor of the German Theater in Prague in 1907. Klemperer follow the normal routine of young German conductor , advance from opera house to opera house. Where he differ from many German conductor of the day be in his interest in contemporary music. Those who remember the recent Klemperer , the exponent of Beethoven , Brahms and Mahler , forget that from 1927 to 1931 he make the Kroll Opera in Berlin a center of avant-garde activity. He introduce or revive major work by Schoenberg , Janacek , Hindemith , Stravinsky and Krenek. In addition to his operatic duty , he conduct many concert of symphonic music at which he also introduce major work of the 20th century. Later , he be content to specialize in the music of Bach through Mahler and Bruckner. Fortunately he have leave a large series of record that attest to his monumental approach. Listening to his Beethoven and Brahms series , any music lover immediately find himself in a rarefied world of sound. Noted for Sheer Power Few conductor have have an equivalent ability to bring out the sheer , unvarnished power of the music. Where Toscanini have that incredible linear drive and objectivity , where Furtwangler represent an opposite pole of tempo fluctuation , Klemperer be broad , direct and massive , yet possess of a musical sensitivity that could illuminate detail as well a the whole. Many story be tell about him. This tremendous man scar orchestral players. He expect a supreme effort from them , and he have the physical authority to exact instant obedience. Seldom do he pass out compliments. When he do , it be a red-letter day for the players. One story about him have him say `` Good ! '' to a player who have turn an especially felicitous phrase. The orchestra , astound , break into applause. Klemperer never have compliment anybody previously. `` It be not that good , '' Klemperer then growl .