July 24 , 1973 OBITUARY Capt. Eddie Rickenbacker Is Dead at 82 By THE NEW YORK TIMES Eddie Rickenbacker , a lead fighter ace in World War I and retire chairman of Eastern Air Lines , die early yesterday in a Zurich hospital. He be 82 year old. His health have be fail since he suffer a stroke in Miami last October , but have improve enough to permit the trip to Switzerland. He be admit to Neumuenster Hospital with a heart ailment on July 15 , four day after his arrival. His wife say the body would be cremate privately and the ash fly to his birthplace , Columbus , Ohio , for burial. Edward Vernon Rickenbacker be a man whose delight in turn the table on seemingly hopeless odds take him to the top in three distinct fields. In the daredevil pre-World War I day of automobile race he become one of this country 's lead driver , although he have a profound dislike for take unnecessary risks. He have enter the auto industry a a trainee mechanic and make his first mark service the cranky machine of that day. In World War I he become the nation 's `` Ace of Aces '' a a military aviator despite the fact that he have join the Army a a sergeant-driver on Gen. John J. Pershing 's staff. He be name by Gen. William Mitchell to be chief engineering officer of the fledgling Army Air Corps. His transfer to actual combat fly -- in which he shoot down 22 German plane and four observation balloon -- be complicate not only by his be two year over the pilot age limit of 25 , but also because he be neither a college man nor a `` gentleman '' such a then make up the aristocratic fighter squadron of the air service. In the highly competitive airline business , Mr. Rickenbacker be the first man to prove that airline could be make profitable , and then the first to prove that they could be run without a Government subsidy and keep profitable. This , despite a previous venture in the automobile manufacturing business that fell victim to the competition of big company and failed. While his success come in field that be develop in the 20th century , his philosophy seem to many a carryover from the 19th century. Opposed to Interference Mr. Rickenbacker , or Captain Eddie a he prefer to be know ( he be a colonel in the reserve but insist that the title of captain be the only one he have earn ) , be an individualist of the old empire-building school. In any kind of fight he neither ask for nor give quarter. His opposition to Government `` interference '' be widely know , a be his outspoken objection to subsidy for industry or individuals. He be also an intransigent foe of trade unionism and liberal democratic concepts. Mr. Rickenbacker be fond of say that the great privilege this country have to offer be the `` freedom to go broke , '' and that `` a chance '' be the only `` favor '' need to succeed in the United States. In recent year , he have identify himself more and more closely with ultra-conservative and right-wing causes. In 1963 , when he retire a board chairman of Eastern Air Lines he announce that he would devote himself to `` awaken the American public to the grave problem face them. '' In frequent speech during the year that follow , Mr. Rickenbacker predict that the American people someday would erect a monument to the memory of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , and he urge United States withdrawal from the United Nations , the severance of diplomatic relation with the Soviet Union and repeal of the 16th Amendment , which authorize a personal income tax. `` I be go to expand my crusade to save the American way of life for future generation , '' he write in his letter of resignation from Eastern Air Lines , `` a I want our child , our grandchild , and those who follow them to enjoy the American opportunity which have be mine for 73 years. '' A self-made man whose formal education end with the sixth grade , Mr. Rickenbacker be a driving leader. He put the stamp of his dominant personality on everything he touched. His relation with his employes be on a personal basis that be heavily lard with paternalism. He frequently refer to his employes a `` the boy and girl , '' but he devote much of his time to push , prod and cajole them into make the same effort to rise that he have made. But in the long run it will not be his material successes that will be remembered. Rather , he will be recall a a larger-than-life figure cast in the same mold a legendary folk hero of the past. Part of this heroism be in the military field. When he be give command of a fighter squadron on Sept. 24 , 1918 , he write in his diary : `` Just be promote to command of 94th Squadron. I shall never ask any pilot to go on a mission that I wo n't go on. I must work now hard than I do before. '' He do not delay suit action to the words. The next day , while lead a patrol before breakfast , he spot a flight of five German Fokker pursuit plane escort two observation craft near Billy , France. He slam his Spad fighter into a power dive , come down out of the sun onto the unsuspecting enemy. Closing fast , he fire a long burst and saw one of the Fokkers fall away and crash. Taking advantage of the momentary confusion of the German fighter pilot , he plunge through their formation and go after the two-seater observation plane , which be then streak back toward enemy territory. He make several unsuccessful pass at the heavy craft while their rear gunner be fire at him and the entire dogfight move behind the German lines. When he saw that the Fokkers have regroup and be close fast at high altitude , he decide to make one final try. Sideslipping his Spad between the two observation plane , which be fly about 50 foot apart , he send one down in flame before streak for home. This double-header , a he call it , earn him the Medal of Honor , but at the time Mr. Rickenbacker have other thing on his mind. `` I be glad it have come this morning [ MISSING TEXT ] effect it would have on the other pilot , '' he said. His determination to set a good example do not end with the twin killing. He go on to achieve 18 of his 26 victory between take command of the Squadron and the end of the war -- a matter of 48 day in all. Much of his combat be against the `` flying circus '' of Baron Manfred von Richtofen , the `` Red Baron. '' For 41 year , Mr. Rickenbacker be officially credit with shoot down 21 plane and four balloon , although he maintain he have down 22 plane and four balloons. In 1960 , the Air Force approve his request for correction of the official record and grant him his 26th kill. While Mr. Rickenbacker 's wartime exploit may have be the result of what he describe a `` plan recklessness '' and `` take all the break , '' he be later to exhibit courage of a steelier kind. B-17 Crash-Landed On a foggy night in February , 1941 , one of his own Eastern Air Lines plane , on which he be a passenger , crash into a hill a it approach Atlanta. Although he be pin to the body of a dead steward by the wreckage and have a shattered pelvic bone , half a dozen broken rib , a broken leg and one eyelid tear away , he remain conscious for nine hour until he be take to a hospital. During that time he take command of the plane. He reassure survivor , send some of the walking injure for help and shout warning against light match in the gasoline- fill cabin. Sixteen month later , fully recover except for a limp , he be to have a still great test of his courage. That come when a B-17 , on which he be make an inspection tour of World War II base in the Pacific , have to make a crash landing in the ocean , 12 hour out from Honolulu. In minute the plane sank and it eight passenger and crewman take to rubber rafts. For the next 22 day , Mr. Rickenbacker , the only civilian in the group , give the orders. He divide the four orange that make up the initial food supply. When a seagull land on his head , he capture the bird smoothly. Then , when fish be catch , he divide the catch. After eight day it rain and he take charge of the water distribution. Cursing one man who pray for death , drag back another who try to drown himself to make more room for the others , the grim , indomitable figure taunt his comrade to stay alive. Hating him every minute , six of these seven survive to be rescue by a patrol plane that find them almost by chance. Most of them come to believe that they owe their life to Mr. Rickenbacker 's iron will. As for the commander of the raft he continue his trip after two week of rest. He be then 52 year old. Mr. Rickenbacker be bear of a German-Swiss father and a French-Swiss mother in Columbus , Ohio , on Oct. 8 , 1890. His name originally be Edward Reichenbacher , but he modify the spelling of the family name during World War I to make it less Germanic , and add the middle name Vernon for a touch of `` class. '' His father , a construction contractor of moderate circumstance , die when Mr. Rickenbacker be 12. The boy , who be the third of eight child , quit school and go to work. After a series of job , he enter the automobile industry a an unpaid porter in the Frayer-Miller Company in Columbus. Took Engineering Course He receive a job for wage when Lee Frayer , head of the company , learn that his voluntary helper have take a correspondence course in mechanical engineering. When Mr. Frayer move a short time later to the Columbus Buggy Company , just begin the manufacture of automobile , Mr. Rickenbacker be take along. The young man , then 16 and a crack mechanic , develop a local reputation a a driver -- although he never hold a driver 's license nor do he ever [ MISSING TEXT ] Frayer , who advertise his car by race them , give his aide his next chance by make him a combination race driver-salesman. For the next six year he travel all over the country , race car one day and sell them the next. In 1912 , when he be 22 , Mr. Rickenbacker drop the dual role and devote his full time to racing. It be a hard , dangerous life , but he have less than his share of accident and walk away from those he had. He say of this phase of his life that it teach him to `` scheme. '' `` You do n't win race because you have more guts. You win because you know how to take the turn and baby your engine. It be n't all just shut your eye and grit your teeth. '' The `` scheming '' pay off. Mr. Rickenbacker set a world record of 134 mile an hour in a Blitzen-Benz at Daytona Beach , Fla. , and in 1916 , the last full year of his active racing career , he earn $ 80,000. He be in England in 1917 , buy motor for a racing team , when the United States enter the war. He hurry home and try to interest the War Department in organize an air squadron of former race drivers. Failing this , he enlist on May 27 , 1917 , a a sergeant in the Signal Corps and sail for France a General Pershing 's chauffeur. Transferred to the Air Corps shortly afterward , he be make a first lieutenant on Aug. 20 and put in charge of engineering of the American air train center at Issoudon. Attended Gunnery School Transferred again at his own request , he attend gunnery school and then be assign to French unit for flight training. His assignment to the 94th Squadron be not please to the other airman of the unit. They resent his civilian fame and his undeniable cockiness about it. In addition , he be regard a uncouth , domineer and profane. To top it off , he insist on check his plane engine before every flight and personally supervise the loading of machine- gun bullet in his ammunition belt , instead of rely on the fortune of war a gallantry dictated. The first Rickenbacker victory come on April 29 , 1918 , while on a patrol with the squadron commander , the late Capt. James Norman Hall , who later write `` Mutiny on the Bounty '' with Charles Nordhoff. He dive his Nieuport to within 150 yard of a German Albatross before open fire. His squadron mate , whose early iciness slowly change to respect and then fondness , have say that he be never a fancy flier , but always a ferocious fighter. And when Captain Hall be shoot down and capture by the Germans , Captain Rickenbacker , who by then be an ace with seven confirmed kill , be promote to command the 94th. After the war , he go on a lecture tour , but turn down an offer to appear in a movie. Instead , in 1922 , he accept the proposal of a group of financier to lend his name and talent to the manufacture of an automobile. The Rickenbacker Motor Company , which produce the first car with four-wheel brake in this country , fail in 1927 , leave Mr. Rickenbacker $ 200,000 in debt and with no job. He say subsequently , the business have fail because he have forget the importance of proper timing in make his moves. `` We be just too early with four-wheel brake , '' he say of the equipment that be now standard on all American cars. He keep a prized souvenirs the advertisement of rival concern of the time that score the four-wheel brake a un- [ MISSING TEXT ] . He resolve to pay off the big debt , and then raise $ 700,000 more. With this he buy the Indianapolis Speedway , which he run until 1945 , when he sell out to devote his full time to aviation. In 1928 Mr. Rickenbacker become a $ 12,000-a-year assistant sale manager of the Cadillac division of the General Motors Corporation. He then be transfer to the big company 's various aviation divisions. In 1934 he be send a a trouble-shooter to salvage what he could of General Motors ' Eastern Air Transport Division , which then own Eastern Air Lines jointly with North American Aviation. The company have sink about $ 6-million into Eastern , but while the line have little competition on it choice New York-Miami route , it be call the ugly duckling of an industry not then notable for successes. Mr. Rickenbacker 's job be to shore up the failing line so the owner could sell it for their $ 1-million ask price. In it first year under his management , Eastern turn in a net gain of $ 350,000 -- the first profit in the history of the airline industry. The second year he double the profits. By the third year , when the Government order G. M. to sell it airline or get out of aircraft manufacturing , a banking syndicate offer more than $ 3-million for Eastern. Mr. Rickenbacker plead with his employer for an equal chance to `` save the airline for the boy and girl who help build it. '' He receive 60 day to raise the money and be tell the company would be his for $ 3.5-million. The night before the option expire he get his final commitment , and the next day , March 2 , 1938 , he own Eastern Air Lines. Mr. Rickenbacker run his company in much the same manner he have command the 94th Squadron in World War I. He set impossible goal , and then go out and achieve them himself before complaint get out of hand. He also apply other early lesson to the airlines. He be never the first to buy a new plane. Only when other company have test a new type and prove it satisfactory do he place his order. He have home in New York and Key Biscayne , Fla. Under Mr. Rickenbacker 's dominance , Eastern be consider an efficient and profitable airline , but somewhat austere compare with many of it competitors. In the eye of many traveler , it lack of emphasis on in-flight service and other frill give it a spartan image. Nevertheless , the airline prospered. For 25 year under Mr. Rickenbacker 's guidance -- from 1935 to 1960 -- it earn a profit every year. Then , along with many other line that be jolt by the financial headwind accompany the introduction of jet airliner , it experience loss during the early sixties. In 1959 , Mr. Rickenbacker resign a president of Eastern , and four year later , on Dec. 31 , 1963 , he retire a director and chairman of the board .