May 20 , 1973 OBITUARY Ex-Rep. Jeanette Rankin Dies ; First Woman in Congress , 92 By ROBERT D. McFADDEN Jeanette Rankin , the first woman to serve in the United States Congress and the only Representative who vote against the nation 's entry into World Wars I and II , die Friday night at her apartment in Carmel , Calif. She be 92 year old. Miss Rankin , a lifelong pacifist and one of the country 's early woman suffragist , serve only two term in the House of Representatives , 1917 to 1919 and 1941 to 1943. But in both those term , by an odd turn of history , the United States decide to go to war. Her dissent vote be consistent with her lifelong belief that violence can not solve human disagreements. Miss Rankin also introduce the first bill to grant woman citizenship independent of their husband , and authorize the first bill for Government-sponsored instruction of hygiene in maternity and infancy. A Republican from Missoula , Mont. , she run her campaign on a peace platform. After leave the Congress , she devote her widely admire energy to peace organization and woman 's activist groups. A Long Active Life Until her health begin fail seriously last year , Miss Rankin 's only concession to age be a cane and a slight weariness at see the idea she have be advocate for seven decade treat a if they be still radically new. There be no consciousness-raising group to liberate Jeanette Rankin in 1916 , when , a the United States move toward war with the Central Powers , the small , trim woman from Missoula undertake her successful Congressional campaign. `` I know the woman would stand behind me , '' she say when tell she have won. `` I be deeply conscious of the responsibility. I will not only represent the woman of Montana , but also the woman of the country , and I have plenty of work cut out for me. '' Miss Rankin take her seat in the House of April 2 , 1916. Four day later , in the predawn hour of April 6 , after month of mount pressure , she tell her colleague in a moment of high drama : `` I want to stand behind my country , but I can not vote for war. '' She then cast her dissent vote. The final House vote to declare war be 373 to 50. Hers be an unpopular stand , and she become the target of many barbs. But she contend afterward : `` I 'd go through much bad treatment. If you know a certain thing be right , you ca n't change it. '' After her first term , Miss Rankin seek but lose the Montana Republican nomination for the Senate , and for more than two decade devote herself to peace organization , particularly the National Conference for the Prevention of War. `` Prepare to the limit for defense ; keep our men out of Europe , '' be her slogan in 1940 for her second successful race for the House. Many year later , she say : `` The woman elect me because they remember that I 'd be against our entering World War I. '' Despite Pearl Harbor , the pleading for unanimity by Everett McKinley Dirksen , then a member of the House , and the eloquence of President Franklin D. Roosevelt in his Dec. 8 , 1941 , address to Congress , Miss Rankin cast the only dissent in the 388 to 1 House vote on the Declaration of War against Japan. `` I vote against it because it be war , '' she say afterward. In recent year , Miss Rankin , who never marry , continue to march and make speech for the cause in which she believed. Denounced Vietnam War She let the Jeannette Rankin Brigade in a massive march on Capit0l Hill in Washington in 1968 to protest the war in Vietnam , which she denounce a a `` ruthless slaughter. '' The following year she participate in moratorium march in Georgia and South Carolina. She continue , too , to write letter and to make phone call and visit to member of Congress , urge an end to United States involvement in Indochina. In an interview several year ago , Miss Rankin call the Vietnam war `` stupid and cruel , '' and put the blame on `` stupid leader '' and a `` military bureaucracy. '' She add : `` The people really be n't for war. They just go along , but war be evil , and there be always an alternative. '' At the poll , she say , people be give a `` choice of evil , not ideas. '' As for woman , for whose right she labor a lifetime , Miss Rankin say : `` They 've be worms. They let their son go off to war because they 're afraid their husband will lose their job in industry if they protest. '' Jeanette Rankin be bear on June 11 , 1880 , on a ranch near Missoula , the old of seven child of John and Olive Rankin. Her father be a rancher and building contractor , and her mother be a native of New Hampshire who have go West to be a schoolteacher. Miss Rankin graduate from the University on Montana in 1902 and go into social work , which take her to New York City. Here , she join the suffrage movement and live in the Suffrage League house on East 86th Street. In 1908-09 , she be a student at the School of Philanthropy here , then do social work in Seattle for a year , before turn increasingly to the woman 's movement. She later become field secretary of the National American Women 's Suffrage Association and chairman of the Montana State Suffrage committee. In 1912 , she take the suffrage fight home to Montana , address the State Legislature-a precedent for a woman-on the subject. Two year later , Montana pass a suffrage law. This be six year before that right become a Constitutional Amendment. Miss Rankin later say she first run for Congress `` to repay the woman of Montana who have work for suffrage. '' Miss Rankin long advocate electoral reform , with a view to great diversity among candidates. `` Now , '' she say , `` we have a choice between a white male Republican and a white male Democrat. '' And , with equal vigor , she urge unilateral disarmament , contending : `` If we disarm , we 'd be the safe country in the world . ''