April 9 , 1973 OBITUARY Picasso : Protean and Prodigious , the Greatest Single Force in 70 Years of Art By ALDEN WHITMAN There be Picasso the neoclassicist ; Picasso the cubist ; Picasso the surrealist ; Picasso the modernist ; Picasso the ceramist ; Picasso the lithographer ; Picasso the sculptor ; Picasso the superb draftsman ; Picasso the effervescent and exuberant ; Picasso the saturnine and surly ; Picasso the faithful and faithless lover ; Picasso the cunning financial man ; Picasso the publicity seeker ; Picasso the smolder Spaniard ; Picasso the joker and performer of charade ; Picasso the generous ; Picasso the Scrooge ; even Picasso the playwright. A genius for the age , a man who play wonderful yet sometimes outrageous change with art , Pablo Picasso remain without doubt the most original , the most protean and the most forceful personality in the visual art in the first three-quarters of this century. He take a prodigious gift and with it transform the universe of art. Henri Matisse and Georges Braque , two painter with assured stature in modern art and both his close friend , be also original ; but both develop a style and stick pretty much to it , whereas Picasso , with a feverish creativity and lavish talent last into old age , be a man of many style whose artistic life reveal a continuous process of exploration. He create his own universe , invest it with his own human being and his own form of beast and myths. `` For me , a picture be neither an end nor an achievement but rather a lucky chance and art experience , '' he once explained. `` I try to represent what I have find , not what I be seeking. I do not seek -- I find. '' 'One Step on a Long Road' On another occasion , however , he saw his work in a different light. `` Everything I do , '' he remark at 76 , `` be only one step on a long road. It be a preliminary process that may be achieve much later. Therefore my work must be see in relation to one another , keep in mind what I have already do and what I will do. '' For all his guise , or disguise , Picasso have an amazing fecundity of imagination that permit him to metamorphize a mood or an idea into a work of art with bewildering quickness. He be , in Andre Malraux 's phrase , `` the archwizard of modern art , '' a man who , a a painter alone , produce well over 6,000 pictures. Some he splash off in a few hour ; others take weeks. In 1969 , his 88th year , he produce out of his volcanic energy a total of 165 painting and 45 drawing , which be exhibit at the Palace of the Popes in Avignon , France. Crowding the wall of that venerable structure , the Picasso array draw exclamatory throng and move Emily Genauer , the critic , to say , `` I think Picasso 's new picture be the fire of heaven. '' Explaining the source of this energy , Picasso say a he near 90 , `` Everyone be the age he have decide on , and I have decide to remain 30. '' The painter be so much know for work that blur or obliterated conventional distinction between beauty and ugliness and for depersonalized form that he be accuse of be an antihumanist. That appraisal disturb him , for he regard himself , with all his vagary , a have create new insight into a see and unseen world in which fragmentation of form be the basis for a new synthesis. A Bull From a Bicycle Seat `` What be art ? '' a visitor once ask him. `` What be not ? '' he replied. And he substantiate this point once by combine a bicycle seat and a pair of handlebar to make a bull 's head. `` Whatever the source of the emotion that drive me to create , I want to give it a form that have some connection with the visible world , even if it be only to wage war on that world , '' he explain to Francoise Gilot , who be one of his mistress and herself a painter. `` Otherwise , '' he continue , `` a painting be just an old grab bag for everyone to reach into and pull out what he himself have put in. I want my painting to be able to defend themselves , to resist the invader , just a though there be razor blade on all surface so no one could touch them without cut his hands. A painting be n't a market basket or a woman 's handbag , full of comb , hairpin , lipstick , old love letter and key to the garage. `` Valery [ Paul Valery , the French poet ] use to say , 'I write half the poem. The reader write the other half. ' That 's all right for him , maybe , but I do n't want there to be three or four thousand possibility of interpret my canvas. I want there to be only one and in that one to some extent the possibility of recognize nature , even distorted nature , which be , after all , a kind of struggle between my interior life and the external world a it exist for most people. `` As I 've often say , I do n't try to express nature ; rather , a the Chinese put it , to work like nature. And I want that internal surge -- my creative dynamism -- to propose itself to the viewer in the form of traditional painting violated. '' In the long course of upending traditionalism , Picasso become a one-man history of modern art. In every phase of it turbulent ( and often violent ) development he be either a daring pioneer or a gifted practitioner. The sheer variousness of his creation reflect his probings of modern art for way to communicate the multiplicity of it expression ; and so Picasso could not be categorize a belonging to this or that school , for he open and try virtually all of them. In his peripateticism he work in oil , water-color , pastel , gouache , pencil and ink drawing and aquatint ; he etch , make lithograph , sculpture , fashion ceramic , put together mosaic and construct murals. One of his masterpiece be `` Guernica , '' paint in 1937 and on loan for many year to the Museum of Modern Art in New York. An oil on canvas 11 1/4 foot high and 25 1/2 foot long , it be a majestic , stir indictment of the destructiveness of modern war. By contrast , another masterpiece be a simply and perfectly draw white pigeon , `` The Dove , '' which be disseminate around the world a a symbol of peace. But masterpiece or something not so exalted , virtually all Picasso be interesting and provocative. Praised or revile , his work never evoke quiet judgments. A Different View The artist , however , hold a different view. `` There be no such thing a a bad Picasso , '' he say , `` some be less good than others. '' Exhibitions of his work , especially in his late year , be sure-fire attractions. The mention of his name be sufficient to lure thousand , many of them only barely acquaint with any art , to museum and gallery and benefits. Reproductions and print be nail up in home all over the Western world , a certain mark of the owner 's claim to culture. Originals be widely disperse , both in museum and in the hand of collector wealthy enough to meet Picasso 's prices. And they be steep. In 1965 he charge London 's Tate Gallery $ 168,000 for `` Les Trois Danseuses , '' a painting he do in 1925. For a current painting , private collector felt that $ 20,000 be a steal and $ 35,000 not too much. For the last 50 year there have be no such thing a a cheap Picasso. Indeed , Leo and Gertrude Stein and Ambrose Vollard , a Paris dealer , may have be the last to get a Picasso for $ 30 , and that be in 1906 and 1907. Income Grew With Fame As Picasso 's fame grow , so do his income until it get so that he could manufacture money by sketch a few line on a piece of paper and tack on his dramatic signature. He be probably the world 's high pay pieceworker , and there be many year in which he garner more than $ 1-million. `` I be rich enough to throw away a thousand dollar , '' he tell a friend with some glee. The artist , however , be canny about money , drive hard bargain with his dealer and keep the bulk of his work off the market. He release for sale about 40 of his painting a year out of a production of hundred , so that the market for his work be never glutted. What he do not sell ( and he say that many of these constitute the best from his palette ) he squirreled away in bank vault , studio , in a castle not far from the Riviera and in empty room in his villa near Cannes. Picasso do not exactly hide his collection , for on occasion he permit special friend to see it , to photograph it and to publish the results. Toward the close of his life he donate 800 to 900 of his fine early work to a Barcelona museum. Worth a multimillion-dollar fortune , his work represent his Spanish period and be give in memory of Jaime Sabartes , his long-time secretary. In 1971 he give an early constructed sculpture , `` Guitar , '' to the Museum of Modern Art in New York. Mostly , though , Picasso take a merchant 's delight in acquire his money. `` Art be a salable commodity , '' he once observed. `` If I want a much money a I can get for my art , it be because I know what I want to do with it. '' But just what that be only a few intimate knew. He be say to have own a great deal of real estate in France and to have make some excellent stock investments. Contrary to Miss Gilot 's suggestion that Picasso be tightfisted , he give large sum to the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War and then to refugee group that care for the defeated Republicans who have flee to France. `` He be a very generous man , '' Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler , his principal dealer since 1912 , say of him. `` He support for many year more than a dozen indigent painter , most of whom would have be live in poverty but for his help. And whenever he be ask to help some charity , he always give something. '' He be , surprisingly , even open-handed in a quiet fashion with woman of his past. One of these be Fernande Olivier , who be his mistress for a number of year until 1912 and whose book about her experience with him be not flattering. However , when Picasso hear that her fund be run low , he saw to it that she be supply with money. Nonetheless , his generosity , like his temperament , could be fitful. Once , when the faking of Picassos be a small industry , a friend bring the painter a small work belong to a poor artist for authentication so that it could be sold. `` It 's false , '' say Picasso. From a different source the friend bring another Picasso , and then a third. `` It 's false , '' Picasso say each time. `` Now listen , Pablo , '' the friend say of the third painting. `` I watch you paint this with my own eyes. '' `` I can paint false Picassos just as well a anybody , '' Picasso replied. And then he buy the first Picasso at four time the amount the poor artist have hop it would fetch. As for himself , Picasso , from the time he begin to take in appreciable sum until his death , live like an Okie , albeit one who never have to worry about where his next meal or his next pair of trouser be come from. `` I should like to live like a poor man with a lot of money , '' he have say in the day when he be desperately poor and burn some of his painting for heat. Collector of Oddments All his studio and home -- even the 18-room rambling La Californie at Cannes -- be cram and clutter with junk -- pebble , rock , piece of glass , a hollow elephant 's foot , a bird cage , African drum , wooden crocodile , part of old bicycle , ancient newspaper , broken crockery , bullfight poster , old hat , weird ceramics. Picasso be a compulsive collector of oddment , and he never throw any of them away , or permit anyone to move any object once he have drop it , toss it or place it somewhere. To compound the chaos inside La Californie , the villa 's lawn be home to cluck chicken , pigeon , at least one goat , dog and children. They all disport among bronze owl , fountain and statuary scatter about the grounds. Freedom for animal and child be a cardinal belief. In late year this villa become a weekend residence , while his main home be Notre Dame de Vie in nearby Mougins. He also own two chateau , Vauvenargues , in Provence , and Boigeloup , in Normandy. Despite the disorganization with which he surround himself , Picasso be a most methodical man. When he drive to Cannes or to Arles he invariably follow the same route ; and when he live in Paris he walk or ride the same street in a fixed order. When his Paris studio be at 7 rue de Grand-Augustins on the Left Bank , he almost always din at La Brasserie Lipp on the Boulevard Saint-Germain and then cross the street to the Cafe Flore to join friend in a mineral water and conversation before go home. One Picasso day be , in outline , much like the next. He arise late , usually around 10 or 11 , devote two or three hour to friend , conversation , business , letter and lunch ; then , at 3 or 4 , he would go to his studio to work in Trappist silence , often for 12 hour at a stretch , break off only for dinner around 10:30. Afterward , he sometimes work until 2 or 3 in the morning. When Miss Gilot be live with Picasso in Paris , she find that one of her most difficult task be to get him start on his day. `` He always wake up submerge in pessimism , and there be a definite ritual to be follow , a litany that have to be repeat every day , '' she recall in her book , `` Life With Picasso , '' publish in 1964 by McGraw-Hill. The rigamarole , a Miss Gilot recount it , have largely to do with reassure Picasso that his lamentation be falsely based. `` Well , I do despair , '' he would say in Miss Gilot 's reconstruction , `` I 'm pretty nearly desperate. I wonder , really , why I bother to get up. Why should I paint ? Why should I continue to exist like this ? A life like mine be unbearable. '' Eventually , of course , Picasso permit himself to be convince that the world be not in conspiracy against him. Part of his maledicent mood could perhaps be trace to the physical aspect of his bedroom. `` At the far end be a high Louis XIII secretary , '' accord to Miss Gilot , `` and , along the left-hand wall , a chest of the same period , both completely cover with paper , book , magazine and mail that Pablo have n't answer and never would , drawing pile up helter skelter , and package of cigarettes. Above the bed be a naked electric-light bulb. Behind the bed be drawing Pablo be particularly fond of , attach by clothespin to nail driven into the wall. Letters Pinned on Wires `` The so-called more important letter , which he do n't answer either but keep before him a a permanent reminder and reproach , be pin up , also with clothespin , onto wire that stretch from the electric-light wire to the stovepipe. There be almost no other furniture , except a Swedish chair in laminated wood. '' By early afternoon , Picasso , amid the bustle of the household and friend who come to pay him court , be bubbly and sunny. He like not so much to converse a to talk , and his monologue be usually witty. His agile mind leap from subject to subject , and he have almost total recall. He always have several project in hand at the same time , and to each he seem equally lavish with his talent. `` Painting be my hobby , '' he said. `` When I be finished painting , I paint again for relaxation. '' `` He use no palatte , '' Miss Gilot write of his work habits. `` At his right [ a he address his easel ] be a small table cover with newspaper and three or four large can fill with brush stand in turpentine. `` Every time he take a brush he wipe it off on the newspaper , which be a jungle of colored smudge and slashes. Whenever he want pure color , he squeeze some from a tube onto the newspaper. At his foot and around the base of the easel be can -- mostly tomato can of various size -- that hold gray and neutral tone and other color that he have previously mixed. Stood for Several Hours `` He stand before the canvas for three or four hour at a stretch. He make almost no superfluous gestures. I ask him if it do n't tire him to stand so long in one spot. He shake his head. `` 'No , ' he said. 'That be why painter live so long. While I work I leave my body outside the door , the way Moslems take off their shoe before enter the mosque. ' '' `` Occasionally he walk to the other end of the atelier and sat in a wicker armchair. He would cross his leg , plant one elbow on his knee and , rest his chin on his fist , would stay there study the painting without speak for as long a an hour. `` After that he would generally go back to work on the portrait. Sometimes he would say , 'I ca n't carry that plastic idea any further today , ' and then begin to work on another painting. He always have several half-dry unfinished canvas to choose from. `` There be total silence in the atelier , break only by Pablo 's monologue or an occasional conversation ; never an interruption from the world outside. When daylight begin to fade from the canvas he switch on two spotlight and everything but the picture surface fell away into the shadows. `` 'There must be darkness everywhere except on the canvas , so that the painter become hypnotize by his own work and paint almost a though he be in a trance , ' he said. 'He must stay as close a possible to his own inner world if he want to transcend the limitation his reason be always try to impose on him. ' '' Mood be a vital ingredient of Picasso. Everything he saw , felt or do be for him an incomplete experience until it have be release and recorded. Once he be lunch on sole and happen to hold up the skeleton so that it catch his glance. He get up from the table and return almost immediately with a tray of clay in which he make an imprint of the skeleton. After lunch he draw colorful design around the filigree of the bone , and the eventual result be one of his most beautiful plates. Here , a in other art area , when the inspiration be upon him he work ceaselessly and with such concentration that he could , for example , paint a good-sized picture in three hours. Just a intensely , Picasso love to mime , to clown , to play charade , to joke. To amuse his friend ( and himself ) he would don a tuxedo , red sock and funny hat ; or he would put on Chaplinesque garb and engage in horseplay. Disguises for Visitors `` The moment when disguise be call for most urgently be on the arrival of visitor , especially those from abroad , '' Roland Penrose , a British friend , write in his `` Picasso : His Life and Work. '' `` The less known or the more intimidate the guest may be , the more likely it be that he will find himself confront by the master not a he expect to find him but a a burlesque little figure wear perhaps a yachting cap with horn-rimmed spectacle , a red nose and black side-whiskers and brandish a saber. '' He put on disguise , too , to romp with child , and they love him for the ease with which he enter their fantasy world. Picasso be a short , squat man with broad , muscular shoulder and arms. He be proud of his small hand and foot and of his hairy chest. In old age his body be firm and compact ; and his cannon-ball head , which be almost bald , gleam like bronze. Set into it be deep black eye of such penetration and alertness that they become his hallmark. Photographs from his young year show him a handsome man with jet-black hair. Apart from the absence of hair , the description of him by Miss Olivier , his first long-term mistress , could have apply to the artist of late years. `` Small , dark , thickset , unquiet , disquiet , with somber eye , deep-set , piercing , strange , almost fix , '' she wrote. `` Awkward gesture , a woman 's hand , ill-dressed , careless. A thick lock of hair , black and glossy , cut across his intelligent , obstinate forehead. Half Bohemian , half workman in his clothes ; his hair , which be too long , brush the collar of his worn-out coat. '' Although at various time in his life Picasso dress a a dandy , he be never comfortable in conventional clothes. He prefer corduroy or heavy velvet jacket , a T shirt and heavy trouser make of a blanket type of wool. These , after he could afford them , be custom-made in odd designs. Sometimes he vary his get-up by wear a striped jersey pull-over ; and sometimes he just walk around in shorts. It be all a matter of whim. Scores of Close Friends Although whim at time governed whom he would see and for how long , Picasso be generally a hospitable host in the Spanish manner. He have score of close friend -- Mr. Kahnweiler , Jean Cocteau , Paul Eluard and Louis Aragon among many others. However , a with most illustrious men , Picasso attract gush admirer and sycophants. Some call him `` maestro '' and fawn on him for the subsidiary fame that come from stand in his light. He be not above their company ; and , indeed , he seem to have relish some who give him favorable publicity. Women be one of Picasso 's most persistent preoccupations. Apart from fleet affair , there be seven woman significant in his personal and artistic life. He marry two of them , but his relationship with the five others be well recognize and generally respected. Two of his companion bore three of his four children. The artist 's wife and mistress serve a his model , organize the domestic aspect of his household so far a that be possible , pet him , suffer his mercurial mood and greet his friends. In Picasso 's early day in Paris , his mistress be Miss Olivier , a young painter and teacher , who live , a he do , in the Bateau-Lavoir -- a Montmartre building call that by the poet and painter Max Jacob because it sway like a creaky Seine laundry boat. `` I meet Picasso a I be come home one stormy evening , '' Miss Olivier recalled. `` He have a tiny kitten in his arm , which he laughingly offer me , at the same time block my path. I laugh with him. He invite me to his studio. '' Their liaison last until 1912 , when Picasso meet Marcelle Humbert , the mistress of a sculptor friend. The two run off together , and there follow a series of superb canvas express the artist 's happiness. He call Miss Humbert `` Eva '' and sign two of his work `` J'aime Eva. '' Miss Humbert die in 1914. In Rome , early in 1917 , he meet Olga Khoklova , a ballerina with Sergei Diaghilev 's Ballet Russes. He paint her in a Spanish mantilla , and he and Olga be marry in 1918. Three year later a son , Paolo -- Italian for Pablo or Paul -- be born. Separated for 20 Years The marriage break up in 1935 , and Olga die in southern France 20 year later. The couple be never divorced. One reason , it be say , be that they have be marry under a community property arrangement that would have oblige Picasso to divide his fortune with her. At the time of the separation Picasso 's mistress be his blond model , Marie-Therese Walter. In 1935 she bore him a daughter , Marie de la Concepcion. A portrait of the girl , know a Maia , be one of Picasso 's most fetching naturalist studies. Dora Maar , a young Yugoslav photographer , be the painter 's next mistress. Their companionship last until 1944. The same year , when Picasso be 62 , he begin an 11-year liaison with Miss Gilot. Their child be Claude , bear in 1947 , and Paloma , bear in 1949. In 1970 Miss Gilot be marry to Dr. Jonas E. Salk , the polio-vaccine developer. Picasso 's final attachment be to Jacqueline Roque , who become his mistress in 1955 , and his wife in 1961 , when she be 35 and he be 79. Miss Roque have a rather wry sense of her role in the painter 's life. A member of a movie crew that be make a picture at their home ask her quite innocently who she was. `` Me , I 'm the new Egeria , '' she reply ; and from all account she be happy in devote her life to her husband's. Amid the Bohemian clutter in which he live and thrive , despite the concomitant disarray of his personal affair , Picasso maintain a strong , consistent and lasting emotional bond to the country of his birth. This bond influence his painting and , after 1936 and the Spanish Civil War , propel him for the first time into politics. His attachment to Spain be romantic and passionate ; and the fact that he shun Generalissimo Francisco Franco's Spain yet keep his Spanish nationality be an expression of his umbilical feeling for the country. There be two principal consequence of this bond : One be `` Guernica '' and the other be his membership in the French Communist party , which he join in 1944. `` Up to the time of the Spanish Civil War , Picasso be completely apolitical , '' Mr. Kahnweiler , his agent , recalled. `` He do not even know the name of the different parties. The Civil War change all that. '' Previously , Picasso 's insurgency have be that of every artist against the constriction of conventional life. But with the outbreak of conflict in his homeland , Picasso become instinctively an aroused partisan of the Republican Government. In January , 1937 , he begin etch the two large plate of `` Sueno y Mentira de Franco '' ( The Dream and Lie of Franco ) . These show the rebel leader a a perpetrator of symbolic horror -- himself ultimately transform into a centaur and gore to death by a bull. Countless copy of these etching be drop like propaganda leaflet over Franco territory. But it take the bombing of the Basque town of Guernica y Luno on April 26 , 1937 , to drive Picasso to the height of his genius. At 4:30 on that cloudless Monday afternoon , German airman , who have be provide to Franco by Adolf Hitler , descend on Guernica , a town of no military importance , in a test of the joint effect of explosive and incendiary bomb on civilians. The carnage be enormous , and the news of it appal the civilized world. At the time Picasso have be engage by the Loyalist Government to do a mural for it pavilion at a Paris fair later that year. The outrage at Guernica give him his subject and in a month of furious and volcanic work he complete his great and stunning painting. In Trust for the Nation The monochromatic mural , stark in black , gray and white , be retain by the artist in trust for the Spanish nation. It be to be give to the nation when it become a republic again. Assessing the picture 's searing impact on viewer over the year , Roland Penrose write : `` It be the simplicity of 'Guernica ' that make it a picture which can be readily understood. The form be divest of all complication which would distract from their meaning. The flame that rise from the burning house and flicker on the dress of the fall woman be describe by sign as unmistakable a those use by primitive artists. `` The nail-studded hoof , the hand with deeply furrow palm and the sun illuminate with an electric-light bulb be draw with a childlike simplicity , startle in it directness. '' `` Guernica '' be responsible for one of Picasso 's most noteworthy ripostes. During the Nazi occupation of France in World War II , a German officer visit the artist 's studio , where a large reproduction of the mural be on display. `` Ah , so it be you who do that , '' the German said. `` No , '' snap Picasso. `` You do it ! '' Picasso paint two other major historical picture , `` The Korean Massacres '' and `` War and Peace. '' The two large composition be in an old chapel in Vallauris , France. Both be intend to arouse the conscience of mankind to the horror of war. Toward the close of World War II the artist join the Communist party , and L'Humanite , the party daily , mark the occasion by publish almost a full-page photograph of him. Although his decision seem clearly motivate by the Spanish War and the ensuing World War , there be many who think at first that the action be another of Picasso 's caprices. He respond to such charge with a statement publish in Les Lettres Francaises , which say in part : `` What do you think an artist be ? An imbecile who have only his eye if he be a painter , or his ear if a musician , or a lyre at every level of his heart if he be a poet , or , if he be merely a boxer , only his muscle ? `` On the contrary , he be at the same time a political be , constantly alert to the heart- rending , burning , or happy event in the world , mold himself in their likeness. `` How could it be possible to feel no interest in other people and , because of an ivory- tower indifference , detach yourself from the life they bring with such open hand ? `` No , paint be not make to decorate apartments. It be an instrument of war , for attack and defense against the enemy. '' Denounced by Soviet Critic But Picasso 's brand of Communism be not Moscow 's , at least in the Kremlin 's Stalinist period. In 1948 , his work be denounce by Vladimir Kemenov , a Soviet art critic , a an `` apology for capitalistic esthetic that provoke the indignation of the simple people , if not the bourgeoisie. '' `` His pathology have create repugnant monstrosity , '' Mr. Kemenov go on. `` In his 'Guernica ' he portray not the Spanish Republic but monsters. He tread the path of cosmopolitanism , of empty geometric forms. His every canvas deform man -- his body and his face. '' Picasso be pain but unmoved by the attack. `` I do n't try to advise the Russians on economics. Why should they tell me how to paint ? '' he remark to a friend. About that time , accord to one account , an orthodox Soviet painter say to Picasso on be introduce , `` I have know of you for some time a a good Communist , but I 'm afraid I do n't like your painting. '' `` I can say the same about you , comrade , '' Picasso shot back. After Mr. Kemenov 's appraisal , Moscow 's attitude to the artist fluctuated. `` The Dove '' help , quite unintentionally , to create a thaw , and it come about this way : One day in 1949 Matisse come to visit Picasso , bring a white fantail pigeon for his friend 's cote. Virtually on the spot , Picasso make a naturalistic lithograph of the newcomer ; and Louis Aragon , the Communist poet and novelist , who saw it shortly afterward , realize it possibility at once. The lithograph , sign by the artist , be first use a a poster at a World Peace Conference. And from that introduction it fly around the world , reproduce in all size and in all medium a a peace symbol. Picasso get into Communist hot water again , however , in 1953. This time the attack come from his French comrades. The occasion be Stalin 's death and a crayon portrait that the artist sketched. The imaginative likeness of Stalin a a young man stir up the working-class member of the French party. Mr. Aragon , who have publish it , felt oblige to recant in public , and Picasso be not amused. `` When you send a funeral wreath , the family customarily do n't criticize your choice of flower , '' he said. Nevertheless , in 1954 Moscow appear to relent , for it take out of hide it 37 precious early Picassos ( they have never be show to the Soviet public ) and lent them to a Paris exhibition. And two year later the Soviet Union mark the painter 's 75th birthday by show a large number of his picture and ceramic to the public. Picasso 's distortion of reality , to which Mr. Kemenov object , also baffle less political critic who be unaccustomed to the artist 's private language and private mythology or who do not appreciate the esthetic of plane and solid geometry and of Mercator-like projection of the human face and form. Born on Spain 's South Coast The man who so largely create the special esthetic of modern art be bear on the night of Oct. 25 , 1881 , in Malaga , on Spain 's south coast. Picasso 's father be Jose Ruiz , an Andalusian who teach for small pay in the local school of art and crafts. His mother be Maria Picasso , a Majorcan. Pablo could draw as soon a he could grasp a pencil , but a a pupil in the ordinary sense he prefer look at the clock to do sum and reading. Save for art , he manage to avoid all but the rudiment of formal schooling. He be obstinate about this , a in other matters. As a child , Picasso often accompany his father to the bullfights. These make an indelible impression , for throughout his life bullring scene and variation on them be a significant part of his work , recur more persistently than any other single symbol. His first oil , at the age of 9 , be of the bullring. In 1895 the family move to Barcelona , where Pablo 's father taught at the School of Fine Arts. By that time the youngster 's talent be truly Mozartean , so obviously so that his father solemnly present him with his own palette and brushes. This confidence be justify when Pablo , at 15 , compete for admission to the art school. A month be ordinarily allow , but he complete his picture , a male nude , in a single day and be admit to class in 1896. He remain there for a year before go to Madrid for further study. During an illness he live among the peasant of Catalonia , the poverty and barrenness of whose life appal him. From them and from the countryside , he say later , he learn `` everything I know. '' Dropped Father 's Name Late in 1898 , the young artist drop his father 's name from the signature `` P. Ruiz Picasso '' for reason that have never be make clear. ( His full baptismal name have be Pablo Diego Jose Francisco de Paula Nepomuceno Paria de los Remedios de la Santisima Trinidad Ruiz Picasso. ) Picasso pay his first visit to Paris in 1900 and after three more visit settle in Paris in 1904. On one of these visit he meet Max Jacob , who be , next to Pierre Reverdy , his most appreciative friend until his death in a Nazi concentration camp. Picasso also become acquaint with Berthe Weill , the art dealer , who purchase some of his painting , and Petrus Manach , another dealer , who be to support him briefly at the rate of $ 37.50 a month. Meanwhile , Picasso 's `` blue '' picture have establish him a an artist with a personal voice. This period , end about 1904 , be characterize by his use of the color blue to depict fatalistically the haunting melancholy of die clown , most of them in catatonic state , and agonize acrobats. `` La Mort d ' Arlequin '' be one of the most widely know of these. When the artist move into the Bateau-Lavoir , his rickety and drafty studio become an important meeting and talk place for person later to be famous in art and letters. In addition to Mr. Jacob there be Guillaume Apollinaire , the poet ; Andre Salmon , the writer ; Matisse ; Braque : Le Douanier Rousseau ; Juan Gris , the Spanish painter ; Cocteau , Dufy , Gertrude and Leo Stein , Utrillo , Lipschitz and Marcoussis. Apollinaire , Picasso 's spiritual guide in those day , introduce him to the public with a long article in a Paris review in 1905. One of Picasso 's lifelong habit , paint at night , start during this time , and for the simple reason that his day be frequently absorb by friend and visitors. It be also the time of his two-year `` rise period , '' generally date from 1904 to 1906 , so-called because hue of that color dominate his pictures. Near the rise period 's close , he be take up by the Steins , American expatriate in Paris. Leo and Gertrude do not so much discover the painter a popularize him. He , in turn , do a portrait of Gertrude with a face far from representational. When Miss Stein protest that she do n't look like that , Picasso reply , `` But you will , '' and , indeed , in her old age Miss Stein come to resemble her picture. The year 1907 , the end of a very brief `` Negroid '' or `` African period , '' be a milestone for the painter , for it mark the birth of cubism in an oil of five distorted nude call `` Les Demoiselles d'Avignon. '' With cubism , Picasso -- along with Braque -- reject light and perspective , paint not what he saw , but what he represent to himself through analysis. ( The name `` cubism '' be coin afterward , and it be base on the cube form into which Picasso and Braque tend to break up the external world. ) `` When we paint a we do , '' Picasso say later , `` we have no intention of create cubism , but only of express what be inside us. `` Cubism be neither a seed nor a fetus , but an art which be primarily concern with form , and , once a form have be create , then it exist and go on live it own life. '' This be also the case when Picasso add a new dimension to cubism in 1911 or 1912 by invent the collage by glue a piece of imitation chair can to a still life. Later he go on to an even less academic cubism , sometimes call rococo cubism. Invention of the Collage These expression in the cubist manner be not Picasso 's total expression in the year from 1907 to 1917 , for at the same time he be paint realistically. His first substantial recognition come in this period through an exhibition in New York in 1911 and one in London in 1912. His picture begin to fetch high price -- almost $ 3,000 for `` Acrobats '' in 1914. With the war and his marriage to a ballerina , Picasso be a costume designer and scenery painter for the Ballet Russes up to about 1925 , all the while paint for himself , mostly in a neoclassic and romantic manner. `` The Woman in White '' be among the best-known of these naturalistic pictures. With the advent of the surrealist movement in the middle twenty , the artist 's work turn to the grotesque. Some of his figure be endow with several head , displaced nose , mouth and eye , overenlarged limbs. Turbulence and violence seem to be at the bottom of his feelings. Then , in 1929 , Picasso return somewhat abruptly to sculpture , of which he have do little for 15 years. But again it be not a full preoccupation , and he be soon attack his easel , this time with variation within a distinctive generally surrealistic framework. One typical picture be `` Young Woman With a Looking-glass , '' paint in 1932. With these and other picture of a similar genre , the artist 's renown and income reach new heights. Life be also quieter for him , especially after 1935 when Dora Maar help put routine into his daily existence. She be also the model for a notable series of portrait in which the Mercator projection principle be apply to the human face. Serenity , or as much of it a ever be possible for Picasso , persist until the fall of Paris in 1940. He reject an opportunity to escape to the United States , and , instead , remain in Paris throughout the war , paint industriously amid considerable personal hardship and the prying of Nazi soldiers. It be forbid to exhibit his picture or to print his name in the newspapers. Lithography and Ceramics After the war , Picasso become enchant by lithography , which he teach himself. In a short period he turn out more than 200 lithographs. He be at the same time painting , in Paris and in Antibes , and restlessly investigate pottery. Ceramics entrance him , and his work with clay create an industry for the town of Vallauris , not far from the Riviera. In a single year he make and decorate 600 figure and vessel , all different. Even this concentration on one medium seem not to diminish the intensity with which he , at the time , paint , sculpture and illustrate books. His painting style , although it have moment of naturalism , contain wild reinventions of anatomy but in such an idiosyncratic way that surrealism or any other `` ism '' do not appear to apply. Picasso have isolate an idiom for himself. Toward the close of his life he also produce a number of seascape and painting a a composer would write variation on another 's theme. Among Picasso 's more notable variation be 10 on Cranach 's `` David and Bathsheba , '' 15 on Delacroix 's `` Femmes d'Alger '' and 44 on Velazquez 's `` Las Meninas. '' He also paint score of portrait of his wife in a variety of pose -- on a bed fondle a cat , seat nude in his studio , reading. They be portrait only in the sense that they be vaguely representational of Jacqueline Roque , for the figure and the face be almost always distorted. Many of these picture be publish in `` The Artist and His Model. '' They give the impression of a man of unlimited vitality in a perpetual state of creation. As if in confirmation of this , Picasso tell a visitor who admire the vigor of the work : `` A painter never finishes. There 's never a moment when you can say , 'I 've work well and tomorrow be Sunday. ' As soon a you stop , it 's because you 've start again. You can put a picture aside and say you wo n't touch it again. But you can never write The End. '' Landscapes be another fascination. Some be of the sunlit terrain near his villa at Notre Dame de Vie ; others be of countryside paint from an undimmed memory. Although the bulk of his painting be not place on the market , many be publish in color reproduction by Harry N. Abrams in New York , an art book house. Acclaim Mounted With Age Popular acclaim for Picasso seem to mount with his age. In 1967 , when he be 86 , `` Homage to Picasso , '' an exhibition of some of his work , draw throng to museum here and abroad. His sculpture be give a special exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. One example of his sculpture , `` Bust of Sylvette , '' be a 60-ton , sand-blasted work that rest in University Plaza , in downtown New York. A Picasso play also attract attention , not to say notoriety. It be `` Desire Caught by the Tail , '' which he have write in three day on a sickbed in 1941. It be produce privately in Paris three year later with a cast that include the playwright , Simone de Beauvoir , Valentine Hugo , Albert Camus , Raymond Queneau and Jean-Paul Sartre. The main prop be a big black box that serve a a bed , bathtub and coffin for the two principal character , Fat Anxiety and Thin Anxiety. The play 's action be earthy. When `` Desire '' be commercially stag in St. Tropez in 1967 , it arouse protest even in that resort town 's atmosphere of tolerance. The objection be that some of the character be expect to urinate on stage. Although this do not take place , the play be think overly suggestive. Picasso write a second play , `` The Four Girls , '' in 1965 , but it be not produced. The painter do not venture to St. Tropez for his play , nor do he often leave his hilltop villa in his last years. He seem to feel the world slip away from him , especially when his old friend die one after another. He shut himself up , refuse to answer the telephone , for example , to mourn Ilya Ehrenburg in September , 1967. But for the most part he painted. Rather than stand , he sit down , bend almost in half over his canvas. Age line in his face underscore an intensity of purpose hardly abate by time. And a he paint his nostril flare , his eye widen , he frown and all the while his hand be never still. He be , in the word of a friend , `` like a sturdy old oaken tub brimful of the wine of life. '' `` You would think , '' another friend say , `` he be try to do a few more century of work in what he have leave to live. '' Picasso -- Symbol of a Conquest in Art By John Canaday Whatever else he be , Pablo Picasso be the most potent single force in the art of the 20th century. Matisse and Kandinsky might rival him a second leader in the most violent revolution since the Renaissance. But neither of their revolution be quite a drastic , a far reach , a vary in manner of assault and foray against tradition a Picasso's. And yet as soon a the word `` tradition '' be mention , Picasso must be think of a a colleague of the master of the past as well a the artist who seem most to reject them. It have always be typical of Picasso that he could not be capture within a single net. He be this , he be that , he be the other -- at one moment a poet , at the next an inspired buffoon ; tender and romantic to the point of sentimentality , intellectual to the point of frigidity ; now a cynic , now a compassionate man ; ebullient in one painting , despair in another ; exquisitely refine , and deliberately brutal. To think of Picasso a dead be next to impossible. Two generation ago he be already , with Matisse , the most commanding presence in art for an avant-garde that at that time be still small and be still oppose by the academic legions. But for a generation Picasso have be the establish symbol not only of the revolution of modern art but also of it conquest of the intellectual , the collector , the school , and the last academic fortress -- the museums. The conquest be so complete that there aer schoolchildren who know Picasso 's name but have never hear of Giotto's. There be college student who can tell you more about the cubist revolution than the Russian Revolution. Picasso turn the avant-garde into a mass audience. The one thing that hold 's Picasso 's tremendous body of work together in spite of it unparalleled variety of style be the sense it give , in total retrospect , of restlessness , of dissatisfaction with any achievement , of constantly uncover something new , of throw it away , pick it up again , invent , recombine , always searching. Picasso once say , `` I do not seek -- I find , '' but nothing he find ever satisfy him for long. In a critique , Hilton Kramer suggest that Picasso 's preoccupation during the last year of his life with play variation on masterpiece of the past be a way of satisfy his hunger for the monumental theme that the past offer it artists. This must be true. Our century have somehow deny even it genius among painter theme comparable to the great religious cycle and the glorification of ruler that be once valid , and which be extendable beyond their specific subject into exploration of the human spirit. In a century when faith be question and government be a matter of practical organization , we be accustom to say that modern artist have reject the world and be content to deal with triviality or with ivory-tower esthetic problems. But the choice have not be theirs. Michelangelo surely could not find today within religion and society the impulse that generate the Sistine Ceiling , or any substitute for those impulses. It be significant that Picasso , in his one great social statement , the great social statement make in paint in this century -- his `` Guernica '' -- do not celebrate a victory or an ideal but elegize a defeat. And now , with his death , the probability that Picasso be defeat by his century become clear. One can no longer wonder what Picasso be go to do next : The line have be drawn. For 70 year his torrential energy constantly burst through conventional boundary to discover new release , but his genius , comparable to that of the old master , never find expressive consummation comparable to theirs. He produce , in a dozen manner , body of painting and sculpture that could have be the impressive life work of a dozen artists. He shift , in his single life a a man , from one creative life to another. We can say again and again that he exhaust a field of experiment -- that he exhaust the poignant lyricism of the Blue and Rose period , exhaust the technical experiment of cubism , exhaust even the nostalgic recall of ancient Greece , exhaust his castigation of the violent and the monstrous , and exhaust them simply because the inexhaustible theme of the past have be shatter into individually exhaust fragments. But Picasso could not stop working. His creative energy well up incessantly and demand incessant release. He be leave time and time again with no outlet for his fantastic genius except wit , showmanship and legerdemain. In wit , showmanship and legerdemain he be unsurpassed , but the work that pour out seem sometimes to have be pour out desperately , in the double desperation of release intolerable creative pressure and the desperate realization that this great force must be spend trivially. But the triviality be only comparative. Picasso be be think of here along with Giotto , Leonardo , Michelangelo , Rembrandt and Rubens , for he be a gigantic figure in spite of everything. If he be also a tragic figure , it be by the convention of tragedy that demand a kingly figure fatally vulnerable to a tragic flaw. And in this case the flaw be not in the protagonist , but in the relationship of this century to it artist .