January 2 , 1973 OBITUARY Clemente , Pirates ' Star , Dies in Crash Of Plane Carrying Aid to Nicaragua Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES SAN JUAN , P. R. , Jan. 1 -- Roberto Clemente , star outfielder for the Pittsburgh Pirates , die late last night in the crash of a cargo plane carry relief supply to the victim of the earthquake in Managua. Three day of national mourning for Mr. Clemente be proclaim in his native Puerto Rico , where he be the most popular sport figure in the island 's history. He be a certainty to be enshrine in Baseball 's Hall of Fame. He be only the 11th man in baseball history to get 3,000 hit , and his lifetime batting average of .317 be the high among active players. Mr. Clemente , who be 38 year old , win the National League bat championship four time in his 18-season career , be name to the All-Star team 12 time and in 1966 be name the league 's Most Valuable Player. He be also one of the fine defensive outfielder with a very strong throw arm. He lead the Pittsburgh Pirates to two world championship , in 1960 and 1971 , the latter time be name the Most Valuable Player in the World Series. Mr. Clemente be the leader of Puerto Rican effort to aid the Nicaraguan victim and be aboard the plane because he suspect that relief supply be fall into the hand of profiteers. The four-engined DC-7 piston-powered plane crash moment after takeoff from San Juan International Airport at 9:22 P.M. The plane , carry a crew of three and one other passenger , come down in heavy sea a mile and a half from shore. Coast Guard plane circle the area try to locate the plane by the light of flares. The wreckage be not find until 5 P.M. today in about 100 foot of water. There be no sign of survivors. Airport official say the plane crash after make a normal left bank while climb after the takeoff. It could not be learn if the pilot , identify a Jerry Hill , radio that he be in difficulty. Cristobal Colon , a friend of Mr. Clemente who be work on the committee to raise fund and collect clothing for the earthquake victim , say he have drive Mr. Clemente and his wife , Vera , to the airport. Mrs. Clemente do not board the plane. Mrs. Clemente say she be concern that the plane seem old and overloaded , but her husband assure her that everything would be all right. When the pilot do not show up until late , she say he tell her , `` If there be one more delay , we 'll leave this for tomorrow. '' Mr. Colon say Mr. Clemente have insist on go with the flight to make certain that the supply get into the hand of the people who need them. `` He have receive report that some of the food and clothing he have send earlier have fall into the hand of profiteer , '' say Mr. Colon. Mr. Clemente have be ask to take part in the collection of fund by Luis Vigoraux , a television producer. `` He do not just lend his name to the fund-raising activity the way some famous personality do , '' say Mr. Vigoraux. `` He take over the entire thing , arrange for collection point , publicity and the transportation to Nicaragua. '' Mr. Clemente 's relief organization have collect $ 150,000 in cash and ton of clothing and foodstuffs. More money and clothing be still be donated. `` We send a ship load with supply during the week , '' say a member of the earthquake relief committee. `` One of the reason Roberto go on the plane be to get there before the ship arrive to see the supply be distribute properly. '' The baseball star be suppose to be meet at the airport by Anastasio Somoza , the Nicaraguan military leader , a friend said. Mr. Clemente 's interest in Nicaragua may have be heighten by his experience in manage the Puerto Rican team that participate in the amateur world series hold in Managua in late November and December. Sixteen team participated. The Puerto Ricans take fifth place. News of Mr. Clemente 's death plunge Puerto Rico into mourning. Gov. Louis A. Ferre decree three day of mourn and Governor-elect Rafael Hernandez Colon , who will be swear into office tomorrow , order the cancellation of an inaugural ball and all other social activity relate to the inauguration .