July 10 , 1974 OBITUARY Earl Warren , 83 , Who Led High Court In Time of Vast Social Change , Is Dead By ALDEN WHITMAN Presiding over the Supreme Court for 16 year -- from 1953 to 1969 -- Earl Warren champion the Constitution a the vigorous protector of the individual right and equality of all Americans. Reflecting the dynamic of social change in the nation ( and profoundly affect them ) Mr. Warren 's Court , amid much dispute , elaborate a doctrine of fairness in such area a criminal justice , vote right , legislative districting , employment , housing , transportation and education. In so do , the Chief Justice of the United States contribute greatly to a reshaping of the country 's social and political institutions. `` I would like the Court to be remember a the people 's court , '' he remark on his retirement , express his strong sense of indignation over wrong do to obscure citizen in the Government 's name. This be a quite different attitude from his early law-and-order view a a California prosecutor ; but Mr. Warren have become more liberal with age and perspective. `` On the Court I saw [ thing ] in a different light , '' he once explained. Liberties Reinforced The impact of the Warren Court be cumulative , and Mr. Warren 's stature grow perceptibly over 16 years. The part that constitute the whole be embody in a series of decision that have the collective effect of reinforce popular liberties. Among these be ruling that : Outlawed school segregation. Enunciated the one-man , one-vote doctrine. Made most of the Bill of Rights binding on the states. Curbed wiretapping. Upheld the right to be secure against `` unreasonable '' search and seizures. Buttressed the right to counsel. Underscored the right to a jury trial. Barred racial discrimination in voting , in marriage law , in the use of public park , airport and bus terminal and in housing sale and rentals. Extended the boundary of free speech. Ruled out compulsory religious exercise in public schools. Restored freedom of foreign travel. Knocked out the application of both the Smith and the McCarran Acts -- both design to curb `` subversive '' activities. Held that Federal prisoner could sue the Government for injury sustain in jail. Said that wage could not be garnish without a hearing. Liberalized residency requirement for welfare recipients. Sustained the right to disseminate and receive birth control information. Although Mr. Warren do not write the opinion in all these case , he bore the brunt of the criticism that many of them aroused. This criticism come from policeman and prosecutor ; politician ; white supremacist ; conservative ; and , indirectly , from the Nixon White House. The cry from the Nixon Administration that the Warren Court `` coddle criminal '' and foster permissiveness '' mislead many people , accord to Mr. Warren. In an interview Mr. Warren bristle visibly a he recall charge that he have be `` soft '' on crime. `` I be n't 'softer ' on crime that I ever be , '' he declared. `` All we do on the Court be to apply the Constitution , which say that any defendant be entitle to due process and to certain basic rights. '' Some critic of Mr. Warren want him remove , and at one time there be a spate of billboard and bumper sign that say `` Impeach Earl Warren. '' Of the sign , Mr. Warren say , `` It be kind of an honor to be accuse by the John Birch Society [ the right-wing group that oppose him strenuously ] . It be a little rough on my wife , but it never bother me. '' Although impeachment be clearly a minority movement ( there be never even a House resolution ) , there be conservative , some lawyer among them , who agree with President Eisenhower when he call the Warren appointment `` the big damned-fool mistake I ever made. '' He be allude to the Court 's desegregation decision , which provoke lawless dissension among many Southern white , before they become reconcile to law foster racial equality. Many observer believe that the desegregation ruling , start with Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka in 1954 , be the Warren Court 's most important because they lead to a readjustment of long-standing racial imbalance in the country. Mr. Warren himself , however , regard the redistricting case a the most significant. He express his feeling this way : `` If everyone in this country have an opportunity to participate in his government on equal term with everyone else , and can share in elect representative who will be truly representative of the entire community and not some special interest , then most of the problem that we be confront with would be solve through the political process rather than through the courts. '' If the one-man , one-vote principle have be in effect much earlier in our history , accord to Mr. Warren , `` our Court would not have be compel to decide big case just on the bare bone of the Constitution , on the bare bone of the Civil War Amendments. '' If the 15th Amendment , assure the right to vote regardless of race , have be translate into legislation give the black man the right to vote , `` by this time racial problem should have be solve by the political process , '' he say , add : `` If Baker v. Carr [ the lead re-districting case ] have be in existence 50 year ago , we would have save ourselves acute racial troubles. But a it be , the Court just have to decide. '' The essence of Mr. Warren 's ( and the Court 's ) position on one man , one vote -- a doctrine that transform the political map of the nation -- be set forth in Reynolds v. Sims. At issue be whether factor other than equal representation of voter could be consider in elect state legislators. Assuming that member of one house would be elect from district of equal population , could member of the other house represent geographical area of vary density in order to assure a voice to sparsely settled locality and minority interest ? Because to do so would give some person more influence than others , Mr. Warren reply with a firm `` no. '' `` Legislators represent people , not tree or acre , '' he wrote. `` Legislators be elect by voter , not farm or city or economic interests. '' He saw no reason , he add , why `` history alone , nor economic or other sort of group interest '' could justify give `` one person a great voice in government than any other person. '' Desegregation Rulings `` The override objective , '' he remark , `` must be substantial equality among the various district , so that the vote of any citizen be approximately equal in weight to that of any other citizen in the state. '' As a result of this and other ruling -- and sometimes prod by low court -- state redrew their legislative district , and many review Congressional boundaries. Ranking just below redistricting in Mr. Warren 's estimation come the school desegregation ruling that start with the Brown case in 1954. This historic decision be one of 45 in which the Warren Court overrule prior Supreme Court holding and set in motion profound change in the country 's racial relations. Mr. Warren 's handling of the Brown case to achieve unanimity inside the Court illustrate the quality that make him , in the mind of many lawyer , an outstanding Chief Justice. Describing what happen , he say : `` Ordinarily , the Justices , at our Friday conference state their position , offer debate and then voted. But in Brown we be all conscious of the case , so I hold off a vote from conference to conference while we discuss it. If you 'll remember , Brown be argue in the fall of 1953 , and I do not call for a vote until the middle of the following February , when I be certain we would be unanimous. We take one vote , and that be it. `` I assign myself to write the decision , for it seem to me that something so important ought to issue over the name of the Chief Justice of the United States. In draft it , I seek to use low-key , unemotional language and to keep it short enough so that it could be publish in full in every newspaper in the country. I keep the text secret ( it be lock in my safe ) until I read from the bench. '' Speaking for the Court , Mr. Warren brush aside the `` separate but equal '' doctrine of Plessy v. Ferguson that have be in effect for 58 years. Basing himself on the 14th Amendment 's declaration that no person should be deny the equal protection of the law , he write of black school child : `` To separate them from others because of their race generate a feeling of inferiority a to their status in the community that may effect their heart and mind in a way unlikely to be undone. '' This lead him to declare : `` We conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of 'separate but equal ' have no place. Separate educational facility be inherently equal. '' The Brown ruling touch off a series of act of defiance in the South and generate serious tension in other part of the country. These have largely subside by 1973 , although strong undercurrent of white supremacy be still evident in dispute over the busing of schoolchildren and other racial matters. The moral authority of the Court , which have be severely test , survived. From the Brown decision flow a score or more of holding by the court and by inferior court that collectively strike down racial inequality in most area of public life. As a result , park , swimming pool , bus terminal and housing be desegregated. A hundred year after the Civil War black begin to achieve full citizenship. Rights of the Accused Ranking third in Mr. Warren 's mind be a group of criminal case that expand protection for the right of the accused. In the view of many lawyer ( and of Mr. Warren ) these decision be often misunderstand a permit the `` coddling of criminal , '' whereas these lawyer contend that the ruling do little more than make specific the word of the Constitution. `` I think one of the most important case we have be the Gideon case , '' Mr. Warren remark after his retirement. `` That be the case that interpret the Constitution to say it meant just exactly what it say , that a man be entitle to counsel in a criminal proceeding. '' Continuing his analysis , he say : `` Before the case , in many place throughout the country a man be afford counsel if he could n't pay for it only if he be charge with a capital offense , and of course that mean that hundred of thousand of men every year be arrest and try and perhaps have no legal advice at all. The Gideon case make it a living thing that every man charge with a serious offense be entitle to counsel at his trial. `` Then also I think the case of Escobedo be a very important case , because in that case it be determine that when a man be in jail and ask for his lawyer and his lawyer be available , he be entitle to have him there. `` Then we come to the Miranda case , and the question arise : If he 's entitle to a lawyer when his lawyer be present , when be he first entitle to a lawyer ? `` Miranda simply say that when the law put upon a man by put him in restraint and take him away from his home and his family and his friend and start to put him behind bar , that then he 's in the foil of the law in a criminal case and be entitle to have representation of counsel. '' Mr. Warren 's explication , his reducing of legalism to comprehensible language , be , accord to his colleague , typical of the way he present case in the Court 's conference and typical also of the language of his opinions. This scanting of law book language lead some scholar to doubt his learning , but he contend that `` express the concept of the Constitution in common language be part of my idea of the Court a a people 's court. '' The Chief Justice be at pain to deny that the Court 's criminal justice decision have hamper legal law enforcement. `` It be always easy to obtain a conviction if you be permit to use excess that be prohibit by the Constitution , '' he said. `` I 'm not soft on crime than I be a a California prosecutor , but a lot of thing change in 50 year , '' he go on. `` The third degree call for some restraint so that innocent people be not convict , and all we do be to keep up with the times. '' The Changing of Views Actually , Mr. Warren 's vote in the criminal case illustrate the phenomenon of a man grow more liberal with age. He be , in succession , a crime-busting District Attorney , a law-and-order State Attorney General , a progressive Governor and a libertarian Chief Justice. His view change , he once say , because he saw thing `` in a different light. '' And in the interview for this article , he remark , `` No man can sit on the Court over 16 year and remain parochial , for he must look out over all the United States. '' `` I do not see how a man could be on the Court and not change his view substantially over a period of year , '' he said. One example be his vote early in his term to uphold a gambling conviction that be base on the placing of wiretapping device in a bookie 's bedroom. Mr. Warren agonize that prosecutor should not be allow to use the fruit of such practice , but he could not bring himself to encroach on a state 's law-enforcement prerogatives. His attitude shift markedly with late cases. Starting with the Mapp case in 1961 , the Court make the Bill of Rights curb on unreasonable search and seizure fully bind on state and local policemen. After this ruling , the Court go on to apply most of the Bill of Rights to the states. `` This be a most significant development , '' Justice William J. Brennan Jr. say in an interview for this article. '' Ultimately , all but three or four of the Bill 's guarantee be lay on the states. `` Warren be not the chief architect of this development , in which [ Justice Hugo L. ] Black and [ Justice William O. ] Douglas be leader , but the Chief help to make a consensus among several of us. '' By the early sixty Mr. Warren be clearly demonstrate an ability to give the Court cohesion and direction. This leadership be buttress by the appointment of several liberal Justices who tend to see thing his way. Thus the familiar `` Warren majority '' of the Chief Justice and Justices Arthur J. Goldberg , Black , Brennan and Douglas be bolster by Thurgood Marshall and Abe Fortas. Cordial Relationships A mild and genial man , Mr. Warren get along well with his colleague on the bench , all men of strong personalities. According to both Justices Brennan and Douglas , the member of the Court often engage in vigorous disagreement over issue , but their personal relation be always cordial. One Justice recall , however , at least one personal clash between Mr. Warren and Justice Felix Frankfurter , who have the habit of lobby his colleagues. Mr. Warren acknowledge that Mr. Frankfurter have sometimes be prickly and long-winded , but in retrospect he laugh about the Justice 's traits. According to Mr. Brennan , `` It be incredible how efficiently the Chief would conduct the Friday conference , lead the discussion of every case on the agenda , with a knowledge of each case at his fingertips. '' More than many Chief Justices , Mr. Warren remove himself from partisanship and political activity , but in one instance he felt oblige to take on , albeit reluctantly , an extra-judicial task. That be the chairmanship of the so-called Warren Commission , which investigate the assassination of President Kennedy in November , 1963 , and conclude that Lee Harvey Oswald , act alone , have shoot the President. In take the post , Mr. Warren yield to the importunings of President Johnson. The 10 month of the commission 's work be `` the unhappy time of my life , '' he say , add that `` to review the terrible happening of that assassination every day [ be ] a traumatic experience. `` The only reason I undertake the commission be the gravity of the situation , '' he recalled. `` There be no way of hold a trial , for Oswald be dead and the country need to have the fact of the kill brought out. But it be n't a good thing for a Justice to undertake such duties. '' Although many dispute or disbelieve the commission 's finding , Mr. Warren be unshaken , asserting , `` No one have produce any fact that be contrary to the commission 's conclusions. '' Mr. Warren 's path to the Court begin in Los Angeles , where he be bear March 19 , 1891 , the son of Methias H. ( Matt ) Warren and Crystal Hernlund Warren. His mother be a native of Sweden and his father be bear in Norway. The elder Warren be a car repairman and inspector for the Southern Pacific Railroad. The family move to Bakersfield , where , after a number of year , Matt Warren slip into the way of an eccentric who do not live with his family. He be bludgeon to death in 1938 , and the case be never solved. His son attend public school in Bakersfield , play the cornet in band and orchestra ( he join the musician ' union in the process ) and work at odd job -- railroad call boy , freight hustler , truck driver -- to meet expenses. He go to the University of California , get a Bachelor of Letters degree in 1912 and a doctorate in jurisprudence in 1914. World War and Law He practice law for several year , serve a an infantry first lieutenant in World War I , and begin his public career a Deputy City Attorney for Oakland , Calif. Then he become a Deputy District Attorney for Alameda County , which embrace the city of Oakland , Alameda and Berkeley in the San Francisco Bay area. His career in both post be unspectacular , but in the 13 year he serve a the county 's District Attorney , from 1925 to 1938 , he emerge a a racket- busting prosecutor. Even so , Mr. Warren be not think of a brilliant , merely thorough. None of the conviction he obtain , for example , be upset on appeal. Although he be proud of his legal footwork , he say later that he have get no personal satisfaction from the convictions. `` Although I fight vigorously in the case I prosecute , '' he remark , `` I invariably felt nauseate when the jury bring in a verdict of guilty. '' In his year a District Attorney , Mr. Warren make many friend in the state. Standing a little over 6 foot and weigh 215 pound , he have a hearty handshake and an easy manner. `` Hello , there , '' he would say. `` How ARE you ? Glad to SEE you ! '' He join the ritual organization , include the whites-only Order of Elks. In those day , he say later , he accept without think the prevail racial attitudes. Mr. Warren have be his party 's state chairman , from 1934 to 1936 , and be Republican national committeeman when he run for California Attorney General in 1938 at the age of 47. He cross- fill and win three nomination -- his party 's , the Democratic and the Progressive. He win election in an otherwise Democratic year. In four year a Attorney General , he keep in the public eye with an occasional raid on gamble den , but most of his work be administrative. Nonetheless , he appear frequently around the state , usually with his wife , the former Mrs. Nina Palmquist Meyers , a widow , whom he have marry in 1925. With her son , James , whom Mr. Warren adopt , and the couple 's five child -- Virginia , Earl Jr. , Dorothy , Nina Elizabeth and Robert -- the family be attractive , and Mr. Warren be not averse to show it off. `` How can you beat a man with a family like that ? '' ask one California politician. In 1942 Mr. Warren run for Governor and win by defeat the favor Democratic nominee , Governor Culbert L. Olson. He prove an amiable and popular Governor but not a governmental leader of great distinction or a political leader of great power. Nonetheless , when he seek re- election in 1946 , he cross-file in the primary and win both the Republican and Democratic designations. The election be a formality. In 1950 he be again his party 's choice , but this time he face James Roosevelt , the son of the late Franklin D. Roosevelt. The Roosevelt name , however , carry no magic and Mr. Warren win by a million votes. In between , in 1948 , he be select for geopolitical reason to run for the Vice-Presidency with Gov. Thomas E. Dewey of New York. They lose to Harry S. Truman and Alben W. Barkley after have convince many journalist and pundit that they would surely triumph. Again in 1952 Mr. Warren make a national bid a a contender for his party 's Presidential nomination. He actually have little hope of get it over the popular Dwight D. Eisenhower , but in the general 's contest with Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio he side with General Eisenhower at a crucial moment in the convention , thus accumulate a political due bill. Up to this point , Mr. Warren 's career reflect some of the same quality he demonstrate later on the Court -- a capacity for the hard work , a disarming affability and an ideological progression from right to left. As a young prosecutor , he make himself indispensable by frequently work until midnight and by master his and other assistant ' case so that a they depart for private practice , it become automatic for the District Attorney to turn more responsibility over to him. When he become a top official himself , he be a taskmaster who assume that his subordinate would toil long hour , and who rarely express gratitude for it. Smoothly Toward Goals With all of his ambition , there be an openness about Mr. Warren that permit him to move smoothly toward his own goal , without make those whom he might be pass -- or use -- feel threatened. He be a big , fair-haired man , call Pinky in his youth , who love spectator sport and outdoor life , and whose suit be always double-breasted blue serge. He could call hundred of people by name , but he have few close friend , prefer to spend free time with his family. In his early year , Mr. Warren be instinctively attract to the kind of conservative thinking that make him a favorite of California 's regular Republicans. One February morning in 1935 , he stomp grumpily into his office , where a young assistant be work at a desk with open lawbooks spread around him. Mr. Warren begin to slam the book shut , muttering , `` Throw them away -- forget them. They 're no good now , contract do n't mean anything anymore. '' He have just learn of the Supreme Court 's decision uphold the law take the United States off the gold standard. When he later run for Attorney General , he favor a bill to make school child salute the flag. He also proclaim that the Communist party `` should bot be entitle to legal recognition in the political life of America , '' and he oppose a pardon for Tom Mooney , the trade union radical. Early in his term a Governor he support the wartime Federal order move all person of Japanese ancestry from the West Coast into concentration camp inland. In 1943 he oppose the return of the evacuees. In a Governor 's Conference speech , he warn that `` if the Japs be release , no one will be able to tell a saboteur from any other Jap. '' From there he move on to a proposal that , when he make it in 1945 , be so far to the left that it be denounce a socialistic. It be compulsory health insurance for all citizen of California , to be finance by a 3 per cent payroll tax. In this , he prove to be too far ahead of his time. The American Medical Association mount an attack against his proposal , and it be reject by the Legislature. Mr. Warren 's opportunity for a Court seat come in 1953 when Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson , a lackluster jurist , die , and President Eisenhower nominate the Californian. There be complaint at the time that it be a political deal , but it later appear that it be not quite that pat. General Eisenhower say in his memoir that he have mention the possibility of a Supreme Court seat to Mr. Warren , but that he have not consider that the first vacancy might be the Chief Justice 's seat. When it occur , General Eisenhower be say to have offer it first to John Foster Dulles , who prefer to remain Secretary of State. Next Mr. Dewey turn it down , a he wish to retire. General Eisenhower felt that judicial experience be need , and he consider elevate one of the Associate Justices. But dissension within the Court and the dearth of distinguished Republicans there make that impracticable. Nevertheless , General Eisenhower be report to have suggest that Mr. Warren wait until an Associate Justice 's seat open up. Mr. Warren reportedly reply that for him it would be Chief Justice or nothing. On Sept. 30 , 1953 , the Administration let it be know that the President would give Mr. Warren a recess appointment , make him the 14th Chief Justice of the United States. He be swear in on Oct. 5. There be some criticism a Mr. Warren begin to preside over the Court and the nomination do not reach Congress until early the next year. At the Senate hearing , he decline an invitation to appear , even though more than 200 objection to his nomination have be filed. Several spokesman for right-wing group testify against him. Charges be make that he have allow crime and corruption to flourish in California , that he `` have a 100 per cent record of follow the Marxist line , '' and that he have no experience for the job. He be nonetheless confirm by a voice vote on March 1 , 1954. Later , many Warren admirer and critic term the nomination the most momentous act of the Eisenhower Presidency. To President Eisenhower , who evidently take Mr. Warren at face value a a rather bland , unexceptional individual , his performance be surprising , and , judge by the `` damned-fool mistake '' comment , apparently it be not a pleasant surprise. As two figure in the traditionally fratricidal Republican party , Mr. Warren and Richard M. Nixon never enjoy warm relations. The event of the 1952 convention do most to cool them off. Senator Nixon , a delegate pledge to vote for Mr. Warren , be never quite able to conceal his own national ambition , or his preference for General Eisenhower. After the general win the nomination and pick Mr. Nixon a his run mate , hostility between Mr. Warren and Mr. Nixon be widely rumored. But the destiny of the two men be not so easily severed. In 1968 , when Mr. Nixon be elect President , one of his most effective campaign issue be to accuse the Warren Court of go `` too far in weaken the peace force a against the criminal force in this country. '' After his election , in mutual gesture of reconciliation , Mr. Warren administer the Presidential oath to Mr. Nixon , and the President subsequently deliver a speech in the Supreme Court on the day Mr. Warren retired. Mr. Nixon praise Mr. Warren 's example of dignity , fairness and integrity in bring `` continuity and change '' to the law. In his early year several incident demonstrate that behind Mr. Warren 's benign exterior be a man who be deeply sensitive to personal slight or hint of disloyalty. As late a 1957 he be still sufficiently pique at Mr. Nixon to inform the American Bar Association that he would refuse an invitation to attend it convention if Vice President Nixon be also invited. The A.B.A. choose not to invite Mr. Nixon. Internal doubt or grope for consistency be rarely discernible in Mr. Warren 's make-up. He be a man of intense emotion , which sometimes lead him to judicial position that clash with other doctrine that he espoused. Speech and Obscenity In his opinion on Communism and political speech and association , he make it clear that the value of free speech overwhelmingly outweigh the interest in `` social order '' assert by the Government. But he be the kind of old-fashioned moralist who once tell a man he have just meet on an airplane that if a smut peddler be to sell pornography to one of his daughter , he would throttle him with his bare hands. So in the area of obscenity , the Chief Justice stand out from the trend of decision that during his tenure turn the United States from one of the most Puritan to one of the most permissive nation in write about sex. It be the only issue upon which he resist a long-term judicial movement toward great individual liberty. Thus when the Court majority hold in 1964 that erotic material could not be suppress by local official unless it be objectionable under a national standard , the Chief Justice dissented. He felt that each locality should be free to ban material that violate the value of that community. At the same time he be lead the Court in lay down rigid police procedure that would have to be obey in every community. In a stand similar to his position on obscenity , Mr. Warren dissent alone when the Supreme Court rule in 1968 that gambler could invoke the Fifth Amendment 's privilege against self- incrimination to avoid buy a Federal tax stamp. The Court be apply the principle of a 1965 decision that allow Communist party member to refuse to register. Mr. Warren have join the 1965 ruling , but he saw a difference in 1968 , in that gambling and not political expression be at stake. The Fifth Amendment make no distinction in the nature of the charge that allow a suspect to refuse to answer , but Mr. Warren 's aversion to gamble permit him to find such a distinction. The Court 's `` antipolice '' image grow out of decision limit the kind of police activity that fell hard upon the nonwhite , poor and ignorant. Thus the Warren majority crack down on technique of interrogation , identification , dragnet arrest and search that be most frequently abuse in the slums. But police technique most commonly use against organize crime survive the Warren era virtually unscathed. The majority find that the Constitution would permit the use of informer , police spy , surveillance and court-approved wiretapping. One notable exception to this pattern come in 1968 , when a political backlash be build up against the Court 's restriction on the police , and even some liberal be begin to wonder if the Court have not be too rigid in rule out all evidence obtain in violation of the Supreme Court 's procedural rules. In Terry v. Ohio , a ruling that quickly come to be know a the `` stop and frisk '' decision , Mr. Warren write an 8-to-1 opinion that give the police the authority to search dangerous-looking person `` on suspicion '' for weapons. It be clear that this power might be use in a discriminatory manner against the poor and powerless , but the Court be face with the fear that without it the police in urban slum face great danger from an arm population. In an opinion that reflect the painful tension between the rise crime problem and the Court 's concern for minority , Mr. Warren write : `` The wholesale harassment by certain element of the police community , of which minority group , particularly Negroes , frequently complain , will not be stop by the exclusion of any evidence from any criminal trial. `` Yet a rigid and unthinking application of the exclusionary rule , in futile protest against practice which it can never be use effectively to control , may exact a high toll in human injury and frustration of effort to prevent crime. '' He then declare , with obvious reluctance , that weapon seize by `` frisking '' could be use in evidence -- a decision that civil libertarian lament a a serious breach in the Fourth Amendment 's shield against unreasonable search and seizures. It be Mr. Warren 's tendency to interpret the Constitution in term of the result he find desirable that draw the most criticism. The result , critic say , be to transform the Supreme Court into a perpetual constitutional convention , update the Constitution to square with the liberal majority 's concept of what the law ought to be. The late Justice John M. Harlan , dissent in the 1964 Reynolds v. Sims case , put it a follow : `` These decision give support to a current mistaken view of the Constitution and the constitutional function of this Court. This view , in a nutshell , be that every major social ill in this country can find it cure in some constitutional 'principle , ' and that this Court should 'take the lead ' in promote reform when other branch of Government fail to act. The Constitution be not a panacea for every blot upon the public welfare , nor should this Court , ordain a a judicial body , be think of a a general haven for reform movements. '' Legislative Role Seen Philip B. Kurland , of the University of Chicago Law School , complain that the Court leap to it conclusion , without adequately explain or justify them. `` The judicial process , a demonstrate by the Warren Court , be come closer and closer to the legislative process , '' he wrote. He add the charge that `` the Court have not be honest in the mean that it have use to support it judgments. '' Mr. Warren 's admirer answer that a half-century have pass since Charles Evans Hughes have concede that the Constitution be what the judge say it be , and that the Supreme Court must , because it be supreme , `` make '' law. At a time of great social upheaval , sensitive issue be be place before the Court , and it be argue that the Justices ' duty be to decide those issues. For Mr. Warren , the outcome almost always reflect idealism , fairness and equality -- and the decision make him a revered figure to many Americans and people around the world. One of the secret of his success have always be that he be more effective at whatever he do than a superficial look make him appear to be. This be equally true of his performance a a Justice. His opinion do not mark him a a great jurist , a Anthony Lewis , a critic and admirer , once observe : `` A Warren opinion , characteristically , be a world make new -- a bland , square presentation of the particular problem in that case almost a if it be unencumbered by precedent or conflict theory , a it inevitably must be. Often , the framework of the argument be ethical rather than legal , in the sense that one expect the law to be analytical. Chief Justice Warren 's opinion be difficult to analyze because they be likely to be unanalytical. '' But Mr. Warren 's year a a trial lawyer have make him aware of the extent to which the fact of a case reveal it real meaning. In his relentless , polite way he often draw out , during Court argument , fact that lay bare case that have be obscure by murky constitutional principles. Development of an Art Mr. Warren develop the outside-the-record disclosure to a high art. In his questioning of counsel , he often bring out fact crucial to a decision he want the Court to reach. He would cheerfully permit the fact to be add to the record in the form of a letter or statement , and the subsequent decision frequently lean heavily upon the new information. Warren Olney 3d , an old colleague from Mr. Warren 's crime-busting day in California , and later choose by Mr. Warren to be Administrator of the United States Courts , be his close lifetime friend. The degree of his cordiality with other Justices tend to increase with ideological proximity. His close association be with Justices Douglas , Brennan and Fortas. When he get away on fish trip , or to the World Series or a football game , it be more likely to be with the late Drew Pearson , the columnist , or Ben Sweig , owner of the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco. As Chief Justice , Mr. Warren be a far more insular figure than his successor , Warren E. Burger. He sever his connection with the organize bar , refuse to accept award and make few speeches. His view be that the Supreme Court speak solely through it opinion , and he keep himself -- and his law clerk and subordinate -- at arm ' length from the press. In June , 1968 , Mr. Warren be stun by the assassination of Robert F. Kennedy. He later tell an old friend of read with astonishment that a few hour before the assassination , people stand two and three deep along the highway into Los Angeles from the airport. He have see many politician travel that route , and he know that no such assemblage have ever greet a candidate before. He take it a a sign that the nation be reach out for young leader and new ideas. On June 13 , he write President Johnson and tender his resignation `` at your pleasure. '' A few day later , in his first public news conference a Chief Justice , he explain that `` at the age of 77 , this be a good time to retire. '' He add , `` I do believe we be come into a new era as far a American life be concern -- probably so far a the entire world be concerned. '' The Fortas Nomination Mr. Johnson accept , effective when Mr. Warren 's successor would be confirmed. Then he nominate Mr. Fortas , a Justice closely associate with the doctrine of the Warren Court. Mr. Warren insist later that this arrangement be necessary because `` there always ought to be a Chief Justice of the United States , '' but to some others it appear that Mr. Warren , in collusion with Mr. Johnson , be offer the Court 's critic a Hobson 's choice -- take Abe Fortas a Chief Justice or continue to suffer Earl Warren. In an attack that focus upon the ruling of the Warren Court as well a upon Mr. Fortas , a coalition of Republicans and conservative Democrats block Senate action on the nomination , and it be withdrawn. Mr. Warren then announce that he would retire at the end of the Court 's term in June , 1969. A final sour note be the disclosure in May that Mr. Fortas have accept and later return a $ 20,000 fee from a foundation create by the financier Louis E. Wolfson. Mr. Warren be draw into the matter when Attorney General John N. Mitchell come secretly to the Court and deliver document bear on the case. It be later know that Mr. Mitchell give Mr. Warren document show that Justice Fortas have be promise $ 20,000 a year for his life and the life of his wife , but it be never disclose what Mr. Mitchell say to the Chief Justice , or what he and his colleague on the Court did. Mr. Fortas resign a few day later , become the first member of the Supreme Court to quit under fire. This give President Nixon another early vacancy to fill in his campaign to change the direction of the Court. But if the tide of event be run against the Warren Court at the end of his tenure , Mr. Warren 's action do not reveal it. On the week before he step down , he write an opinion that break precedent for assert judicial supremacy , a he rule for the Court that the House of Representatives have illegally exclude the maverick black Congressman , Adam Clayton Powell Jr. His decision overturn a low court hold , write by Mr. Burger , that the court should stay out of such Congressional squabbles. Last Day on Court On Mr. Warren 's last day on the bench , June 23 , the Court hand down three decision , with the Chief Justice in the majority in each. All three be criminal case , and in each the Court break new legal ground in enlarge the right of the accused. Mr. Warren have often mention his desire to return to California , but he prove to be a susceptible to Potomac fever a others , and he stay on in Washington after his retirement. He move into a small office in the Supreme Court building , and keep his apartment at the Sheraton Park. He spend much time fishing , hunt and attend football and baseball games. He be greatly in demand on the banquet circuit , where he accept awards. He demonstrate his political touch by tell several organization that their award be the first he have accept since ascend the bench. Supreme Court Justices who retire and publish usually produce weighty legal article , analyze where the Supreme Court have go or be go but Mr. Warren write a book appropriate for a high school civics text. It declare fidelity to the Bill of Rights to be the high duty of the citizen , and conclude with a homily that express the sweep of his hope for American society : `` Where there be injustice , we should correct it ; where there be poverty , we should eliminate it ; where there be corruption , we should stamp it out ; where there be violence we should punish it ; where there be neglect , we should provide care ; where there be war , we should restore peace ; and wherever correction be achieve we should add them permanently to our storehouse of treasure . ''