January 13 , 1974 REVIEW Her Poetry , Not Her Death , Is Her Triumph By ROSALYN DREXLER Great Britain 's Royal Shakespeare Company be bring an evening of Sylvia Plath to the Brooklyn Academy. Her work , include `` Three Women , '' the only verse play she ever write , be to be in repertory with Shakespeare 's `` Richard II '' start Tuesday. This be prestigious indeed. Why Plath and why now ? Sylvia Plath be a poet who commit suicide in 1963 when she be 31 year old , leave two child , and a body of brilliant work. She be at the height of her powers. There be some controversy a to whether the dramatic detail of her death bring her to prominence , or whether her present acclaim be indeed due to her talent. There be a need in most of u to think of the poet a sacrificial victim ; a if the poet 's unhappy history add additional weight to the poetry itself , surround her work with an ambiance of religiosity. Plath satisfies this need , though she herself would have be distress by an audience drawn to her by morbidity. Her work be incisive , bright , intelligent , not the least bit self-pitying in spite of it subject matter. She be full of life and have so much to look forward to that one can hardly believe , even though the evidence be in , that she choose to put her head into the oven like an unbaked loaf of bread. In-expert baker that she be , the loaf come out cold. No one could make a meal of it. She of course have plan it that way , to remain undiminished and whole ... but dead. Many of her poem be rehearsal for death. She have an obsession for know it ; something like ask a stranger you be go to meet to wear a white carnation in his buttonhole so you will recognize him. One identifies with Sylvia Plath a a woman : she be a domesticated undomestic ; take care of her house and child because there be no one else to do it. She do n't love do it. The way she 'd arrange her schedule , she 'd get up at 4 A.M. to write poetry , then do the other things. A. Alvarez in his study of suicide , `` The Savage God , '' say : She be a full-time mother with a 2-year-old daughter , a baby of a few month , and a house to look after. By the time the child be in bed at night she be too tired for anything more strenuous than music and brandy and water. '' All mother , even those who be not poet , know that kind of bone weariness , the emotional drain of be need , need , needed. Yet her work prospered. It get to the very center of her existence ; it flow from there while she masterfully control the flow ( like a Yoga who can make his heart stop and start , who be able to remain so loose that his limb can be braid without injury ) . Her life be set into her work like great folk quilt put together from exquisite bit and piece of discarded apparel. It be woman art , patiently make and true to herself. Malevolence visit itself upon her in ordinary surroundings : Viciousness in the kitchen ! The potato hiss. . . She revel a she describe `` the stink of fat and baby crap. '' Nothing be too banal for her to raise to poetry. Even her child , whom she do love , be sacrifice to poetry and use to martyr her upon the domestic cross : And my baby a nail Driven in. He shriek in his grease. Bones nose for distance. And I , nearly extinct , His three teeth cut Themselves on my thumb. . . She welcome the cut , anything that would make her feel. Ordinary life numb her , and so find herself accidentally injure while prepare food , she be elate : What a thrill -- My thumb instead of an onion. The top quite go Except for a sort of hinge Of skin. . . Always the observer , she be able to distance herself. One imagine that have the thumb not heal itself , she would have watch herself bleed to death. Reading her poem , we be put in the position of observer , we have take over her post , and we be leave to grieve for her. Plath 's poetry be organic , homegrown : birth fruit , the mother 's lump of mortality. She , a woman , be in touch with everything cyclical and round. In `` Three Women , '' the verse play she write for radio , set in a maternity ward , she say : I be very patient , Turning through my time , the sun and star Regarding me with attention. The moon 's concern be more personal : She pass and repasses , luminous a a nurse. Is she sorry for what will happen ? I do not think so. She be simply astonish at fertility. In the same play , she accuse men of be destroyer because their inheritance be one of flatness : There be something about them like cardboard , and now I have catch it. That flat , flat flatness from which idea , destruction , Bulldozers , guillotine , white chamber of shriek proceed , Endlessly proceed -- and the cold angel , the abstractions. Her anger , her rage against men , may have have it root in a family tragedy. When she be 10 her father die ; she interpret this a his abandonment of her : . . .I be 10 when they bury you. At 20 I try to die And get back , back , back to you. I think even the bone would do. She also find it difficult to reconcile the conflict between the lifestyle of a poet- intellectual and that of a wife and mother , so she write : `` It 's quite amazing how I 've go around for most of my life a in the rarefy atmosphere under a bell jar. '' Her novel , `` The Bell Jar , '' a thinly disguised autobiographical work be originally publish in England ( Sylvia Plath be American but live the last year of her life in England ) ; when it be publish here , it be widely read. The book chronicle the crack-up of Esther Greenwood : brilliant , beautiful , enormously talented , successful -- but slowly go under and maybe for the last time. '' Nineteen-year-old Esther Greenwood felt that ordinariness be her enemy ; observe a man she think must be the most beautiful man she have ever see , she say : `` And then I wonder if as soon a he come to like me he would sink into ordinariness , and if as soon a he come to love me I would find fault after fault. . . The same thing happen over and over : I would catch sight of some flawless man off in the distance , but as soon a he move closer , I immediately saw he would n't do at all. That 's one of the reason I never want to get married. The last thing I want be infinite security and to be the place an arrow shoot off from. I want change and excitement and to shoot off in all direction myself , like the colored arrow from a Fourth of July rocket. '' In her poem , `` The Applicant , '' Sylvia Plath mock herself a an `` it , '' and wickedly satirize the emptiness of woman 's life : A living doll , everywhere you look. It can sew , it can cook ... We 've come a long way since this poem be publish 13 year ago , but we have n't go all the way yet. There be still many woman who exist under the stifle paternalism of the bell jar. Plath , by know herself intuit the new woman 's movement but , unlike the young woman who be today 's feminist , she do not give herself options. Perhaps if she have live longer , if she have hold on , she would have shoot off like color arrow from a rocket , but her last year be a year that not many could have survive : she have a miscarriage , an appendectomy , give birth to a second child , be separate from her husband , poet Ted Hughes , and the weather in London be the cold it have be since 1813. Light and heat go off unannounced , pipe freeze , the telephone have n't be installed. Her writing be a deliberate expression of anguish , and so finally be her death. `` Sylvia Plath '' be a production so popular that it entire run in London be a sell-out. Human nature be what it be , one can not expect that the `` tragic story '' will be forget , but one do hope that the work will be read for a long time to come. Plath 's poetry and not her death be her triumphant fulfillment .