October 14 , 1974 OBITUARY Ed Sullivan Is Dead at 73 ; Charmed Millions on TV By THE NEW YORK TIMES Ed Sullivan , who entertain hundred of million of Americans over his long career a Broadway columnist and host of the long-running televise Sunday even variety show , die last night of cancer. He be 73 year old. Mr. Sullivan have be under treatment for cancer of the esophagus at the Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan since Sept. 6 , when the affliction be diagnosed. His survivor include a daughter , Mrs. Elizabeth Precht , of Scarsdale , N.Y. ; five grandchild ; three sister , Mrs. Piercy Cuyler , of Manhattan , and Mrs. Hugh Murphy and Mrs. George Hagele , both of Port Chester , N.Y. , and a brother , Charles , also of Port Chester. His wife of 42 year , the former Sylvia Weinstein , die on March 16 , 1973. A Broadway Fixture Ed Sullivan , a rock-faced Irishman with a hot temper , painful shyness and a disdain for phony , have be a successful and well-known part of the Broadway scene since the Twenties. But write a gossip column , shuttle about the fringe of the entertainment world and be master of ceremony for a succession of variety show never give him what he want most out of life -- national recognition. He do n't achieve that until he move into the whirlwind world of television in 1948 , and his weekly show become an essential part of Sunday even for million of Americans. Between 45,000,000 and 50,000,000 person tune in every week to watch the show -- a vaudeville-like parade of top talent that cost $ 8,000,000 a year to produce and for which Mr. Sullivan receive $ 164,000 a year. The show be worth every penny of that to it sponsor , Lincoln-Mercury automobile dealer , who make Mr. Sullivan their salesman in chief through numerous trip around the country. And he be the proud possession of the Columbia Broadcasting System , which find he could outdraw almost any competition from the other networks. The basis of his appeal be an ephemeral thing that baffle those who try to analyze it. He be not witty , he have no formal talent , he could not consciously entertain anyone. He be bashful , clumsy , self-conscious , forgetful and tongue-tied. And there be time he be painfully , excruciatingly sentimental. The television critic unmercifully pan him for these fault in the early year of his show. Sponsors be leery of him. The network pinch penny on his budget to the point that he be put up his own salary to buy talent. Public Loved Show But the public love the show , and in the end that be what counted. Mr. Sullivan stick to his job of master of ceremony -- introduce the act , then get out of the way. He be an excellent judge of entertainers. He be sincere in his enjoyment of their work. And he be so honestly ill-at-ease that viewer come to be affectionately sorry for him. So rarely do he smile , in the early day of camera-fright , that he come to be know a `` The Great Stone Face. '' His stiff posture and heavy ( size 17 ) neck make many imagine he suffer from dire ailments. But his only real illness be a stomach ulcer -- and one acquire before television , at that. He be not unaware that , a he say , `` I have a graver look kisser than most. '' In fact , he capitalize on it by present mimic who impersonate him. `` I want to let the people know I have a sense of humor about myself , '' he explained. Mr. Sullivan be proud of his Irish origin , of his tightly-knit family , of his Roman Catholic faith. He despise bigotry , fraud and irresponsibility. And he have the great respect for the power of words. Edward Vincent Sullivan be bear in Harlem , on East 114th Street , on Sept. 28 , 1901. After a twin brother , Daniel , and a young sister , Elizabeth , die , his father move the family out of the city to Port Chester , N.Y. There he attend St. Mary 's Parochial School and the Port Chester High School , where he win twelve letter in athletics. In 1917 he run away from home to Chicago and try to enlist in the Navy , but be turn down because of his youth. After graduation he work for a while a a reporter on The Port Chester Daily Item -- for which he have write sport news while in high school -- and then in 1919 he join The Hartford Post. The newspaper fold in his first week there , but he land another job on The New York Evening Mail a a sport reporter. After The Evening Mail close in 1923 he bounce through a series of news job with The Associated Press , The Philadelphia Bulletin , The Morning World , The Morning Telegraph , The New York Bulletin and The Leader. Finally , in 1927 , Mr. Sullivan join The Evening Graphic a first sport writer and then sport editor. In 1929 , when Walter Winchell move to The Daily Mirror , Mr. Sullivan be make Broadway columnist. Throughout his career a a columnist , Mr. Sullivan have dabble in entertainment -- produce vaudeville show with which he appear a master of ceremony in the Twenties and Thirties , direct a radio program over WABC ( now WCBS ) and organize benefit review for various causes. This activity reach it peak during World War II , when he organize benefit in Madison Square Garden , one of which raise $ 226,000 for Army Emergency Relief , and another of which raise $ 249,000 for the American Red Cross. And it be through this that he finally find his way into television. In 1947 , when he be master of ceremony for the Harvest Moon Ball , put on annually by The Daily News , C. B. S. televise the ball. Worthington Miner , the Columbia manager of television program development , be so impressed by Mr. Sullivan 's showmanship that he be hire to be master of ceremony for the television variety show `` Toast of the Town. '' Eventually this become the `` Ed Sullivan Show. '' Of his television work , he say , `` I enjoy what I 'm doing. I would have become a water skiier if I could have make money honestly and with integrity. '' Mr. Sullivan be know a a man who contribute his service to organization he find worthy , regardless of their creed. He serve a national chairman of fund-raising drive for the National Foundation for Neuromuscular Disease and Rheumatism Foundation. He be among those most active in give national TV exposure to Negro artists. As part of the United States-Soviet Union cultural exchange program , Mr. Sullivan lead a variety troupe on a successful Soviet tour in 1959 and present an hour-long telecast of the Moiseyev dancer on his show. He often make visit abroad to film act and sequence for his show , among them the Brussels Worlds Fair in 1958. The show last until 1971 , when CBS drop it in favor of movie , which bring in more money for a small investment. Over the 23 year of his run , Mr. Sullivan present a wide variety of entertainer , start with Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis , who appear on what Mr. Sullivan be fond of call `` a rilly big shew '' on the first program in June , 1948. He also put on the American television debut of Jack Benny , Humphrey Bogart , Jackie Gleason , Maria Callas , Elvis Presley , Rudolf Nureyev , who dance with Dame Margo Fonteyn , his co-star of Britain 's Royal Ballet , and , of course , the Beatles and many animal acts. Among the oddity be a 10-piano `` concert , '' in which Eugene List and nine others play 10 nine-foot concert grand in a rendition of Louis Moreau Gottschalk 's `` La Jota Aragonesa , '' from his `` grande symphonie '' for 10 piano , `` The Siege of Saragossa. '' His little Italian puppet mouse , Topo Gigio , become a movie star and the subject of an American patent. The film , `` The Magic World of Topo Gigio , '' make in Italy with English voice draw this comment from a reviewer in The New York Times : `` Put it all down a a nice treat for the kiddies. And while we 're at it , who say a mouse ca n't act ? '' In 1965 , Mrs. Maria Perego Caldura of Milan , who often operate the puppet on the Sullivan show , receive a patent for the complex mechanism , operate by three person , with a fourth supply the voice , that make the 10-inch puppet come alive. At the peak advertiser be pay $ 62,000 for a minute 's advertising , and Mr. Sullivan 's own honorarium go from nothing for the first shaky , unsponsored month to a report $ 20,000 a week. He also be say to receive $ 100 for each of his two columns a week in The Daily News. Honors be heap on him. CBS rename it studio at Broadway and 53d Street , once the Billy Rose Theater , `` The Ed Sullivan Theater '' during his program on Dec. 10 , 1967. In December , 1973 , Mr. Sullivan be elect president of Theater Authority , Inc. , an organization create by the entertainment union and charitable guild to safeguard member from exploitation by benefit , telethons and other charity functions. He be elect abbot of the Friars , succeed the late Joe E. Lewis , the comedian , in 1972. After the departure of his show Mr. Sullivan preside over some specials. One of them in 1973 , be `` Ed Sullivan 's Broadway , '' with contribution by Jack Cassidy , Boby Van , Michele Lee , Marilyn Michaels and Frank Sinatra Jr .