August 27 , 1974 OBITUARY Daring Lindbergh Attained the Unattainable With Historic Flight Across Atlantic By ALDEN WHITMAN In Paris at 10:22 P.M. on May 21 , 1927 , Charles Augustus Lindbergh , a one-time Central Minnesota farm boy , become an international celebrity. A fame envelop the 25-year-old American that be to last him for the remainder of his life , transform him in a frenzied instant from an obscure aviator into a historical figure. The consequence of this fame be to exhilarate him , to involve him in profound grief , to engage him in fierce controversy , to turn him into an embittered fugitive from the public , to accentuate his individualism to the point where he become a loner , to give him a special sense of his own importance , to allow him to play an enormous role in the growth of commercial aviation as well a to be a figure in missile and space technology , to give him influence in military affair , and to raise a significant voice for conservation , a concern that mark his old years. All these thing be touch off when a former stunt flier and airmail pilot touch down the wheel of his small and delicate monoplane , the Spirit of St. Louis , on the tarmac of LeBourget 33 1/2 hour after have lift the craft off Roosevelt Field on Long Island. Thousands -- no one know how many -- trample through fence and over guard to surround the silvery plane and to acclaim , in a wild outburst of emotion , the first man to fly the Atlantic solo nonstop from the United States to Europe -- a feat that be equivalent in the public mind then to the first human step on the moon 42 year later. Icarus have at last succeeded , a dare man alone have attain the unattainable. What enhance the fear for many be that Lindbergh be a tall , handsome bachelor with a become smile , an errant lock of blond hair over his forehead and a please outward modesty and guilelessness. He be the flawless El Cid , the gleaming Galahad , Frank Merriwell in the flesh. The delirium that engulf Paris swirl out over the civilized world. Banner headline herald the event. Medals galore be bestow on Lindbergh. He be gush over , adulate , worship , fete in France , Belgium and Britain. President Calvin Coolidge send the cruiser Memphis , flagship of the United States European Fleet , to bring him and the Spirit of St. Louis back to the United States and later award him the Medal of Honor , previously reserve only for military heroes. And already a captain in the United States Officers Reserve Corps , Lindbergh be jump to a full colonel. As the cruiser steam up Chesapeake Bay , she be meet by four destroyer , two Army blimp and 40 airplane from the Army , Navy and Marine Corps. Debarking at Washington in a civilian 's blue serge suit , Lindbergh be glorify by the President , who say that the trans- Atlantic flight be `` the same story of valor and victory by a son of the people that shin through every page of American history. '' The panoplied Washington reception , which be top by an award -- the first in the nation 's history -- of the Distinguished Flying Cross , be follow by an even noisy outpouring in New York , where four million people spill into the streets. Ticker tape and confetti rain on the Broadway parade , and the day be climax by a banquet for 4,000 guest. `` We measure hero a we do ship , by their displacement , '' the bewhiskered Charles Evans Hughes tell the multitude. `` Colonel Lindbergh have displace everything. '' And then there be triumphal parade and reception , seemingly endless , in other cities. Lindbergh eventually fly the Spirit of St. Louis to every state in the Union. Everywhere he go a throng collected. Even a supposedly private visit to Orville Wright , co-inventor of the airplane , be noise about and crowds appeared. Lindbergh , at one point , be `` so fill up with listen to this hero guff that I be ready to shout murder. '' What the parade , the pandemonium , the oratory , the hero worship obscure be that Lindbergh 's epic flight be a most minutely plan venture by a professional flier with 2,000 air hour amass over five years. `` Why should n't I fly from New York to Paris ? '' he have ask himself in September , 1926. `` I have more than four year of aviation behind me. I 've barnstorm over half of the 48 states. I 've fly my mail through the bad of nights. '' There have be two previous Atlantic flight -- both in 1919 , the first when one of three Navy craft fly from Newfoundland to the Azores ; and the second when John Alcock and Arthur Brown make it from Newfoundland to Ireland. But no one have make the cross alone , or from continent to continent. Once he conceive the notion of the flight , Lindbergh , with characteristic energy , begin to elaborate the details. He help design the plane to his specification , calculate every ounce that go into it. He lay out his route. Every foreseeable circumstance be check out. Two element could not be figure : the weather and his ability to stay awake. With the weather he take a calculated risk. Fighting off sleep prove a problem , and only his indomitable determination overcame that , although he concede there be moment of touch-and-go. One of the attraction for the Paris flight be a $ 25,000 prize , for which there be several competitor , among them Clarence Chamberlin and Adm. Richard E. Byrd. Lindbergh , though , be confident he could be first and be successful. He be motivate , he tell this writer in late year , by a desire to improve his standing a a pilot as well a by an eagerness to win the prize. And although there be great interest in him before take-off time ( his hope and that of his rival to fly the Atlantic have excite wide newspaper coverage ) , Lindbergh have not calculate the response to his achievement , the degree to which he would be lionize or the extent to which he would be regard a public property , especially by reporter and photographer , whom he come quickly to detest. 'Extraordinary Situation ' `` The situation I encounter be extraordinary in the extreme , and often fantastic , '' he recall , and cite , a an example , a woman who `` want to rent the hotel room I be leave so she could take a bath in the same tub. '' Overwhelmed , without precedent to guide him , press by dizzy demand on his time , Lindbergh be happy to accept an invitation from Harry Guggenheim , a very rich and very conservative financier who be connect with the Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics , to escape for a while to his Long Island estate. The invitation be at the suggestion of Dwight Morrow , the Morgan banker , who tell Mr. Guggenheim , `` Harry , almost everyone in the country be after this young fellow , try to exploit him. Is n't there something you and the fund can do , to save him from the wolf ? '' At Falaise , the Guggenheim castle , which be perhaps the most opulent private home he have stay in , the aviator be able to catch his breath for three week and rewrite the ghostwritten manuscript that become the book `` We. '' He also retain Henry Breckinridge , a conservative Wall Street lawyer , to help handle his affairs. Many of his new associate hold conservative view , which his father , a neo-Populist Republican , spend 20 year fighting. Lindbergh be not conceive of then a a possible political figure , but rather a a nice young man , perhaps a little unpolished socially , who deserve the best that could be provided. His new friend be considerate of his strong individualism. They do not impose flattery , they be respectful and , above all , helpful. The income from `` We '' and from his flight article in The New York Times make him a millionaire -- a considerable eminence for a man accustom to think hard before he spend $ 5. His friend help him invest his fortune. And after Lindbergh make his goodwill flight around the country and to Latin America in the Spirit of St. Louis , his friend saw to it that he get a job in keep with his interest in aviation and his status. The position be a an adviser in both Pan American World Airways and the predecessor of Trans World Airlines in lay out transatlantic , transcontinental and Caribbean air route for the commercial aviation that his Paris flight have do so much to popularize. The conservative view that Lindbergh later articulate , the remark about Jews that prove so startling when he be oppose American entry into World War II , his adverse opinion of the Soviet Union , his belief in Western civilization -- these be all a reflection of a world view prevalent among his friend , which he absorb over the years. An engineer and aviator of genius , he be , however , not an intellectual , nor a consistent reader , nor a social analyst. The assumption of this elitism account for his conviction that `` America should lead the world in the development of flight , '' that `` a conflict between English and German group of nation would [ be ] a fratricidal war , '' that race be a valid judgmental concept and that to accomplish an objective one should deal with `` the top people. '' It also account for what many people think be his anti-Semitism. Lindbergh do not regard himself a an anti-Semite. Indeed , he be shock a couple of year ago when this writer put the question to him. `` Good God , no , '' he respond , cite his fondness for Jews he have know or dealt with. Nor do he condone the Nazi treatment of German Jews , much less Hitler 's genocidal policies. On the other hand , he accept a fact that American Jewish group be among those promote United States involvement in World War II. He voice these view in a speech in Des Moines , Iowa , on Sept. 11 , 1941. After assert that those group responsible for seek American `` entanglement in European affair '' be `` the British , the Jewish and the Roosevelt Administration , '' he go on to say : `` It be not difficult to understand why Jewish people desire the overthrow of Nazi Germany. The persecution they suffer in Germany would be sufficient to make bitter enemy of any race. No person with a sense of the dignity of mankind can condone the persecution the Jewish race suffer in Germany. `` But no person of honesty and vision can look on their prowar policy here today without see the danger involve in such a policy , both for u and for them. `` Instead of agitate for war , the Jewish group in this country should be oppose it in every possible way , for they will be among the first to feel it consequences. Tolerance be a virtue that depend upon peace and strength. A few far-sighted Jewish people realize this and stand oppose to intervention. But the majority still do not. Their great danger to their country lie in their large ownership and influence in our motion picture , our press , our radio and our government. '' The speech evoke a nationwide outcry. Lindbergh , it be say , have not only impugn the patriotism of American Jews , but also have use the word `` race , '' a word many Jews consider both pejorative and inaccurate. Lindbergh never withdraw his remark , which he consider statement of `` obvious fact. '' `` The violence of the reaction to my name these group be significant and extremely interesting , '' he say 25 year later. `` In hindsight , I would not change my action. '' Lindbergh 's attitude toward the Jews be match by an adamantine stubbornness on other matters. These together sometimes cast him in an unfavorable public light. One example of his unwillingness to concede that he might have act unwisely involve the Service Cross of the German Eagle , a civilian medal that be award him in 1938 by Hermann Goering , the Nazi leader , `` at the direction '' of Hitler. The presentation , a surprise to Lindbergh , be make at a stag dinner in the home of the American Ambassador to Berlin and be , he be tell , in recognition of his service to aviation , especially his 1927 flight. The award be report briefly in the newspaper and stir little criticism. However , the night of the award Mrs. Lindbergh tell her husband that it be `` the albatross , '' and she urge him to return it. Lindbergh take the position then and later that to do so would affront the Ambassador and Goering , as well , who be technically his host in Germany. Although he never wear the medal ( he give it to the Lindbergh collection of the Missouri Historical Society in St. Louis , along with other award and trophy ) , it become an issue when he oppose American war involvement. It lead , among other thing , to his be call a Fascist sympathizer , particularly when he decline a suggestion in 1942 to repudiate it ; and the medal plague his reputation for the rest of his life. He disdain the criticism , however , say : `` Personally , I be not at all concern about any damage that may have be do to my reputation by the presentation of the medal. `` I felt the throw back of the medal be like take part in a child 's spitting contest. If I must fight , I 'll fight ; but I prefer not to spit at my enemy beforehand. Also , I felt Goering have give me the medal with good intent and in friendship. Regardless of how much I disagree with him about other thing , or later on , I do not want to throw it back in his face. '' Nonetheless , Lindbergh , in his late year , be defensive in recite the medal episode and sensitive in have it known that his wife be among his critics. Like most people , Lindbergh be a bundle of unresolved contradictions. Stubborn , proud , unable to see how Jews might be offend by `` obvious fact , '' blind to the villainy of Hitlerism , he be , in his relationship with his few close friend , a considerate , delightful , sensitive , helpful , unpretentious person who do not obtrude his social and political view , nor make agree with them a condition of steadfast friendship. Although he be the object of much flattery and one who succumb to some of it , he do not like a fuss make over him. He sometimes sound pompous in print , but he be not in person. Indeed , he be a man of genuinely simple taste who be happier in a sleeping bag than in a luxury hotel , who prefer eat wild boar with his finger in the jungle to din in expensive restaurant , who find more inner satisfaction with primitive than with sophisticated people and who be more at ease in knockabout attire than in street dress. Lindbergh 's life , like his personality , be full of shadow and enigmas. Born Feb. 4 , 1902 , in Detroit , he be the son of C. A. Lindbergh , a prosperous Little Falls , Minn. , lawyer and land speculator , and his second wife , Evangeline Lodge Land. The elder Lindbergh 's first wife have die , leave him two daughters. Charles Augustus Lindbergh Jr. be bear in Detroit because his mother 's uncle be a physician there. He be return to Little Falls six week later and live in that small town , the center of a farming and timbering community , with few interruption until he be 18. His paternal antecedent be Swedes , who change their name from Mansons to Lindbergh when they emigrate from Sweden in 1860. They have a history of independence and vigor. The Lands , of Irish and English background , arrive in the United States shortly after 1812. Lindbergh 's maternal grandfather be C. H. Land , a dentist and inventor. Both Dr. Land and C. A. Lindbergh be strong advocate of free inquiry and individual initiative , and both impress on young Charles the merit of personal independence. Lindbergh 's youth be spend close to nature. His deep feeling for it be encourage by his father , and these early attitude surface toward the end of his life when he devote much of his fantastic energy to the cause of conservation. Also early in life , he show a marked aptitude for mechanical contrivances. When he be 8 or 9 , he work out an ingenious and complicated system for get ice from the icehouse into the icebox. Charles 's world be jolt when his father be elect to the House of Representatives , where he serve from 1907 to 1917. He go to Washington , his first venture into a metropolis , and dislike it. About that time , his mother and father cease live together , although for appearance 's sake there be no legal separation and both parent take care to give the child a sense of security. Apart from say that the separation be `` a tragic situation '' for his parent , Lindbergh shut his lip about the situation and shy from talk about the psychic hurt that he bore. He be equally taciturn on other personal matters. The future aviator 's interest in fly be spark in 1908 or '09 , when , one day , he hear a buzzing in the sky and climb out of a dormer window onto the roof of his home to witness a frail biplane skim through the clouds. The Fun of Flying `` Afterward , I remember lie in the grass and look up at the cloud and think how much fun it would be to fly up there among those cloud , '' he recall in late year , add : `` I do n't think of the hazard -- I be just interested in get up there in the clouds. '' But he be tear for a time by a strong yearning to go to Alaska , a land picture a wild frontier and the source of mythic Gold Rush tales. For him Alaska be also the scene of Robert W. Service 's verse , some of which he memorize so thoroughly that he could recite it faultlessly in old age. Although Lindbergh Sr. lead an active and exciting political life a a maverick Republican who battle ( and help to overthrow ) the entrenched Establishment in the House , lead an assault on `` the money trust '' and vote against American entry into World War I , his son be bore by politics and all the speeches. The issue that his father espouse in Congress and later a a Farmer-Laborite supporter of Robert LaFollette fail , so the son say , to make any impression on him. His mother , too , eschew political thinking. In World War I , Lindbergh operate the family farm , leave it in the fall of 1920 to study engineering at the University of Wisconsin. His grade be poor and he leave after a year and a half , but not before learn how to shoot quarter out of the outstretched finger of his friend at 50 foot with a rifle. From Wisconsin , he motorcycle to the Nebraska Aircraft Corporation in Lincoln , which be then produce an airplane and give fly lesson to promote the product. `` I can still smell the odor of dope [ cellulose acetate or nitrate ] that permeate each breath , '' he say year later in recall his first close-up view of an aircraft. Lindbergh take his first flight April 9 , 1922. In succeed month he learn to fly , to wing- walk and to parachute. Of equal importance , he absorb all there be to know about the plane of that day and the various style of flying. And he make friend with flier who pass through Lincoln and with Harlan A. ( Bud ) Gurney , with whom , among others , he barnstorm over the Midwest. Called Slim by his friend because of his lithe , gangling body and 6-foot-2 1/2-inch height , Lindbergh be bill to the public a `` Daredevil Lindbergh '' for his stunt feats. However , he do not solo until April , 1923 , when he purchase his first plane , a Jenny , in Georgia. Shortly afterward he begin to earn his living a a flier by take up passenger in various town at $ 5 a ride. It be all seat-of-the-pants fly and Lindbergh glory in it ; but he give it up to enlist in the Army in March , 1924 , so he could attend the Army fly school at Brooks Field , San Antonio , Tex. For the first time , he find some joy in textbook and classes. Chief Pilot on Mail Run Indeed , he be graduate a the top man in his class , and be commission a second lieutenant in the Army Air Service Reserve in March , 1925. He be by this time an experienced flier. He spend some time a an air circus stunt flier at county fair and the like before be hire by the Robertson Aircraft Company of St. Louis a the chief pilot on the mail run to Chicago. He make the first run in April , 1926. It be the only paycheck job in the normal sense of the word that he ever held. Meantime , he have make a further commitment to the military by join the Missouri National Guard , where he teach other pilot and become a first lieutenant. On one of his flight to Chicago in September , 1926 , he be muse about the possibility of long-distance trip , and he `` startled '' himself by think `` I could fly nonstop between New York and Paris. '' In many way , Lindbergh 's life be a series of response to imperatives. When he become convinced that he `` ought '' to do something -- he ought to oppose entry into World War II , he ought to speak out for conservation -- he react with vigor and dispatch. And virtually immediately he begin to plan the detail of the trip -- get financial backing , get a specially design plane , map the route , seek to eliminate any chance of failure. Ultimately , he persuade a group of St. Louis businessmen to put up $ 15,000 , which be one reason why the plane be call the Spirit of St. Louis. After many rack incident , the Ryan Company , with Lindbergh 's help , design and build a craft tailor for him and the Wright Company build an engine of 223 horsepower to accommodate the plane. For several year after the Paris flight , Lindbergh live in the glare of publicity and pop camera flashbulbs. The public would not let him alone. `` I recall steep out of a building on Wall Street , and have almost everyone on the street turn and follow me , '' he said. He be regard a a sort of oracle , and his opinion be solicit on every conceivable subject. He be , moreover , link falsely in the press with a number of girls. His interest , however , be in Anne Spencer Morrow , the beautiful blue-eyed daughter of Dwight Morrow , then Ambassador to Mexico. The couple meet in Mexico City at Christmastime in 1927 , when Miss Morrow , then a Smith student , go there for the holidays. They be marry in a private ceremony in the Morrow home in New Jersey on May 27 , 1929. The marriage be union of opposites. Sensitive , retire , a poet , Mrs. Lindbergh want nothing so much a a life of peace and quiet. Seldom coddle her , her husband prove hyperactive , happy a a nomad who be rarely at home for long periods. Yet despite some moment of tension , the marriage be an enduring and affectionate one. For a while Mrs. Lindbergh accompany her husband on many of his trip -- to the Caribbean , where he be lay out air route ; to Europe and to Asia. He have teach her to fly , and she learn to navigate and to operate a Morse Code radio. `` North to the Orient '' be her chronicle of one of these flights. Their first child , Charles Augustus 3d , be bear June 24 , 1930. Twenty month later , when Mrs. Lindbergh be pregnant with her second child , the baby be kidnap from his nursery crib in his parent 's home in Hopewell , N. J. The date be March 1 , 1932. On May 12 the baby 's body be find in a shallow grave not far from the house. In between , there be a bizarre hunt for the child that include payment of a $ 50,000 ransom at a cemetery in the Bronx and a cast of character that range from Dr. John F. ( Jafsie ) Condon , a school principal , to Gaston B. Means , a swindler. There be false lead and sensation galore , through all of which Lindbergh bore himself with great public stoicism. His private emotion be never disclose , and about the only reference that he make in late year to the kidnapping and murder be fleeting mention of `` that New Jersey business. '' If public attention glare on Lindbergh during the hunt for his son , it positively pour down on him with the arrest and trial of Bruno Richard Hauptmann , a Bronx carpenter , in 1934. The trial , which Lindbergh attend daily , be report with diligence and sensationalism. Lindbergh receive up to 100,000 letter a week , and the Hopewell estate , which he have long since left , be overrun with curiosity seeker , one of whom dig up and lug off the earth where the baby be find buried. A Move to England After a six-week trial , in which a web of circumstantial evidence be woman about Hauptmann , he be find guilty and executed. Although there be doubt ( Hauptmann , the German-born father of a son about the age of Lindbergh 's son , deny he be guilty ) , Lindbergh be satisfy that `` Hauptmann do the thing. '' Meantime , there be new threat to kidnap Lindbergh 's second son , Jon , and the family be live an abnormal existence. Lindbergh be tell friend that Americans exhibit `` a morbid curiosity over crime and murder trial '' and lack `` respect for law , or the right of others. '' Against this background , Lindbergh take his family to England to seek a safe , seclude residence away from `` the tremendous public hysteria '' that surround him in the United States. One result of the case be passage of the so-called Lindbergh law , which make kidnap a Federal crime. Part of the statute be rule unconstitutional in 1967. Before departing , Lindbergh complete a scientific project on which he have be work with dedication and enthusiasm since 1930. It be the design and building of a tissue-perfusion apparatus at Rockefeller Institute ( now University ) in New York. He be introduce to the project by Dr. Alexis Carrel , who have win the Nobel Prize for physiology and medicine in 1912 for development of blood vessel transplant procedures. The French-born Carrel be interested in the thirty in living organ outside the body , and the problem be to devise an instrument to perfuse these organ and keep them alive. `` For me , '' Lindbergh recall , `` that begin an association with an extraordinarily great man. To me , his true greatness lay in the unlimited penetration , curiosity and scope of his mind , in his fearlessness of opinion , in his deep concern about the trend of modern civilization and their effect on his fellow man. '' In addition to perfect a pump -- an important breakthrough in it time -- Lindbergh invent a quick way of separate serum from whole blood by mean of a centrifuge. The Lindbergh- Carrel friendship last for 14 year , until the scientist 's death in 1944. A brilliant investigator , Carrel tinker with philosophy and other matter ; and his thought in these area be sometimes quirky. He believe , for example , in extrasensory perception. He also speak against `` industrial civilization '' and suggest that `` we ought to try to produce a certain number of individual above the mental stature we observe in the best. '' He say , moreover , that `` only the elite make the progress of the mass possible. '' Some of these notion rub off on Lindbergh and be reflect in his little-known book , `` Of Flight and Life , '' in which he inveigh against `` scientific materialism. '' In this 1948 book , he say , `` I believe the value we be create and the standard we be now follow will lead to the end of our civilization , and that if we do not control our science by a high moral force , it will destroy u with it materialistic values. '' In his plea for the recognition of metaphysical value , Lindbergh write : `` To progress , even to survive , we must learn to apply the truth of God to the action and relationship of men , to the direction of our science. We must learn from the sermon of Christ , the wisdom of Laotzu , the teaching of Buddha. '' But Lindbergh , in this book , also espouse a doctrine of American superiority in the world. `` For Americans , the doctrine of universal equality be a doctrine of death , '' he wrote. `` If we ever become an equal people among other people of the world , our civilization will fall. '' When Lindbergh go abroad to live , first in Britain and then in France , he be 33 year old. He be immediately treat with courtesy and respect -- and give the privacy he so much desired. His new friend be in the upper reach of British society and Tory politics. Moreover , a a distinguished aviator , he be invite to visit airplane factory in France by the French Air Ministry. He be also invite by the German Government to inspect the Luftwaffe and warplane factory in the Reich. He receive red-carpet treatment , visit many factory and be tell repeatedly that the Nazis be eager `` to create an air force second to none. '' He visit Germany several time before 1938 and be increasingly impressed with the quality of the air force. It seem to him all the more fearsome by comparison with the air arm in Britain , France and the Soviet Union. By 1939 he have conclude that the power of the Luftwaffe be overwhelming , and that the air force of other European country be comparatively insignificant. In off-the- record conversation with the leader of these country , the Soviet Union except , he seek to warn them of the peril they be facing. Neither then nor later do Lindbergh , accord to his journal , believe that German air power would be the decisive factor in a war so much a it would be an essential element. And he seek to impress on France , Britain and the United States the need to bestir themselves. Lindbergh and his family return to the United States in 1939 shortly before World War II break out. He felt he ought to do all he could to prevent American involvement. Not a pacifist nor an isolationist , he be a noninterventionist. `` My opposition to World War II result from the grow conviction that such a war would probably devastate Europe , kill million of men and possibly result in the end of Western civilization , '' he tell this writer a few year ago , add : `` Under the circumstance of prewar Europe , I conclude that Germany could not be defeat without the active intervention of the United States. I doubt that Germany could be defeat even with American intervention. `` Obviously this depend a great deal on the relationship between Germany and Russia. But if Germany be defeat , it seem to me almost certain that Russia would be the real victor and that a Stalin-dominated Europe would be even bad than a Hitler-dominated Europe. `` I felt that the wise policy for Western power would be to arm , stay neutral and let Germany and Russia clash -- and thereafter to feel their way accord to change circumstances. I still think this would have be the wise policy. '' Lindbergh make his first antiwar speech -- a radio talk -- on Sept. 17 , 1939. It be arrange by Fulton Lewis , a well-known conservative commentator. In the month that follow , he make other radio speech and word actively with other antiwar personality in public and private life , include Senator Burton K. Wheeler of Montana ; Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia ; former President Herbert Hoover ; Senator William Borah of Idaho ; Henry Ford ; Merwin K. Hart , an avowed right-winger ; William Castle , a diplomat ; Dean Carl Ackerman of the Columbia Journalism School ; Theodore Roosevelt Jr. ; and James E. Van Zandt , head of the American Legion. Lindbergh speak and work under his own auspex until April , 1941 , when he join the national board of the America First Committee , the country 's principal antiwar group. Although it membership be heterogeneous , it effective leadership rest with Robert E. Wood , board chairman of Sears , Roebuck & Co. , and Robert R. McCormick , publisher of The Chicago Tribune. Both be archconservatives and zealous hater of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. America First be strong in the Midwest , the traditional seat of the nation 's isolationist attitude ; but it be also a powerful force in New York and Boston. Popular support for it antiwar objective be widespread , and Lindbergh epitomize that support. He rally million to the cause with such effectiveness that Roosevelt consider him a major threat. The President vent his anger at a news conference in April , 1941. Roosevelt be ask why he do not call Lindbergh , an Army officer , into uniform. The reason , he reply , be that Lindbergh be a defeatist , and he go on to compare him with Representative Clement L. Vallandigham , a Civil War Congressman from Ohio , the chief spokesman of a group call the Copperheads , who say the North could never win. Roosevelt 's attack be perhaps set off by a Lindbergh magazine article that declare , `` While our leader have shout for peace , they have consistently direct u toward war. '' 'Insult From Roosevelt' Considering his honor impugn , Lindbergh resign his commission. `` If I do not tender my resignation , '' he say in the published version of his `` Wartime Journals , '' `` I would lose something in my own character that mean even more to me than my commission in the Air Corps. `` No one else would know it , but I would. And if I take this insult from Roosevelt , more , and bad , will probably be forthcoming. '' Thirty year later Lindbergh still felt wrong by the President , and profess not to see that he himself have question Roosevelt 's integrity. With Pearl Harbor , America First collapse and Lindbergh seek to join the armed forces. `` Now that we be at war I want to contribute a best I can to my country 's war effort , '' he wrote. `` It be vital for u to carry on this be a intelligently , a constructively , and as successfully a we can , and I want to do my part. '' His bid to soldier be rebuff , however , an action for which he blame Roosevelt personally. Lindbergh , then 39 , join the Ford Motor Company a a consultant , work at the Willow Run plant in Michigan , which be produce bombers. Later he be a consultant to the United Aircraft Corporation , attach chiefly to it Vought-Sikorsky Division in Stratford , Conn. Vought be produce the Navy Corsair F4U. As part of his job , he travel to the Pacific war area in 1944 to study the Corsair under service condition , and , a a civilian , fly 50 mission against the Japanese. The flier have at least one very close brush with death in a dogfight near Biak Island. He describe this and other episode in `` The Wartime Journals , '' and they constitute the best writing in the book. After the war , Lindbergh go to Germany for the Naval Technical Mission in Europe to study development in Nazi aircraft and missiles. He have be interested in rocketry since 1929 , when he seek out Dr. Robert Goddard , then an obscure physic professor at Clark University in Worcester , Mass. ( Goddard , who have be ridicule for his idea , have since be recognize a a space flight pioneer. ) Lindbergh be always proud of his association with Goddard and of have raise money to fund his experiments. For 16 year until his death in 1945 , Goddard , also a loner , receive Lindbergh 's help and encouragement ; and Goddard 's basic rocketry patent be use in the development of United States missile after the war. The aviator 's crucial assistance to Goddard do not become well know until Goddard 's biography be publish in 1963 , a book for which Lindbergh write an introduction. For more than 15 year after the war Lindbergh virtually disappear from the news. He be a member of Army Ordnance 's CHORE project at the University of Chicago ; he be consultant to the Secretary of the Air Force ; he take part in the reorganization of the Strategic Air Command ; and he be a member of scientific ballistic-missile committee of the Air Force and the Defense Department. In 1954 , he be commission a brigadier general in the Air Force Reserve. Much of the aviator 's work in these year deal with security-classified project ; but it be believe that he be active in rocketry and space flight program , where his technical expertise be valuable. He enjoy top-secret clearance , and spoke of his task a have to do with security. In this period , Lindbergh complete his autobiographical account of his 1927 flight , which have be write in bit and piece in various part of the world over 14 years. `` The Spirit of St. Louis , '' publish in 1953 , win the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1954 and be make into a movie three year later , with James Stewart a the lead. The book be intend to supersede `` We , '' which , write in haste , have never satisfy the aviator a an accurate account of his flight. Starting sometime after the war , he rejoin Pan American a a consultant for the nominal fee of $ 600 a month. The job , which eventually lead to his work on the design specification for the Boeing 747 , allow him great freedom to travel and to develop any interest he chose. And travel he do , seemingly have no settled abode. In Africa , in 1964 , he find an interest that be to occupy his last year and to bring him out of his public reticence and reclusiveness. The issue be conservation. `` Lying under an acacia tree with the sound of the dawn around me , '' he recall , `` I realize more clearly the fact that man should never overlook : that the construction of an airplane , for instance , be simple when compare to the evolutionary achievement of a bird ; that airplanes depend on an advanced civilization , and that where civilization be most advanced few bird exist. `` I realize that if I have to choose , I would rather have bird than airplanes. '' He conclude , he say , `` that I ought to do something. '' Concern for Environment That imperative , which unfold slowly , lead him to activity in conservation organization , to have a large hand in save the humpback and the blue whale , to concern for endanger specie and to public advocacy of step to save the world 's environment. He make his first public speech in 1968 -- the first since 1941 -- to the Alaska Legislature. The following year he grant what amount to his first newspaper interview in 35 years. This be to The New York Times and this writer , the occasion be his conservation activity in the Philippines. There be anther interview in 1970 , again in the Philippines , but center on his concern for primitive peoples. And again in 1971 , he take this writer with him on a long American conservation tour , which be also a journey backward in time to his boyhood home in Minnesota. Lindbergh say that he have unveil himself because he think the cause of conservation so urgent. `` I have have enough publicity for 15 life , '' he say , `` and I seek no more of it , but where I can accomplish a purpose I will do thing I otherwise abhor. '' There be no doubt that his leadership be effective. Even though he be talk to a generation bear long after his Paris flight , his person and his name evoke a tangible response. He do not pretend to be an expert , but have a singular ability to stir response and activity , to enunciate general principle and to cheer people on. It do not appear to matter that he have publish his bulky `` Wartime Journals '' in 1970 to general critical dispraise. What seem to count be that he be Charles Augustus Lindbergh , the hero still of 1927 , whose smile be engage , whose word be straightforward , whose manner be simple and whose message be forceful. This be , perhaps , the ultimate enigma of his life ; for beneath his outer coating be a man who keep more to himself ( and perhaps to his wife ) than he ever give to the public .