August 28 , 1975 OBITUARY Haile Selassie of Ethiopia Dies at 83 By ALDEN WHITMAN Haile Selassie , the last emperor in the 3,000-year-old Ethiopian monarchy , who rule for half a century before he be depose by military coup last September , die yesterday in a small apartment in his former palace. He be 83 year old. His death be play down by the military ruler who succeed him in Addis Ababa , who announce it in a normally schedule radio newscast there at 7 A.M. They say that he have be find dead in his bed by a servant , and that the cause of death be probably relate to the effect of a prostate operation Haile Selassie underwent two month ago. The broadcast say that the once-revered `` Lion of Judah 's '' only survive daughter , Princess Tenagne-Work , visit the former Emperor Tuesday at his request , after he have determine that his health be rapidly deteriorating. But in London , Crown Prince Afsa Wossen Haile Selassie , who have be live abroad since the leftist government in Ethiopia formally declare an end to the monarchy last March , say his father have be in `` excellent health. '' In a write statement issue in London , it be say that `` the Crown Prince demand that independent doctor and the International Red Cross be allow to carry out an autopsy to ascertain the cause of death of Ethiopia 's and Africa 's father. '' Official source say that burial of the former Emperor would be `` in the strict privacy. '' According to Ethiopian custom , burial must take place within 24 hour after death. As a symbol of regal power , His Imperial Majesty the Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah , Haile Selassie I , Elect of God , Emperor of Ethiopia , have rule his ancient realm a a medieval autocrat. Seized in a military coup after almost a year of fester discontent with his regime , Haile Selassie , who be accustom to Rolls-Royces , be hustle from his spacious palace to an army officer 's bungalow in the back seat of a blue Volkswagen. The final confrontation between the age and frail Emperor and the young and robust army men be like a scene from a Verdi opera. Haile Selassie scold and insult the officer a insolent , and they , with mount ire , decide on the spot to take him to a military camp rather than to another palace. And on the way , he be jeer by crowd yelling : `` Thief ! Thief ! '' Haile Selassie 's trouble begin in 1973 with disquiet in the countryside and in the peasant-based army over Government attempt to hush up a drought that eventually take 100,000 life in two northern provinces. The unrest be compound in February , 1974 , when mutiny break out in the military over low pay ; and a secessionist guerrilla war in Eritrea complicate the Emperor 's problems. In the spring and summer , after riot in Addis Ababa , the capital , his absolute power be gradually circumscribed. Lost Touch With Subjects Ironically , Haile Selassie initiate the change that lead to his downfall -- the military training program that expose Ethiopian officer to representative institution in the United States , and Haile Selassie I University , where student learn to think about political economy. The Emperor , however , could not seem to adapt to new concept , and he lose touch with his subject in recent year , show more affection for his pet cheetah and dog , diplomat say , than for his human entourage. In the work out of Haile Selassie 's cautious reform , a thin layer of technocrat and intellectual be create , a group that perceive the country far differently from the tradition-bound Emperor. The reform process , moreover , create a dependency on the United States , which equip the army and which draw Ethiopia into the periphery of superpower politics. This come about because of the country 's strategic position on the Red Sea. The Soviet Union , likewise alert to geopolitics , equip the military force of Somalia , which also lie on the Red Sea and abut Ethiopia on the southeast. For year the two country quarrel over their border , add to tension inside both nations. 'Preserving ' Progress The combination of circumstance that lead to Haile Selassie 's downfall tend to obscure his accomplishment in lead a largely illiterate , rural and feudal country with 2,000 language and dialect into the 19th , if not the 20th , century. And it also shadow his contribution to African unity. An African who meet the Emperor at the United Nations Security Council session in Addis Ababa in 1972 sum up a widespread feeling when he say : `` Haile Selassie be one of the world 's great men. He do a lot for his country and early become a respected voice for Africa and for the third world. '' If the pace of change be snailish under the Emperor , it be deliberately so. `` We must make progress slowly so a to preserve the progress we have already make , '' he say frequently of his reign , in which slavery be legally abolish and limit democratic structure instituted. But he be also regard a one who rule too strictly by prerogative for the benefit of his family and friends. And at his ouster he be popularly accuse a an exploiter who have secretly send billion of dollar to private bank account abroad. The drama of his departure from power and the intrigue that precede it be kin to the event of his long life. Coming to power in a palace coup and , later , discomfit his enemy in battle , Haile Selassie be drive into exile by the troop of Fascist Italy after the civilized world have spurn his eloquent and poignant appeal for help. Restored to his capital in World War II , he obtain for Ethiopia a coastline on the Red Sea , skillfully court foreign economic aid , strive to improve education , squash an attempt coup and , despite the anachronism of his person and the archaicism of his country , emerge a an elder statesman of African anticolonialism. The prestige and power of Haile Selassie , wax over more than a half century , make of him a personage large than life. With a splendid sense of theater , he live up to , and even surpass , the role in which he be cast. Once the Emperor be distribute gift to men who serve the Ethiopian cause in World War II. After he have finish , one man approach him and complain that he have be overlooked. `` You lie , '' Haile Selassie reply , call the petitioner by name and cite the exact place , day and hour that he have be reward for obtain a string of mule for the army. The man flush and tremble , for he have never suspect that the Emperor would remember , since score of others have be honor at the same time. He start to inch away , but the Emperor summon him back and toss him a bundle of banknote anyway. Such magnificent and munificent gesture tend to obscure the fact that the Emperor look emaciate , and be only 5 foot 4 inch tall. But he manage to convey an imposing presence and an air of cold command whether he be seat at his desk in military uniform with a blaze array of decoration across his chest ; or whether he be stand , cap , on the rostrum of the League of Nations ; or whether , seat bolt upright in his green or maroon Rolls-Royce , he be motor through the dusty street of Addis Ababa a his subject lay prostrate while he passed. What help to make Haile Selassie so physically impose be his bearded and dark- complexioned face , his aquiline nose over full lip and his steady , penetrate black eyes. It be a mien both melancholy and fearsome , the visage of one who rule by the precept of John Stuart Mill as well a by those of Niccolo Machiavelli , by compassion as well a cruelty ; for he could be generous to loyal subordinate , or he could hang the rebellious , or he could keep a rival imprison in golden chains. The limit of his emotional expression be a sad smile , so enigmatic that his true feeling seem deeply mysterious. To many in the West , especially in the United States , Haile Selassie be a storied figure. He be the 225th Emperor of Ethiopia in a line that he trace to Menelik I , who be credit with be the child of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba , identify in Ethiopia a Queen Makeda. ( The constitution of 1955 specify Haile Selassie 's direct descent from Menelik I. ) Unbending on protocol and punctilio , the Emperor , in his public appearance , recall the splendor and opulence of Suleiman the Magnificent or Louis XIV , with the difference that he live and work in a modern atmosphere and journeyed abroad in a commandeered Ethiopian Airlines plane. He once have three palace ; but after he transform the Gueneteleul Palace into the Haile Selassie I University in 1960 , he be reduce to a palace to live in -- the Jubilee -- and one to work in -- the Ghibi. Guarded by Lions Around the clock , he be guard by lion and cheetah , protect by Imperial Bodyguards , trail by his pet papillon dog , flank by a multitude of chamberlain and flunky and sustain by a tradition of reverence for his person. He take seriously the doctrine of the divine right of king , and he never allow his subject to forget that he consider himself the Elect of God. Indeed , he combine in his person the temporal sovereignty of the state and the leadership of the Ethiopian Orthodox church , the country 's establish church. In moment of relaxation -- and these be few , for he be an extraordinarily hard- work monarch -- Haile Selassie display considerable charm. He speak softly ( in halt English if necessary ) , and he have a mind well furnish with small talk derive from his daily scrutiny of the world press and from view film and newsreels. He also absorb information from his extensive travel about the world. His talk , though light , be not likely to be gay or mirth-providing or quotable. He refer to himself always with the imperial `` we. '' In his latter year he be a lonely man beneath the panoply of office. He have outlive his wife of 50 year , who die in 1962 , and four of his six children. He have , though , more than a dozen grandchild and some great-grandchildren , with whom he like to surround himself at dinner. Leader in Africa In African affair , Haile Selassie 's courage and his tenacity a a nationalist give him a position of leadership among such anticolonialist statesman a Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya , Sekou Toure of Guinea and Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia. Despite his autocratic rule , the Emperor represent independence from overt foreign domination as well a the artful acquisition of foreign economic aid. It be Haile Selassie who convoke the first meeting of the Organization of African Unity in 1963 and devise the charter for the 38- nation bloc. Its headquarters be in Addis Ababa. Moreover , at Haile Selassie 's suggestion a United Nations Economic Commission for Africa be set up. Its secretariat be also in Addis Ababa , in a lavish $ 1.75-million building erect at the Emperor 's bidding. In Ethiopia , he be an object of veneration to the mass of people until his overthrow , but to the new urban elite the centralization of authority in his person and the tepidity of reform have be unpalatable for some time. The two constitution the Emperor grant , one in 1931 and the other in 1955 , be both criticize because the Cabinet be responsible to Haile Selassie and because there be no provision for political parties. Economic reform , especially change in the age-old system of land tenure , be far too slow , critic say , with the result that the country 's agriculture and animal husbandry -- the mainstay of it economy -- be operate on a primitive level. Coffee , cereal and bean be the main cash crop ; meat and animal product also contribute heavily to the Gross National Product. Manufacturing and power , on the other hand , account for only 3 per cent of the G.N.P. Haile Selassie 's kingdom be a wild and sprawling country of 455,000 spare mile ( about the size of Texas , Louisiana , Arkansas and Oklahoma combine ) and 26 million people ( an accept guess in the absence of any census ) . There be a score of tribe , at least one so primitive that it men castrate their enemy to win favor with an intended bride. There be many language , but Amharic , the official tongue , be speak in some degree by only 50 per cent of the people. Although the state religion be a Monophysite Christianity , a substantial portion of the population , perhaps 40 per cent , be Moslem. In addition , there be Animists and Judaists. The multiplicity of religion and custom accent Ethiopia 's lack of homogeneity and it general backwardness , for it be a country without a developed highway or rail system and without organize health and social services. The bulk of the people live in mud and straw hut , even in Addis Ababa. In the capital , the contrast between the old and the new be especially striking , for it few modern building cast their shadow on the far more numerous ancient structure that include , until a few year ago , the Imperial Brothel and the square in which public hanging be carry out. Of the dominant Amhara tribe , Haile Selassie be bear in Ejarsa Gora , in a mud and wattle house , on July 23 , 1892. He be name Lij Tafari Makonnen and he be the only legitimate son of Ras Makonnen , Governor of Harar , to survive infancy. The boy 's father be a cousin and close ally of Emperor Menelik II , who be without a legitimate direct male heir. When Ras Makonnen die in 1906 , his son , who already have a rudimentary education and speak French , be summon to the Court at Addis Ababa , where he be far school both in book learning and in the devious intrigue of Menelik 's household. Tafari be pass over on the death of Menelik II in 1913 in favor of the Emperor 's grandson Lij Yasu , a handsome , dissolute and athletic young man. Tafari , meantime , have marry Lij Yasu 's niece , Waizero Menen , after her divorce , and have attain practical experience in government a governor of a province. Lij Yasu , who be never formally crown , be convert to Islam and excommunicate by the Ethiopian church. And in the palace coup that follow , Tafari make himself the heir presumptive to the throne and Regent for Zauditu , a daughter of Menelik , who be proclaim Empress. 'Jaws of a Lion' Emerging a the strong man , Tafari get rid of the husband of the Empress , put her under his control , and , capture Lij Yasu , imprison him for the rest of the life. The golden chain in which he be hold be not so confining , however , a to prevent him from enjoy the variety of woman with whom Tafari ply him. With his other warlord enemy among the noble Tafari be less indulgent. `` He creep like a mouse , but he have the jaw of a lion , '' one of them said. By force of arm and execution he bring an end to the chaos that threaten to envelop Ethiopia and turn his country 's eye ever so slightly toward the outside world. In 1923 Tafari have the kingdom accept a a member of the League of Nations. He act in the hope that league membership would exempt Ethiopia from the colonial ambition of other countries. In the following year Tafari , have bulwark his power at home , undertake an extensive foreign tour. `` We need European progress , '' he explain , `` only because we be surround by it. '' Everywhere he go in Europe , Tafari , with his six lion and four zebra and 30 attendant , create a lasting impression. His modern outlook win him friend ; so do his assertion that Ethiopia require innovation and development. One fruit of his trip be the Tafari Makonnen School , which he found and staff with European teachers. ( Education be one of the chief interest of Tafari when he become Emperor , and he establish primary and secondary school throughout the country as well a the Haile Selassie I University. Even so , at the end of his reign , only 500,000 school-age child of a potential 3.2 million be enrolled. ) Coup Thwarted Friction between the Empress and her Regent grow in the late nineteen-twenties. Believing in 1928 that she have the upper hand , the Empress attempt a coup , but she be thwart by the cunning and alertness of Tafari , who force her to crown him King of Ethiopia. Two year later , after her mysterious death , Tafari be crown Emperor and take the name of Haile Selassie , which mean `` Power of the Holy Trinity. '' The coronation on Nov. 2 , 1930 , be an event of unparalleled sumptuousness in a city that , one observer say , `` resemble a shanty town with wedding-cake trimmings. '' There be only one or two building of more than one story , the rest be a tumbled mass of mud huts. Distinguished foreign delegation mingle with the city 's 20,000 prostitutes. Describing the coronation , Leonard Mosley write in his book , `` Haile Selassie : The Conquering Lion '' : `` Shortly before dawn on the morning of Nov. 2 , before the world press , the foreign guest and a great concourse of ras [ noble ] in their lion 's mane and most resplendent robe , Abuna Kyril [ the Archbishop ] anoint the head of Haile Selassie and place on it the triple crown of Ethiopia. `` Simultaneously , the ras put on their coronet , then make their obeisance to him , after which the celebratory shooting , shout , loolooing , feast , dancing and drinking break out all over the city. '' The Emperor 's initial venture into reform , in which he change the status of his people from chattel of the noble into subject of the state , culminate in a constitution in 1931. Although it limit on the royal prerogative be negligible , it be a step away from feudalism. At the same time , administrative change improve the civil service , and a tax system be introduced. Road-building and other public work be undertaken. Moreover , several edict against slavery be promulgate , if not enforced. Virtually total abolition be not accomplish until 1964. In 1934 Benito Mussolini , the dictator of Fascist Italy , move against Ethiopia in a border incident. His pretense , that of bring civilization to a backward country , conceal Italian imperial ambition for an African colony to supplement Italian Somaliland and Eritrea. In the diplomatic footwork that follow the border clash , the Emperor refer the dispute to the League of Nations for mediation ; but Britain and France give Mussolini to understand that he could expect a free hand in Ethiopia. `` Could we not have call Musso 's bluff and at least postponed this war ? '' Winston Churchill ask later. `` The answer I 'm sure be yes. We build Musso into a great power. '' Deserted by Britain and France , Ethiopia fell to Italian arm shortly after the Fascist invasion begin on Oct. 2 , 1935. By April , 1936 , the conflict ( `` This be n't a war , it be n't even a slaughter , '' a British eyewitness said. `` It 's the torture of ten of thousand of men , woman and child with bomb and poison gas '' ) be over. On May 2 Haile Selassie go into exile. The Emperor go first to Jerusalem to pray and then to Britain a a private guest. Still convince that the League could be rally to his cause , he appeal to it and it member not to recognize the Italian conquest. Shamed , the League permit him to state his case , and his appearance before the delegate assemble in Geneva on June 30 , 1936 , be a moment in history that few who witness it ever forgot. 'Morality at Stake' Aloof , dignify , gaze in contempt at the Fascist journalist who shout at him , and look directly at the uneasy , shuffle delegate , he begin his speech in Amharic by say : `` I , Haile Selassie I , Emperor of Ethiopia , be here today to claim that justice that be due to my people and the assistance promise to it eight month ago by 52 nation who assert that an act of aggression have be commit in violation of international treaties. '' After recite the principal event of the war and his betrayal by the big power , he continue : `` I assert that the issue before the Assembly today be not merely a question of the settlement in the matter of Italian aggression. It be a question of collective security ; of the very existence of the League , of the trust place by state in international treaty ; of the value of promise make to small state that their integrity and independence shall be respect and assured. . . . `` In a word , it be international morality that be at stake. . . . `` Outside of the Kingdom of God , there be not on this earth any nation that be high than any other. If a strong government find that it can , with impunity , destroy a weak people , then the hour have strike for that weak people to appeal to the League of Nations to give it judgment in all freedom. God and history will remember your judgment. `` Placed by the aggressor face to face with the accomplished fact , be state go to set up the terrible precedent of bow before force ? `` I ask the great power , who have promise the guarantee of collective security to small state -- those small state over whom hang the threat that they may one day suffer the fate of Ethiopia : What measure do they intend to take ? . . . What answer be I to take back to my people ? '' As Haile Selassie conclude what be certainly his saddest ( and great ) hour and move from the tribunal to a scatter of embarrassed applause , he murmur : `` It be u today. It will be you tomorrow. '' In practical term the Emperor 's speech be a magnificent but futile gesture , for one by one the power recognize the Italian regime in East Africa. Haile Selassie , meantime , go to live a an unwanted guest in Bath , England ; he be so break that the local bookshop stop his credit. From this seedy oblivion the Emperor be rescue on May 10 , 1940 , when Italy enter World War II a an enemy of Britain. Churchill , long a friend , have him flown incognito , a Mr. Strong , to Africa. Landing at Alexandria , he spend the night in the men 's room of the Italian Yacht Club before go on to Khartoum in the Sudan. There he help to organize an army of liberation with the aid of Orde Wingate , one of the most picturesque British officer in the war. The result of these exertion be that Haile Selassie return to his country on Jan. 20 , 1941 , and make his state entry into Addis Ababa on May 5 in the back of an Alfa Romeo motor car. It be five year to the day since the Italians have enter the city. The country remain under British administration , however , until Jan. 31 , 1942 , when London recognize Ethiopia a a sovereign state. In the year that follow the restoration , Haile Selassie enhance his personal power while act slowly to solve the country 's grave economic and social problems. Some advance in education be also make , for 200 school building be put up between 1942 and 1952. In this period , too , a new force be reach manhood in the kingdom -- the educated elite whose travel and school abroad make them restive over their nation 's introversions. Partly a the result of pressure from this group and partly because of the rise tide of anticolonialism in Africa , Haile Selassie grant a new constitution in 1955. It promise his subject equal right under the law , plus a vote ; but it also retain his traditional prerogatives. One clause read : `` By virtue of His Imperial Blood as well a by the anointing which He have receive , the person of the Emperor be sacred. His dignity be inviolable and His Power indisputable. He be , consequently , entitle to all the honor due Him in accordance with tradition and the present Constitution. Anyone so bold a to seek to injure the Emperor will be punished. '' Mutiny During Absence The surface placidity of Ethiopia be shatter in 1960 , when Haile Selassie be absent on a state trip to Brazil. The Imperial Bodyguard mutiny and some member of the royal family , include Crown Prince Asfa Wossen , join an attempt to dethrone the Emperor and promote faster social and economic progress. The Emperor returnedto Addis Ababa , crush the revolt and have the commander of the bodyguard publicly hang for treason. The Crown Prince be put out of favor , from which he finally emerge , but slowly. The attempt coup lead the Emperor to try to communicate more directly with his subject in radio talk and to indicate what he be do for them in his paternal fashion. One such advance be foreign aid. In the final year of his reign he contrive to obtain help from diverse source without create crosscurrent among the donors. Italy and Yugoslavia build dam for him ; the Addis Ababa airport be construct by the United States ; the Soviet Union put up a polytechnic institute on the shore of Lake Tana , source of the Blue Nile. The Emperor much enjoy state visit -- to Marshal Tito of Yugoslavia , to Queen Elizabeth II of Britain , to the United States , where he be the guest of the last five Presidents before Gerald R. Ford. In all , he travel to more than 60 country , include China , where he be receive in 1971 by Mao Tse-tung .