February 26 , 1975 OBITUARY Elijah Muhammad Dead ; Black Muslim Leader , 77 Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES Chicago , Feb. 25 -- Elijah Muhammad , spiritual leader of the nation 's Black Muslims , die here today of congestive heart failure. The death of the 77-year-old `` Messenger of Allah , '' a his follower call him , come a thousand of Muslims be gather in Chicago for their big annual religious celebration , Saviour 's Day , schedule for tomorrow. Mr. Muhammad suffer from heart trouble , bronchitis , asthma and diabetes. He enter Mercy Hospital Jan. 30. Mr. Muhammad be consider by Black Muslims a the `` Last Messenger of Allah. '' Strict adherence to that belief might cause some problem of succession , but it be expect generally that one of his son will assume the leadership. Mr. Muhammad be survive by six son and two daughters. Built Religious Body By C. Gerald Fraser In his 41 year a it spiritual leader , Elijah Muhammad mold the Nation of Islam into a significant religious body. At the same time , he develop the Nation of Islam 's empire of school in 46 city , restaurant , store , a bank , a publishing company that print the country 's large circulate black newspaper , and 15,000 acre of farmland in three state that produce beef , egg , poultry , milk , fruit and vegetable deliver across the country by Nation of Islam-owned truck and air transport. Elijah Muhammad do not create the Nation of Islam but he build it on a number of principles. Among them : Islam be the true religion , `` knowledge of self '' be vital , `` do for self '' be necessary , the black man be supreme and the white man be `` the devil. '' These principle catch the imagination of thousand of mostly young , male and female , lower-class black American former Christians who become follower of Mr. Muhammad. And recently , black professional -- physician , police officer and the college-educated , for example -- have join the movement. Estimates of membership range from 25,000 to a high of 250,000 claim by the movement. These principle also bring down upon the Nation of Islam scorn from black and white Americans. But Elijah Muhammad contend that to call white `` blue-eyed devil '' be neither to hate them nor to teach hate. `` They say that I be a preacher of racial hatred , '' Mr. Muhammad once say , `` but the fact be that the white people do n't like the truth , especially if it speak against them. It be a terrible thing for such people to charge me with teach race hatred when their foot be on my people 's neck and they tell u to our face that they hate black people. Remember now , they even teach you that you must not hate them for hat you. '' Comments by Marshall Many black do not buy that explanation. Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall , a black liberal and a civil right lawyer in 1959 , say then that Mr. Muhammad 's organization be `` run by a bunch of thug organize from prison and jail and finance , I be sure , by Nasser [ Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt ] or some Arab group. '' Justice Marshall add that follower of Mr. Muhammad be `` vicious '' and a threat to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and state law enforcement agencies. The negative view be share by most black describe by the press a `` black leaders. '' But a black conservative , George Schuyler , a columnist for The Pittsburgh Courier , hold the view more common to many among the black masses. `` Mr. Muhammad , '' Mr. Schuyler write in 1959 , `` may be a rogue and a charlatan , but when anybody can get ten of thousand of Negroes to practice economic solidarity , respect their woman , alter their atrocious diet , give up liquor , stop crime , juvenile delinquency and adultery , he be do more for Negroes ' welfare than any current Negro leader I know. '' There be thug , dope addict and prostitute in the Nation of Islam. But their conversion from criminal to believer be view in black community a a near miracle. Blacks be awe by the discipline , and admire the orderliness the follower displayed. Where home , school and church have fail many of the follower , Mr. Muhammad have succeeded. The opportunity to be `` somebody '' be one of Mr. Muhammad 's major offering to black men and woman who join the Black Muslims -- the name give the group by Dr. C. Eric Lincoln , chairman of the department of religion and philosophical study at Fisk University and author of `` The Black Muslims in America. '' Dr. Charles V. Hamilton , a political scientist and member of the Columbia University faculty , say Elijah Muhammad `` be one of the few who have be able to combine religion and race with a rather continue economic influence. '' Fard Founded Nation Actually , the concept preach and practice by Mr. Muhammad be hand to him by the founder of the Nation of Islam , W. D. Fard , or Master Farad Muhammad. Where Mr. Fard come from and where he go when he drop out of sight be unknown. But in a 1930 Depression-ridden Detroit , `` The Prophet , '' a he be know to customer who buy the fabric he peddle from door-to-door , create the Temple of Islam. He tell those who listen that he have come to `` wake the Dead Nation of the West , '' that he would teach the truth about the white man , that black must get ready for Armageddon -- the inevitable confrontation between black and white -- that black men be not to be call `` Negroes '' and that Christianity be the religion of the slavemasters. Mr. Fard establish Temple No. 1 in Detroit , the University of Islam -- the temple 's elementary and secondary school , Muslim Girls Training Class and the Fruit of Islam -- the elite corp of male assign to protective and disciplinary functions. As be his practice , Mr. Fard give his follower their `` original '' name , and the man who come to him a Elijah Poole receive the name Elijah Muhammad. Mr. Fard select a Minister of Islam and a staff of assistant ministers. Elijah Muhammad , a one of the assistant , become very close to Mr. Fard , and after Mr. Fard disappear in 1934 , Elijah Muhammad become the Minister of Islam. Mr. Fard have since be deify a Allah and his birthday , Feb. 26 , be observe throughout the Nation of Islam a Saviour 's Day. Elijah Muhammad 's ascent be another instance of a black man from a small Southern town who achieve national eminence a a religious leader. He be bear in Sandersville , Ga. , on Oct. 7 , 1897. His parent be sharecropper -- and former slaves. His father , Wali Poole , be also a Baptist preacher , and Elijah be one of 13 children. His formal education end at the fourth grade , and at 16 he leave home. In 1919 he marry Clara Evans and in 1923 , with two child , they move to Detroit. A series of job include work on a Chevrolet assembly line. The Detroit experience be as critical to his late activity a be his modest beginnings. Mr. Fard and Mr. Muhammad be build a Northern urban movement in bad economic time with predominantly Southern-born blacks. At various time in Detroit during the nineteen-thirties Communists , anti-union , pro- Ethiopian and pro-Japanese element try to co-opt the movement. In this period Elijah Muhammad be arrest for contribute to the delinquency of a minor because he send his child to the University of Islam instead of to Detroit 's public schools. And finally , internal turmoil within the Detroit temple cause Mr. Muhammad to move to Chicago , where he establish Temple No. 2. Along with non-Muslims , Elijah Muhammad be arrest in Chicago in 1942 and charge with sedition and violation of the Selective Service Act. Cleared of the sedition charge , he be convict of exhort his follower to avoid the draft and he be send to Federal prison in Milan , Mich. , for about four years. He be credit with control the Nation of Islam from his prison quarters. Role of Malcolm X It be a man who join the Nation of Islam in prison , however , who give the movement it great exposure. El Hajj Malik El-Shabazz -- Malcolm X. Malcolm X join the Nation of Islam in a Massachusetts prison. He be release from jail in August , 1952 , and his rise parallel the period of most significant growth in black awareness. Malcolm X be Elijah Muhammad 's most prominent apostle. Malcolm X be the chief spokesman , the main recruiter ; he bring the heavy-weight boxing champion Muhammad Ali into the movement. But by 1963 Malcolm X be disenchant , while deny that he be a rival of Mr. Muhammad for top leadership. He believe Mr. Muhammad 's religious interpretation that exclude Caucasian Moslems too narrow , and he be concern by the Black Muslims ' policy of non-engagement in civil right and political affairs. In the 10 year since Malcolm X 's assassination by three say to be Black Muslims , Elijah Muhammad rule his movement from it Chicago headquarters. ( Occasionally , he spend time in Phoenix , where the climate relieve some of his asthmatic discomfort. ) Mr. Muhammad , a small man about 5 foot 5 inch tall with a high , thin voice , hold court in his office , listen to aide , weigh their report by balance what they say with the quality he saw in them a individuals. He be serious but witty and verbally creative. He illustrate many of his spiritual lesson about the need of black to elevate their behavior , a he saw it , with little humorous dramatic sketches. Although Mr. Muhammad personally enjoy disaster that befall white , see them a Allah 's work , he seek to prevent any public expression of Muslim enjoyment of the event. Thus , he suspend Malcolm after Malcolm X have say of the assassination of President Kennedy that the `` chicken have come home to roost. '' He prevent Black Muslims from participate in the country 's political process , include any political activity on behalf of a separate state , because , he contend , what be to be achieve by the Nation of Islam be to be achieve divinely , though natural catastrophe and war among white on a national and international scale. Relations with American black Moslem group have become increase hostile since the assassination of Malcolm X. Black Muslims be accuse of kill seven person associate with the Hanafi Muslims in Washington two year ago. And Sunni Muslims in Brooklyn be say by the police to have try to steal gun from a sport good store to prepare for a war with Black Muslims. In recent year , Mr. Muhammad moderate the anti-white tone of the religion. He remark last year that `` The slavemaster be no longer hinder u , we 're hinder ourselves. The slavemaster have give you all he could give you. He give you freedom. Now get something for yourself. '' Elijah Muhammad be a mystic. But his mysticism be apply ; it always have a quite earthly purpose. Forerunning transcendental meditation and other modern popular sect , he saw the need for 20th-century religion to declare themselves base on science , not faith. Islam be a science and a `` way of life , '' not a religion , he said. Yet , he would refer to the Mother Plane , a mysterious space ship with superior being , giant black god or something like that , that patrol the universe , keep an eye on the devil and ready to rescue Black Muslims from Armageddon .