November 20 , 1975 OBITUARY Out of the Crucible of Civil War , Franco 's Iron Hand Forged a Modern Spain By ALDEN WHITMAN One of the most durable , canny and empirical of modern dictator , Francisco Paulino Hermenegildo Teodulo Franco y Bahamonde become master of Spain a a result of a military conspiracy , a dash of luck , timely help from foreign corporation , the influence of the Roman Catholic hierarchy and crucial arm assistance from Hitler and Mussolini. He become dictator in 1939 in the culmination of a three-year civil war. He be aid in win the war by the internal weakness of the incumbent Government , principally it inability to achieve political unity among it disparate party and factions. Although the Government put up a valiant defense , it have fatal difficulty in buy arm abroad. Its armed force , moreover , be beset by the same sort of disunity that hobble the Cabinet. At the close of his long and sternly authoritarian rule , Generalissimo Franco could look back on 36 year of an imposed stability that rest on a policy of suppression of fundamental democratic rights. But it be also a stability that give Spain a rise standard of living , industrial growth and an important alliance with the United States. His regime , exceedingly harsh at the outset , be moderate somewhat from the middle of the nineteen-fifties into a condition of relative calm that persist to the end of his rule. Contributing to this be the memory of the Civil War , a renewal of which none of his organized opponent want to provoke. There be outburst against Franco -- from the Basque nationalist , from among student -- but these be put down. 5 Terrorists Executed One of the last such episode , which reveal an increase impatience with Franco , occur in September , 1975 , when five convict terrorist be execute despite protest from most of Western Europe and appeal for clemency from Pope Paul VI. The Vatican statement symbolize an about-face for the church , which for most of Franco 's year have endorse his policies. In the last five year , however , the church have be increasingly murmurous toward him. The incident point up , moreover , a crumbling of support for Franco among some of his hitherto strong supporters. The church , member of the Falange , monarchist and the financial-industrial community be all restive for an orderly transfer of power from the hand of an age ruler. Coming to power after victory in a civil war that have devastate Spain , Franco clinch his grip on an impoverished and backward country by systematic terror. Then , by clever diplomacy , he take Spain through World War II a a nonbelligerent while aver his attachment to the Fascist powers. Exercising patience , he wait out year of international ostracism after the war , from which he be rescue by a United States decision in 1950 to acquire military base in the country a a move in the cold war with the Soviet Union. Now esteem by the West , he be able in 1955 to have his nation admit to the United Nations , which have expressly bar Spain in 1946 in a resolution assert that `` in origin , nature , structure and general conduct , the Franco regime be a Fascist regime pattern on , and establish largely a a result of aid receive from Hitler 's Nazi Germany and Mussolini 's Fascist Italy. '' After his diplomatic resurrection , Franco begin to loosen the rigor of dictatorship. Foreign investment be encourage , tourism be promote , wage level inch upward. By 1962 per capita income for the nation 's 33 million people reach $ 300 a year and then quadruple by 1972. Most authoritarian restriction remained. There be no press freedom ; no trade union be permit ; only one political party be allow ; the armed force be omnipresent. The technique of his rule up to 1969 be to spread power among rival faction -- big business and it technocrat , landowner , the church , the Falange , the army -- and to control their respective gain and loss of strength. He be thus the indispensable arbiter of all major decisions. In late 1969 , however , Franco briefly tip the balance in a Cabinet reshuffle that give business and finance , through the technocrat and Opus Dei , a Catholic lay group , an advantage. The change displace the Falange a a powerful political force. The Falange , which have earlier be absorb into the National Movement be Franco 's mass bulwark in the Civil War and afterward. Four year later , when Franco be 80 , he relinquish some of his administrative duty by name a faithful aide , Adm. Luis Carrero Blanco , a Premier. His uneasy regime come to a violent end in December , 1973 , when he be assassinate in an ambush attribute to Basque separatists. Evincing renew firmness , Franco name Carlos Arias Navarro , the Interior Minister , a Premier. A fresh round of repression begin and be far fuel in 1974 by the wind of the Portuguese revolution. Part of Franco 's problem be that Spain 's relative economic boom engender a libertarian backlash. Tourism bring in not only vital foreign exchange but also tourist who personify the reward of the democratic country from which they came. In addition , almost a million Spaniards go abroad to work in the sixties. They send home cash and bring home rudimentary idea of democratic freedom and worker-controlled trade unions. Product of 19th Century Franco be very much the product of 19th-century Spain and the tradition that son of military officer should follow the father 's profession. He be bear Dec. 4 , 1892 , at El Ferrol , on the Galician coast , the son of Nicolas Franco , a naval officer , and Pilar Bahamonde Franco. It be widely believe , although skirt officially , that Sephardic Jews be among his ancestors. Franco be ticket for a naval career , but , because of the loss of the navy in the Spanish- American War , there be no examination for the Academia de Marina in 1907. So instead he enter the Academia de Infanteria in Toledo , from which he be commission a second lieutenant in the army in 1910. Posted to North Africa in 1912 , he take part in engagement against rebellious tribesman and become in rapid succession the young captain , major , colonel and general in the army. He develop a reputation for personal valor , for exact discipline and for excellence a an organizer. He be deputy commander of the Spanish Foreign Legion from 1920 to 1923 and commander in chief from then until 1927. He be credit with master- mind the final defeat of the Riff chieftain , Abd-el-Krim. During 1926 Franco study at the Ecole Militaire in France under Marshal Henri-Philippe Petain , with whom he strike up a warm friendship. Returning to Spain , he be director of the Academia General Militar at Saragossa from 1927 until 1931. In that year the incompetent monarchy of King Alfonso XIII fell. He flee the country and a republic be established. The Saragossa academy be dissolve on the ground that it be promonarchist and Franco be post to the Balearic Islands a captain- general. He be bring back in 1933 , when the Spanish Republic move to the right , and he be entrust , in 1934 , with the suppression of the Asturian miner ' revolt. The following year he be name chief of the army general staff. In February , 1936 , Spain elect a Popular Front government , which be dominate by moderate and Socialists. The Communists hold only 17 of 473 seat in the Cortes , or parliament , and the party 's membership throughout the country be estimate at less than 10,000. Later , Communist influence in the Government rise , but the party never dominate the regime. As soon a the election return be post , a general ' plot against the Republic take shape and be lead by Gen. Jose Sanjurjo , in exile in Portugal since the failure of a previous conspiracy in 1932. He visit Germany in February , 1936 , and saw Adm. Wilhelm Canaris , chief of German military intelligence. According to `` the Spanish Civil War '' by Hugh Thomas : `` While Sanjurjo do not actually make any purchase of arm ( since he suppose that his conspiracy would be immediately successful ) he presumably assure himself that German military aid , if it should be necessary to secure the success of the rising , would be contemplate by Canaris at least. '' In addition to General Sanjurjo , other principal plotter be Gen. Emilio Mola Vidal , Gen. Jose Enrique Varela Iglesias , and Gen. Gonzalo Queipo de Llano. Also take part be Jose Antonio Primo de Rivera , the Falangist leader and son of Gen. Miguel Primo de Rivera , the former dictator. Franco , after some initial hesitation , join the conspiracy. Between March and July 18 , 1936 , the day of the rising , the plotter perfect their plans. A private British plane be hire that carry Franco from the Canaries to Teutan in Spanish Morocco , where he be to take command of Moorish and Spanish troops. Meantime , accord to `` The Spanish Republic and the Civil War '' by Prof. Gabriel Jackson , `` the American colonel who head the Telephone Company have place private line at the disposal of the Madrid plotter for their conversation with Generals Mola and Franco. '' Goering Is Consulted Once in Morocco , Franco have to get his troop to Spain , and he accept the offer of Johannes Bernhardt , a Nazi businessman , to supply Junker transports. Of this incident Professor Jackson write : `` On July 21 General Franco accept Bernhardt 's offer. The latter interview Hitler on July 26 at Bayreuth , where the Chancellor be attend the Wagner Festival. `` After consultation with Hermann Goering , chief of the German Air Force , Hitler authorize the immediate dispatch of some 20 JU-52 heavy transports. They be to be fly , unarmed , by German crews. As of July 28 these plane have establish an air ferry between Teutan and Seville. . . . By Aug. 5 the Insurgents be thus able to place some 15,000 troop in Seville despite the Republican naval blockade. '' At the same time Mussolini also begin to commit plane and men to the conspirator , and the flow of this support continue throughout the Civil War. Munitions and men be also send to Franco 's force in great quantity by Hitler. From the outset the rebel receive important support from some element of American business. The American-owned Vacuum Oil Company in Tangier , for example , refuse to sell to Republican ship , accord to Professor Jackson. And the Texas Oil Company , his book asserts , supply gasoline on credit to Franco until the war 's end. The plotter have expect a quick success , but the first day of their revolt be disappointing. Indeed , it seem for a time that they might fail. They have set themselves up a a Nationalist Government at Burgos in the monarchist heartland of Castile in northern Spain , but General Sanjurjo die when his plane , reportedly overload with suitcase of his dress uniform , crash on take-off in Portugal. General Mola also die in a plane crash , and Gen. Manuel Goded be capture and execute by the Spanish Government. New Title Bestowed All three outrank Franco , but a a result of their death he become the Nationalist leader and be so invest in October , 1936. At that time he also receive the title of Generalissimo of the Army. His regime be quickly recognize by Germany and Italy. The Civil War last two year and 254 day before the fall of Madrid to the Franco force on March 28 , 1939. The conflict be wag on both side with great ferocity , but Franco 's side have the preponderance of foreign aid. The Spanish Government , for it part , be able to get some arm from France and the Soviet Union. Despite repeat request , it receive none from the United States. Individual Americans , with men from other nation , fight for the Government in the International Brigades , and the Government cause be the emotional rallying point for thousand of anti-Fascists the world over. Some of these , however , become disillusion after witness the factionalism and terror among the group , include the Communists , that support the Government. In the war one of history 's most publicized experiment in calculated terror occurred. That be the bombing of Guernica on market day , April 26 , 1937 , by the Nazi Condor Legion. It be a Basque town without defense and without military significance. The aviator , in complicity with the Nationalist command , first drop high-explosive bomb on the townspeople , then machine-gunned them in flight and finally fire the town with incendiary bombs. A total of 1,654 person be kill and 889 wound in raid last 2 hour 45 minutes. When the fighting end in 1939 , Franco order shot nearly all captured Republican officer , and his prison contain thousand of so-called `` Reds , '' many of whom be also executed. The United States recognize the new Government on April 1 , 1939 , and the same month Franco sign the anti-Comintern Pact , formally ally Spain with Germany , Italy and Japan. Pope Pius XII , at about the same time , commend Franco for have bring `` mercy and justice '' to his country. World War II , which begin in the fall of 1939 , put Franco in a difficult position. His sympathy be with Hitler and Mussolini , but his nation be too desolate to join the fighting. Key detail of Franco 's relation with Berlin and Rome come to light with the release of captured enemy document after the war. Some of these document , publish by the State Department in 1946 under the title `` The Spanish Government and the Axis , '' reveal his plan to enter the war against the Allies at an opportune moment and to obtain Gibraltar and French Morocco for his prizes. 'Identity of Views' When Hitler conquer France in the spring of 1940 , Franco send him this message : `` In the moment when the German army under your leadership be bring the great battle of history victoriously to an end , I should like to deliver to you the expression of my enthusiasm and admiration as well a that of my people. . . '' Hitler thereupon award Franco the cross of the Order of the German Eagle. Meeting with Mussolini in Italy in February , 1941 , Franco affirm an `` identity of view '' between Spain and Italy. Later that month he write Hitler : `` I consider a you do yourself that the destiny of history have unite you with myself and with the Duce in an indissoluble way. '' However , he resist German demand to use Spain a a stop point on military flight to Africa. But he do permit German tanker to use Spanish coastal water in the refueling of submarine , and he relay to the Axis information of Allied convoy pass through the Strait of Gibraltar. He also help recruit the Spanish Blue Division , which join German troop in the Soviet Union. In the meantime , Franco be hedge his bets. A British-Spanish trade accord be sign in March , 1940 , which be extend to other Allied powers. The dictator make it plain that he be a nonbelligerent. Shortly after the American troop landing in North Africa in November , 1942 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt tell Franco that the Allies harbor no aggressive intention toward Spain. In reply , Franco cite the `` relation of friendship which unite our people and which should be preserved. '' He also remove his brother-in-law , Ramon Serrano Suner , an avowed Axis man , a Foreign Minister. When the fortune of the Axis decline , Franco 's vigilant neutrality increase , although he make at least one effort to promote peace between Germany and Britain so that the two country could undertake `` common action '' against `` the Bolshevik danger. '' After the war , nonetheless , the Allies put Franco temporarily beyond the pale , and the United States and many other nation withdraw their ambassador or minister from Madrid , but keep a charge d'affaires there. The diplomatic boycott of Franco Spain end in fact if not in name in November , 1950 -- a consequence of the cold war between the United States and the Soviet Union , in which Spain occupy a geographically important place. $ 62.5-Million Loan Several month before the boycott be lift , Congress approve a $ 62.5-million loan to Spain. And in February , 1951 , Stanton Griffis become the United States Ambassador to Madrid. That July the late Adm. Forrest P. Sherman open talk with Franco about a defense agreement. Franco realize that this be a turning point for his country , and in January , 1952 , he tell the Council of the Realm : `` Thanks both to God and the tenacity of Spaniards , the sun of our hope begin to shine in the world. '' Later that year he declare `` Spain be now seek after by those who in year past scorn our offer to cooperate against Communism. '' A formal agreement with the United States on base be conclude in September , 1953. Under it Spain give this country the right to use `` a number of Spanish air and naval base for the defense of Western Europe and the Mediterranean. '' The Unites States agree to put up $ 226-million to implement the accord. In 10 year the United States pour into Spain more than $ 1.5-billion in economic assistance and more than $ 500-million in military help. The pact be renew in 1963 , and again in 1970. Spain 's isolation from world affair come to a ceremonial end in 1955 , when she be admit to United Nations membership. This entrance into the community of nation be further signalize in December , 1959 , when President Eisenhower go to Madrid to confer with Franco. As the dictator age , he begin to prepare for a succession. After seem to favor Don Juan , son of Alfonso XIII , who flee the throne in 1931 , he finally settle on Juan Carlos , Don Juan 's son. In present him to the Cortes in 1969 , Franco say : `` Conscious of any responsibility before God and history and take into account the quality to be find in the person of Prince Juan Carlos de Borbon who have be perfectly train to take up the high mission to which he might be call , I have decide to propose him to the nation a my successor. '' The Cortes obediently endorse the Prince , who then swear loyalty to Franco. For all the pervasiveness of his power , the Caudillo , `` by the Grace of God , '' and Generalissimo of the Armies of Land , Sea and Air , and Chief of State for life , be among the least majestic of modern rulers. Standing but 5 foot 3 inch tall , Franco look gnomish even in this general 's gold- trim , olive drab uniform with red silk sash. Unlike Hitler or Mussolini , he never harangue multitude or stir them to fervor. He speak publicly no more than three or four time a year , in a high voice with a slight lisp. His face be so expressionless that when he give his annual New Year 's Eve address on television , the state network show him for only a few minute and flash newsreel clip against his narration the rest of the time. On ceremonial occasion he adopt an august role. Riding in his black Rolls-Royce , which carry the national coat of arm in place of license plate , he be precede by an open car fill with burly red-bereted bodyguard and his route be flank by policeman station 10 yard apart. He demand the homage reserve for royalty , walk under a canopy , for example , at religious rites. Wednesday Audiences His round , mustached face be immobile and his brown eye be appraise and chill. This hauteur be evident at his Wednesday audience for Spanish and foreign civilian and Spanish military men. Strictly accord to protocol , they approach Franco , singly or in groups. There be a brief formal greeting and that be all. Remote in his personality , the dictator nonetheless appear often in public. He attend opening of everything from theater to industrial exhibits. On these occasion , he wave in his stiff , almost timid manner and force a smile here and there ; but there seem to be almost no rapport between him and the population. Crowds regard him a more of an institution than a a person. Franco live and work at El Pardo , a former royal hunt lodge on the outskirt of Madrid. His spacious office be furnish with Aubusson carpet , velvet drapery and gilt- inlaid furniture. The photograph on the wall change over the years. Once there be inscribed portrait of Hitler and Mussolini ; later there be one of President Eisenhower , and that be replace by one of Pope Paul VI. Franco 's ormolu-mounted desk and a nearby table be pile with report and memorandum , virtually all of them unread. `` When the pile become too high , '' he once tell Prince Juan Carlos , `` I have everything take out from the bottom and burned. '' Franco be report to have chuckle at his own remark. He be , however , enormously well-informed , for he listen to his minister and subordinate and visitor , and he read newspaper with care. Some of this listening be do at semimonthly Cabinet meeting , over which he preside with great imperturbability. These session begin at 9 A.M. and often continue all day and through the night , for they deal not only with major matter but also with such trivia a a medal for a minor civil servant. Ministers might argue or step outside for a smoke ( Franco forbid smoke in his presence ) , but the dictator be never know to get up from his chair or to relax the stiffness of his posture. Nor do he often interrupt his minister or decide question precipitously. Franco be celebrate for his secretiveness. `` Not even his collar know what he be think , '' an associate once remarked. Thus , it be difficult to read his mind , and it be not uncommon for a subordinate , even a minister , to leave an audience convince that he have make a splendid impression and the next morning to receive a letter from Franco thank him for his service and inform him that he have be replaced. Flattered in News Media Franco be much flatter by the controlled press , radio and television. It be not unusual for him to be rank above Augustus , Charles V and Napoleon. About 50 town catch the spirit of this sycophancy and add his name. He also have construct a Pharaonic tomb , in which he want to be buried. Called the Valley of the Fallen and dedicate to the Civil War dead , it be situate close to the Escorial , near Madrid. Carved out of living rock , the interior be a basilica , one of the world 's large , and be surmount by a cross 500 foot tall. Franco take a detailed interest in it construction , which cover 15 year and cost millions. Irreverent Spaniards call it `` Franco 's folly , '' but it become a major tourist attraction. An avid sportsman , the dictator like to shoot mountain goat , deer , rabbit and partridges. His bag of these bird sometimes reach 300 a day. Franco 's cruelty be that of the centurion , impersonal and efficient. Once , inspect troop a a colonel of the Spanish Foreign Legion , he have food throw in his face by a legionnaire protest it quality. It spatter his uniform , but his facial expression do not change , nor do he say a word. He merely take out his handkerchief , wipe off the food and continue the inspection. Returning to his office , he calmly call an officer , point out the offender and say : `` Take that soldier out and execute him. '' He exhibit the same methodical cruelty in 1934 when he import legionnaire and Moors to crush an Asturian miner ' uprising. At least 2,000 miner be round up and execute , many of them in the Oviedo bullring. Some officer reportedly seek to halt the slaughter , but Franco send word that the officer must continue or face execution themselves. Virtually a Teetotaler Franco 's home life be simple. He din with his family as often a possible , and lightly to keep his girth down. He be virtually a teetotaler , limit himself to a glass of wine or beer at a meal. There be no hint of personal scandal in his private life. He have marry Carmen Polo y Martinez Valdes , a young woman of good Asturian family , in 1923. If Franco felt any reaction to criticism or have any self-doubt , it be not observable. Indeed , he have a Moslem-like fatalism , the `` maktoob '' ( `` It be write '' ) of the Moroccan rifleman. Horses be shot beneath him. Once a bullet strike a flask from which he be drinking. Leading an assault in 1916 , he be shoot through the abdomen , but recover uneventfully. In 1961 , the barrel of his gun explode in his left hand a he be shoot pigeon , but his hand be saved. A similar fatalism , or impassivity , seem to attend Franco in moment of domestic tension a , for example , when five convict Basque terrorist be execute in September , 1975. Although the Vatican and most Western European country protest or ask for clemency , he have the sentence carry out. The execution also lead to speech at the United Nations and to threaten economic sanction by the Common Market. The regime , however , do not appear to be sway .