April 11 , 1975 OBITUARY Walker Evans Dies ; Artist With Camera By ALDEN WHITMAN Walker Evans , the photographer note for his bleak , abstinent picture of American life , die yesterday of a brain hemorrhage at Yale-New Haven Hospital in Connecticut. He be 71 year old and hold the title of professor emeritus of graphic art at Yale University 's School of Art and Architecture. Mainly in black-and-white and without gimmickry , Mr. Evans 's picture be of sharecropper , automobile graveyard , fade sign , Western ghost town , rumple tenement bed , serried factory windows. Photography , he believe , be the art of see unblinkingly ; and he star the assorted malevolence and aborted promise of American society straight in the face , and they star back. His photograph be detach , even understated , but they all carry his trademark of factual exactness. Apart from influence a young generation of photographer , Mr. Evans 's work affect the way many Americans saw the 20th century , especially the nineteen-thirties. `` With an infinitely great artistry than the Hollywood movie of the period , his photograph embody the moral and esthetic texture of the Depression era with an unrivaled pictorial precision , '' Hilton Kramer , The New York Times art critic , write four year ago. Worked With Agee The essence of Mr. Evans 's viewpoint be embody in the eloquent , uncaptioned photograph he do for the Farm Security Administration in the thirty and in the 31 picture that accompany James Agee 's embittered prose in `` Let Us Now Praise Famous Men : Three Tenant Families , '' publish in 1941. Mr. Evans take many photograph of New York City subway rider with a camera conceal in his topcoat. Eighty-nine of these picture , consider revealing of the mental state of the subject , be publish in `` Many Are Called. '' Some of them be also exhibit to acclaim at the Museum of Modern Art in 1966. Like Henri Cartier Bresson , another great modern photographer , Mr. Evans eschew fancy equipment. Mostly , he use a battered view camera with an old and extremely slow lens. He make his contact print by the light of a mazda bulb and with nothing more elaborate than a few tray , a bottle of developer and a bottle of hypo solution. `` Photography be n't a matter of take picture , '' he often remarked. `` It 's a matter of have an eye. '' The `` eye , '' he believe , be something instinctive. `` With a camera , it 's all or nothing , '' he explained. `` You either get what you 're after at once , or what you do have to be worthless. The essence be do very quietly with a flash of the mind , and with a machine. `` The secret of photography be , the camera take on the personality and the character of the handler. The mind work on the machine -- through it , rather. '' Mr. Evans arrive at photography through ambition to be a writer. Born in St. Louis Nov. 3 , 1903 , he be the son of Walker and Jessie Crane Evans. He grow up in a suburb of Chicago and when his parent separate , live here with his mother and be send , successively , to the Loomis School and Phillips Academy in Andover , Mass. , where he be attract to literature. A year at Williams College , however , be unrewarding , so he drop out and leave for Paris in 1926. There he audit class at the Sorbonne , read Flaubert and Baudelaire , and look at work of art. `` The School of Paris painting be so incandescent then , a revolutionary-eye education , '' he recall , add : `` In recollection , I be really in Paris to absorb intellectual stimulus. The best training in the world. '' He want badly to write , but , he later remark , `` I want so much to write that I could n't write a word. '' He turn to photography in 1928 , discover that he felt immediately comfortable with a camera in his hand. His esthetic viewpoint , he say , be then disdain for the work of Alfred Stieglitz and Edward Steichen , two of the most highly praised photographer of the era. In rebellion against what he saw a commercialism and artiness , Mr. Evans deliberately set out to achieve , he say , `` the elevated expression , the literate , authoritative and transcendent statement which a photograph allows. '' Fascinated by Architecture For a time he be a Wall Street stock clerk , a job in which he meet the poet Hart Crane. Three of Mr. Evans 's picture , his first publish work , be illustration for Crane 's `` The Bridge. '' Mr. Evans be then fascinate by architecture , because he think of photography a one way of preserve segment out of time itself , without regard for the conventional structure of picture-building. Happily , Mr. Evans recall , he be able to join Lincoln Kirstein , the polymath , who point out camera subjects. Together they photograph Victorian house in and around Boston , many of which be later show at the Museum of Modern Art. His work , first appreciate by a small number of critic , draw a wider audience when 31 Evans photograph appear in 1931 in Carleton Beals 's `` The Crime of Cuba , '' a book about ordinary Cubans under a dictatorial regime. From 1935 to 1938 , Mr. Evans be a rove social historian with the photographic unit of the New Deal 's Farm Security Administration. He produce hundred of picture that tell the story of rural poverty , picture that be ultimately collect in 1973 in `` Walker Evans : Photographs for the Farm Security Administration. Executed Photo Essays After his work for the Agee book , Mr. Evans take a job a a writer at Time magazine. `` Two year , and I be just drain dry , '' he say afterward. `` Hard work , and also intellectually degrade and insulting. You have to figure out how not to die , and that be useful too ; it toughen you. '' Mr. Evans shift to Fortune magazine in 1945 , and spend almost 20 year on it staff. For it he conceive an execute his own idea for photo essay , take the picture and write the caption and text. Many of his picture be metaphor , a quality that be convey in `` Message From the Interior , '' publish in 1966. The picture be unpeopled scene of the inside of building that tell a great deal about their occupant and about America. The Museum of Modern Art mount a retrospective exhibition that include more than 200 of his photograph in 1971. Mr. Evans leave no survivors. A memorial in the form of an exhibition of his work will be hold at the Yale University Art Gallery , open next Tuesday and run for two month .