April 6 , 1975 OBITUARY The Life of Chiang Kai-shek : A Leader Who Was Thrust Aside by Revolution By ALDEN WHITMAN Twenty-two year after rise to the leadership of China in a bloody coup against the Communists in 1927 , Chiang Kai-shek lose the . . . gained. And . . . maintained. . . . Communist revolution. Thrust aside at the age of 62 by the convulsion that shake half a billion people and an ancient culture , he spin out his long life on the small island of Taiwan in the East China Sea 110 mile from the mainland. There he preside sternly over a martial group of 2 million Nationalist refugee and about 11 million Taiwanese. At first he talk aggressively of return to the mainland by force ; but a that possibility fade he wait hopefully for the Communist regime to collapse of it own inner tension and for the Chinese to welcome back a faithful statesman. That do not take place either. On the contrary , the People 's Republic of China grow in internal strength and international might , displace Chiang 's regime in the United Nations in 1971 and win diplomatic recognition by 1972 from all the major power except the United States. And even this country , a a result of President Nixon 's visit to Peking in 1972 , all but drop Chiang diplomatically. His bitterness in his last year be enormous. During his year a China 's leader , Chiang rule an uneasy and restive country , beset by intractable domestic strife as well a by armed conflict with Japanese invaders. Although China have a national government for these two decade , there be so much political , social and economic turmoil , so much Japanese aggression to cope with -- it start in 1931 in Manchuria and intensify in 1937 -- that national unity be more fiction that reality. Nonetheless , Chiang be the visible symbol of China ; a member , with Franklin D. Roosevelt , Winston Churchill and Josef Stalin , of the Big Four ; his nation 's supreme commander in World War II ; and the principal architect of a domestic policy that aim , however unsuccessfully , at internal stability. To the world , Chiang 's lean , trim , erect figure bespeak resoluteness and determination. His asceticism and personal austerity seem to befit a man of dedication to the ideal of a China resurgent against insuperable odds. Faced Herculean Tasks Having emerge to power in a country the victim of a quarter-century and more of political decay , Chiang face Herculean task once his National Government at Nanking be recognize by the Western power in November , 1928. With the nation in fragment , he choose to seek political unification by force of arm in precedence to attack fundamental social and economic problem , especially those center on agriculture , in which the great bulk of the population be engaged. Only later , and under enormous pressure , do he turn his attention to rebuff the Japanese. The choice prove unwise , for his campaign and his battle with local satrap permit the Communists to befriend the peasantry , harness the force of social revolution that have be gather since 1911 and , ultimately , to align themselves with a nascent nationalism in the anti- Japanese war. Had China be more than a geographical expression in the nineteen-twenties , Chiang might have impose a viable government on it. But the weakness of the social system be such that his regime be quickly enmesh in corruption and guile. Despite Chiang 's personal probity , he could not contain the rapaciousness of others , with the result that his policy be sap from the start. Compounding this state of affair , the Chinese family system , once a force for stability , prove unsuited to modern nationalism. Many official think more of better their family than they do of further the national interest , a concept difficult in any case for many Buddhist- and Confucian-oriented Chinese to grasp and apply. One result be that widespread nepotism , from which not even Chiang himself be entirely immune , enfeeble the Government and it bureaucracy. To many Americans Chiang be a heroic and embattled figure , the embodiment of a `` new '' China struggle to adapt politically and culturally to the 20th century. He be widely picture a indomitable and a a bulwark against Communism in Asia. From the nineteen-forties onward , Chiang 's chief promoter and partisan be collectively know a the China Lobby. According to W. A. Swanberg , the historian and biographer , `` the China Lobby be an amorphous group , preponderantly Republican , boost Chiang for reason of anti- Communism and also a an issue against the Democrats. '' It include such person a Alfred Kohlberg , an importer of Chinese lace ; Representative Walter H. Judd , Republican of Minnesota ; Senator William F. Knowand , Republican of California ; Mrs. Claire Chennault , widow of the Flying Tiger leader ; Thomas Corcoran , the Washington lawyer ; Senator Styles Bridges , Republican of New Hampshire ; William Loeb , the New Hampshire publisher ; and Henry R. Luce , the publisher of Time , Life and Fortune. Because of an emotional and ideological commitment to Chiang and his command of three national magazine , Mr. Luce be among the lobby 's most powerful members. His periodical publish eulogistic article about Chiang and optimistic assessment of the situation in China. From 1945 to 1949 , the lobby tirelessly pressure Congress and the Administration for military and economic aid to Chiang , at least $ 30-million of which be report to have be pocket by his generals. In all , about $ 3 billion in arm and aid be give Chiang , Seymour Topping estimate in his book `` Journey Between Two Chinas. '' Much of the military equipment , he add , wind up in the hand of Communists. At the same time Gen. David Barr , chief of the American military adviser to Chiang , report to Washington that there be `` complete ineptness of military leader and widespread corruption and dishonesty throughout the arm forces. '' Such be the influence of the China Lobby , however , that this somber evaluation of Chiang 's leadership be submerged. The notion be advance that abandonment of the generalissimo would be an act of surrender to Communism. After the Nationalist debacle which . . . foreseen by General . . . many other Americans on the scene ; the China Lobby help to savage a number of Foreign Service officer in China who have long warn of Chiang 's fatal shortcomings. In the McCarthyite atmosphere of the early fifty , such diplomat a John Paton Davies and John Carter Vincent be accuse of have `` lose '' China to the Communists. Even Dean Acheson , President Harry S. Truman 's Secretary of State , and Gen. George C. Marshall , who have head a fruitless mission to China just after the war , be not immune from attack , although both be stanch anti-Communists. Indeed , in the early fifty , the myth be widely propagate that Chiang be more the victim of State Department `` subversive '' than of his own weaknesses. Even in exile in Taiwan , Chiang retain a remarkable image in the United States. The China Lobby and Mr. Luce continue to praise him and to urge American financial and military support of him ; but into the bargain Chiang fit into the Communist-containment policy of the Eisenhower Administration , a circumstance that help to fortify his position militarily and diplomatically. A pro-Chiang policy carry over into the nineteen-sixties also. Policy Widely Supported Although it seem evident to many that his Taiwan regime be not a world power , it retain not only it membership in the United Nations but also it seat a a permanent member of the Security Council until 1971. The United States consistently vote against the admission of the People 's Republic to the United Nations , and it be widely support in this policy by Americans who saw desertion of Chiang a a betrayal of an old ally and a a concession to the force of Communism. As recently a October , 1972 , Chiang 's partisan , describe him a a `` brilliant leader , '' publicly deplore his Government 's ouster from the United Nations. Another aspect of Chiang that appeal to many in this county be his conversion to Protestantism -- he join the Methodist Church in 1931 -- and his professed devotion to New Testament ideals. Missionaries portray the generalissimo in a favorable light , cite his protection of their activity and his comprehension of Christian ethics. Some of the more visionary of his admirer hop that he would lead the way to the Christianization of China. Chiang , however , be not a missionary ruler , despite his creation of the New Life Movement , a politico-spiritual program contain element of Christianity. Deeply imbue with Confucius ' thought , he believe with the pre-Christian philosopher , `` If the ruler be virtuous , the people will also be virtuous. '' He also believe in rigorous self-examination of his moral action , and he keep a diary in which he set down every week the result of his introspection. This give him both an inner certainty and an insularity to criticism. Scolding his subordinate , he seem like a Savonarola , an impression reinforce by his drawn , monklike face with it severe crop mustache and his shaven pate. And , like a monk , he set aside a time for daily meditation and Bible reading. Moreover , he regularly attend Sunday religious services. Unlike some of his associate , Chiang Kai-shek , whose give name can be render in English a `` Firm Rock , '' lead an austere and frugal life , albeit in surroundings of imperial opulence. He make a point of eat simply and sparingly , drink powder milk or weak green tea. He do not smoke , gamble or indulge in recreation more frivolous than walking. He dress customarily in a natty but otherwise undistinguished brown high-necked tunic and matching trousers. But relax at home he would wear a traditional long gown and skull cap. He speak a rough Mandarin for state occasion , although his conversational tongue be the Ningpo dialect. Another aspect of Chiang 's traditionalism be his belief in a system of personal loyalty , in which the subject be loyal to the ruler , the son to the father , the young to older. This lead to situation where he impute disloyalty to his critic ; it also lead to his reliance on a very small circle of adviser , only a few of whom felt they could speak up to him with impunity. Added to this be a shortness of temper that exhibit itself in bizarre ways. Once , for example , Chiang be witness a movie at home that contain a scene displease to him. He stalk out and order the hapless projectionist thrash soundly. And , on a more consequential level , he be capable of jail or otherwise punish those who cross him. Chiang be very much a product of the breakup of the Manchu Dynasty and the condition of near- anarchy that ensued. He be bear in the waning year of the dynasty -- on Oct. 31 , 1887 , at Fenghua , Chekiang Province , 100 mile south of Shanghai. The son of a petty salt merchant and his `` second wife , '' or concubine , he have a grim boyhood. On this 50th birthday he recall : `` My father die when I be 9 year old. The miserable condition of my family at that time be beyond description. My family , solitary and without influence , become at once the target of much insult and abuse. `` It be entirely due to my mother [ a devout Buddhist ] and her kindness and perseverance that the family be save from utter ruin. For a period of 17 year -- from the age of 9 until I be 25 year old -- my mother never spend a day free from domestic difficulties. '' Meeting with Dr. Sun The event of his youth be obscure , but somehow he be able in 1906 to enter the Paoting Military Academy , where he do well enough to be send to Japan in 1907 for two year of advanced instruction. There he become acquaint with a number of Chinese revolutionary , include , it be say , Dr. Sun Yat-sen , one of the principal founder of modern China. Chiang join the Tung Meng Hul , a secret society that be the forerunner of the Kuomintang , the Nationalist party , which he dominate after Dr. Sun 's death in March , 1925. When revolt break out in China in October , 1911 , Chiang resign from the Japanese Army ( he have sign up a an officer ) , return to the mainland and take the field against the Manchu forces. A capable commander , he lead a successful attack on Hangchow and later hold military position in the Shanghai area. In the next 10 year , however , his fortune be mixed , and it be believe that at one point he quarrel with Dr. Sun. According to O. Edmund Clubb 's `` Twentieth Century China , '' Chiang , make his [ temporary ] exit from the political scene in 1913 and engage in brokerage in Shanghai for nearly a decade. '' `` It be during that period , '' the book say , `` that he establish connection with the powerful political and financial figure in Shanghai that be to have so important an influence on his late orientation. '' By 1921-22 Chiang return to miliary-political life a chief of staff of Dr. Sun 's Canton-based regime. Rickety and in constant clash with warlord and with the shadowy official government in Peking , this regime fortuitously seek and receive military and political help from the newly establish Soviet Union. Chiang be send to Moscow to help organize this assistance , meet many of the top Soviet revolutionary in the process. One result of his mission be that score of Soviet adviser go to China and become influential in the Kuomintang , attempt to give it a left-wing orientation. Indeed member of the new Chinese Communist party be encourage to join it. Chiang , a another consequence of the mission , organize the Whampoa Military Academy , which train officer for the Kuomintang army. With Dr. Sun 's death the bond between Communists and Chiang 's more conservative group in the Kuomintang dissolve and in a tragedy of plot and counterplot Chiang slaughter thousand of Communists and worker in Canton and Shanghai and , in 1927-28 , organize his own National Government at Nanking. According to some China specialist , Chiang be materially help by Shanghai financial interest and wealthy landowners. `` The banker and industrialist of Shanghai , lead by the brilliant Soong-Kung Family group , have now come to term with Chiang , '' George H. Kerr write in `` Formosa Betrayed , '' add : `` Apparently , Chiang make a bargain. In return for financial support on a large scale he agree to exclude left-wing element and Communists from the new 'National Revolutionary Government. ' `` The bargain be cement by a marriage between Chiang and an 'unclaimed jewel ' of the Soong family , the beautiful Soong Mei-ling , age 26 , the young sister of T. V. Soong [ the powerful banker ] . '' The marriage with the American-educated and Christianized Miss Soong be cloud at the outset by dispute over Chiang 's divorce from a previous wife. His subsequent baptism , however , mollify his missionary critic , who become his most persistent and influential advocate among Americans. Over the year Mrs. Chiang be not only a close confidante of her husband but also his best link with the economic power structure. Members of her family hold key Government and party post and dealt also in diplomacy. With the coup that bring Chiang to power , the Chinese Communist party be shattered. Its leader and some member flee the coastal city and find refuge in the Chingkang Mountains of Kiangsi. Over the next few year Chiang , with the expert advice of import Nazi general , seek to eliminate the Communists ; but despite several proclamation of success the Communists prove elusive. In fact , they batten on campaign against them and , after break free of an attempt to trap them in Kiangsi , conduct the epic Long March through the wilderness of western China and reach safety in Yenan in the northwest. Meantime , Chiang 's regime fail to achieve unification of China. True , there be a national currency and a national legislative apparatus ; but what pass for a national administration at Nanking be in fact only one of many regional faction of limited authority and influence. Instead of subdue the more powerful northern warlord , Chiang prefer to make deal ; if they would accept him a titular head of state , he in return would respect their local sovereignty. Thus the Nationalist regime become a loose coalition of military chieftain bound to Chiang by pledge of personal loyalty. This situation be exacerbate by the diversion of Nationalist energy and money into futile pacification drive against the Communists. What make these campaign so vain be that social and land reform under the Nationalists be largely a matter of rhetoric. The Communists , meanwhile , be win the peasantry by put their reform into effect. Despite his aloofness , Chiang be aware that he govern a volatile country ; but his ideological recipe be vague and moralistic , whereas that of the Communists be precise and empirical. The New Life Movement , for example , encourage the . . . piety , and . . . while the Communists , in addition to promise an excite new world , take active step to improve living condition in the here and now. To student and patriot of virtually every political stripe , Chiang 's tepid program seem all the more irrelevant in the face of Japanese aggression. The Japanese threat be unmistakable from 1931 onward , but Chiang 's `` pacification '' project only postpone a confrontation with the Japanese while permit them to gobble up Manchuria and convert it into a puppet state. Alarmed by the possibility that the Japanese would strike southward , the northern warlord rebel in 1936. In theory up to then these warlord , principally Marshal Chang Hsueh-Liang , be battle the Communists in Shensi ; but , in fact , agitation for a united front against the Japanese be so effective that little blood be be shed. Chiang arrive in Sian , Marshal Chang 's capital in December , 1936 , to investigate , and be promptly arrest on Chang 's orders. The generalissimo , attempt to flee in his nightgown , be easily captured. Chang , know a the Young Marshal , present his superior with a series of demand that include immediate cessation of the civil war against the Communists in favor of a general policy of arm resistance to Japan in cooperation with the Communists. Some insurgent want to execute Chiang , but he be save by the timely intervention of the Communist leader Chou En-lai , who travel to Sian to support the national united front program. In weird negotiation involve the Communists , the Chang dissident and high official from Nanking , Chiang capitulate and be released. The shotgun alliance also have one notable side- effect -- a decision by the Soviet Union to bolster Chiang with air power and military advisers. Role in World War II The Japanese , perturb at the prospect of a unified China , strike south from Peking in 1937-38. The ferocity of the onslaught , while it hold the united front together for a time , drive Chinese troop out of key coastal city and oblige the Government to shift it capital from Nanking to the small interior city of Chungking. However , when the Japanese army stall and the war enter a seven- year period of attrition , the Chiang-Communist alliance disintegrate under the impact of mutual suspicion and political intrigue. With United States entry into World War II in late 1941 , American strategists saw China a a potentially effective front against Japan , and military and economic aid be dispatch there. However , Chiang 's relation with Americans send to help him be less that cordial , especially those with Gen. Joseph W. ( Vinegar Joe ) Stilwell , who be send to Chungking in 1942 a Chiang 's chief of staff. Meantime , to overcome what Mr. Clubb describe a Chiang 's `` pronounce reluctance to take the field '' against Japan , the generalissimo be invite , toward the close of 1943 , to confer with President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill at Cairo. There he obtain a promise for the postwar return to China of Manchuria and of Formosa ( Taiwan ) , which have be under Japanese rule since 1895. A plan for joint Allied action in Burma be also agree upon. General Stilwell , who love the Chinese and speak their language , be President Roosevelt 's choice to be commander in chief of Chinese and American force in China. But Chiang and the outspoken general fell out. In his report to the War Department , General Stilwell say that Chiang seek to `` dominate rather than unify and lead '' China against Japan. Confiding to his diary , the general be even more blunt. He write : `` I never have hear Chiang Kai-shek say a single thing that indicate gratitude to the President or to our country for the help we be extend to him. Invariably , when anything be promise he would . . . the huge amount of Lend-Lease supply go to Great Britain and Russia with the meager trickle go to China. He would complain that the Chinese have be fight for six or seven year and yet we give them practically nothing. `` It would have of course be undiplomatic to go into the nature of the military effort Chiang Kai- shek have make since 1938. It be practically zero. '' 'It May Be Too Late' By 1944 , with the military situation in China in disarray save in the Communist-controlled area , the United Nations propose that General Stilwell be give command of the Nationalist troops. `` With further delay , it may be too late to avert a military catastrophe tragic both to China and to our Allied plan for the early overthrow of Japan , '' President Roosevelt cable Chiang. However , accord to `` Stilwell and the American Experience in China '' by Barbara Tuchman , Chiang `` thoroughly intend in his own mind to stay out of the war ... no matter how much of east China be lose , until the Allies should defeat Japan and he could emerge on the winning side. '' Nonetheless , Mrs. Tuchman say , the generalissimo prove devious , give General Stilwell the impression in an interview in September , 1944 , that he be indeed commander of the Chinese Army. At the same time , Chiang interpose condition , among them control of million of American Lend- Lease supply lest any arm get into the hand of the Communists , whose efficient troop General Stilwell want to use against the Japanese. The Communists , Mrs. Tuchman write , be willing to fight under the general , but not under Chiang. Chiang 's backing and filling infuriated General Stilwell. He often refer to the generalissimo in private a `` the Peanut , '' and now his diary contain such phrase a `` that hickory nut he use for a head. '' `` He be impossible , '' the general write at one point. In addition to Lend-Lease control , Chiang want effective authority over the general in the matter of strategy and tactics. In attempt to reach an understanding with Chiang through the wily T. V. Soong , the general remark that what Chiang want in a commander be `` an over-all stooge. '' In the face of Chiang 's calculated reluctance to place General Stilwell in full command , President Roosevelt send the generalissimo a strong , almost peremptory , cable , say , in part : `` It appear plainly evident to all of u here that all your and our effort to save China be to be lose by further delays. '' General Stilwell himself hand the message to Chiang , write afterward that the `` harpoon '' hit the generalissimo `` in the solar plexus and go right through him. '' Shocked though he be by the President 's bluntness , Chiang almost immediately rise to height of wrath. According to Mrs. Tuchman , `` He know he could not accept the American demand ... without open the way to his own discard. If the Americans succeed in impose Stilwell on him against his will , they might do likewise in the matter of the Communists. '' The result be Chiang 's formal demand for General Stilwell 's recall , an action to which a weary President Roosevelt acceded. He be not prepared `` to impose an American commander against the express wish of a chief of state , '' Mrs. Tuchman said. The general 's reaction be succinct and prescient : `` If Old Softy give in on this a he apparently have , the Peanut will be out of control from now on. '' The general 's leavetaking have overtone of comic opera. Chiang offer him the Special Grand Cordon of the Blue Sky and White Sun , a decoration that be refused. There be , though , a final tea. Describing it , Mrs. Tuchman say : `` Chiang Kai-shek , with T. V. Soong at his elbow , be gracious. He regret all this very much , it be only due to difference in personality , he hop [ TEXT MISSING ] . The guest be laconic. '' In a news article on the Stilwell ouster , Brooks Atkinson , a New York Times correspondent in China , write that the action represent the `` political triumph of a moribund antidemocratic regime. '' Chiang 's hold on the Nationalist leadership be prolong , at least temporarily , by mount American success against Japan in the Pacific in 1945 that culminate in that country 's unconditional surrender in August. In December , 1945 , after the close of the war , President Truman send Gen. George C. Marshall to China with order to unify and pacify the country. He exert enormous pressure on Chiang and the Communists to end the civil strife that have erupt afresh with the defeat of Japan. On Jan. 10 , 1946 , a cease-fire accord be sign ; but the truce be quickly breach and before long open civil war rag through the nation. With three million troop to Mao Tse-tung 's one million , Chiang gain the upper hand in the first few month of the war ; but once the Communists felt strong enough to mount an offensive in the spring of 1947 , it be clear where the initiative lay. As Communist force be overrun the country , the United States issue a 1,054-page White Paper , write off Nationalist China and attribute Communist success to Chiang 's military and political errors. Published in the summer of 1949 , the State Department document dourly recount Chiang 's dissipation of the more than $ 3-billion in American aid his regime have receive between August , 1945 , and the middle of 1948. Details of White Paper In assert the futility of additional help to Chiang , Secretary of State Acheson say in the White Paper : `` A large proportion of the military supply furnish the Chinese army by the United States since V-J Day have fall into the hand of the Chinese Communists through the military ineptitude of the Nationalist leader , their defection and surrender , and the absence among their force of the will to fight. `` It have be urge that relatively small amount of additional aid -- military and economic -- to the National Government would have enable it to destroy Communism to China. The most trustworthy military , economic and political information available to our Government do not bear out this view. `` A realistic appraisal of condition in China , past and present , lead to the conclusion that the only alternative open to the United States be full-scale intervention in behalf of a Government which have lose the confidence of it own troop and it own people. '' Earlier , a Nationalist defeat turn into a rout and the Communists be press for the arrest of Chiang and his wife a war criminal , the generalissimo issue a statement of resignation a President of the Republic on Jan. 1 , 1949. Three week later , he pay a ceremonial farewell in Nanking by drive his Cadillac to the Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum. After bow three time before a marble statue of the preeminent founder of modern China , he retire to his birthplace to prepare his retreat to Taiwan. Air and naval unit be transfer to the island along with gold and silver bullion reserves. `` The generalissimo also clamp tight military and police control over the restive Taiwanese , '' Mr. Topping write in `` Journey Between Two Chinas. '' The island have be return to Chinese sovereignty after Japan 's surrender , and some Nationalist force have be send there in 1945. `` The Nationalist troop ... loot and strip the island , which have be develop with Japanese capital [ since 1895 ] , '' the book reported. Many Kuomintang official expropriate land from the Taiwanese for themselves. In February and March , 1947 , the Taiwanese demonstrate against the sacking of their island , demand that the Nationalist governor , Chen Yi , reform his corrupt , dictatorial administration. `` Chen Yi 's response be to bring in additional troop from the mainland and put down the demonstration in an orgy of kill in which between 10,000 and 20,000 Taiwanese be massacre , include several thousand of the island 's political and economic leader and intellectual elite. `` On the generalissimo 's order , Chen Yi eventually be shoot for his excess but the population of the island ... remain hostile to the mainlanders. '' In December , 1949 , Chiang come out of retirement and fly to Taiwan , declare Taipei to be the temporary capital of China , a status it still retain , accord to the Nationalists. On March 1 , 1950 , Chiang announce that he have resume the Presidency of China. In the next two decade he receive hundred of million in American Military aid that permit him to build a smartly turn out armed force. Over the same period , private American capital flow into the island and build up a network of light industry , chiefly in the textile and electronics fields. Low labor cost -- Chiang be not tolerant of trade union -- contribute to creation of an economic boom. Thriving industry , however , be accompany by repressive military rule. Simultaneously , the Nationalists introduce land reform and scientific agricultural practice that permit the island abundant crop , some of them for export. In the bitterness of exile , and defeat , Chiang say : `` I must put the blame on myself. The disastrous military revers on the mainland be not due to the overwhelming strength of the Communists , but due to the organizational collapse , loose discipline and low spirit of the [ Nationalist ] party members. '' Outbreak of Korean Conflict At that moment the generalissimo seem destine to fade away in a shower of rhetoric. He be rescue , however , by an unforeseen international event -- the outbreak of the Korean conflict in June , 1950 , and the participation of the Soviet Union on the side of the North Koreans. The United States assign it Seventh Fleet to the Strait of Taiwan and begin to bolster China a a counterweight to Communism in Asia. Political , economic and military assistance be pour into Taiwan. In May , 1951 , an American mission begin to equip and train a new Nationalist army , which eventually total 600,000 men and eat up the bulk of the island 's budget. Moreover , in 1954 , the United States and the Chinese regime conclude a mutual defense treaty. Chiang , for his part , become embolden to think of return in triumph to the mainland. Inaugurated for a fourth term a President in 1966 , he call himself an `` undiscouraged old soldier , '' and vow that he `` would exterminate Mao Tse-tung and his cohort , liberate our mainland compatriot and establish on the ruin a new country of unity and freedom. '' In private , however , Chiang be less sanguine about his chances. He hop for a return , of course , but he expect that it would follow a political collapse on the mainland. Meantime , he engage himself in keep his army on the ready and in improve the economy of Taiwan. Paradoxically , a the island become more prosperous , many among his follower grow more concerned with benefit from Taiwan 's wealth and less eager to embark on uncertain military ventures. With the year , Chiang 's hold on the political structure of Taiwan tightened. Part of this owe to the deference that Chinese customarily pay to age and part to the vigilance of his secret police and the repression of the regime. Below the surface , however , there be a discreet restiveness among the young son and daughter of the mainland refugee who want a free political and cultural life than Chiang 's regime be willing to accord them. This yearning be join by many Taiwanese , who never cease to resent Chiang 's intrusion in 1949 and who be still bitter over the massacre of thousand of them by Nationalist troops. Chiang 's official international stature begin to erode seriously in the early nineteen-sixties , when support for the admission of the People 's Republic of China to the United Nations gain an increase number of vote with each session of the General Assembly. Finally , in 1971 , the Communists be vote into the world organization. This recognition of the reality of global politics be follow in February , 1972 , by President Richard M. Nixon 's visit to Peking and the establishment of an entente of sort between Peking and Washington. The United States , however , do not immediately recognize the People 's Republic and thus continue diplomatic relation with Chiang. Later in 1972 Japan recognize Peking , far isolate Chiang in the world community. In 1972 Chiang be swear in for his fifth six-year term a head of state , but soon afterward he fell ill and tacitly surrender control to his elder son , Chiang Ching-kuo , the child of his first marriage , who have be name Deputy Premier. Chiang and his second wife be childless ; another acknowledge son , Chiang Wei-kuo , shun political life. Though enfeeble toward the close of his life , Chiang never admit defeat. Last December , the 25th anniversary of his arrival on Taiwan , pass a an all-but-forgotten occasion. There be no speech , editorial or public commemoration. Indeed , it be more than two year since the generalissimo have appear in public , and there have be no new photograph of him in more than a year .