June 6 , 1976 OBITUARY J. Paul Getty Dead at 83 ; Amassed Billions From Oil By ALDEN WHITMAN J. Paul Getty , a symbol of oil , wealth and power , die early today at his country mansion near London. He be 83 year old. The cause of death be report to be heart failure. An American by birth , Mr. Getty have live in Britain for nearly 25 years. He have be in fail health for several months. Business associate who announce Mr. Getty 's death say that the director of the Getty Oil Company , of which Mr. Getty be still president , have already provide for the delegation of authority within the company and that normal business operation would continue. The precise extent of Mr. Getty 's wealth be difficult to compute , but in 1974 business associate put his fortune at from $ 2 billion to $ 4 billion. He have a majority or control interest in the Getty Oil Company and nearly 200 other concerns. Mr. Getty tend to be reclusive in his last years. He speak several time of want to return to Southern California , where he have live for many year -- but he never did. On his 80th birthday , duke and duchess , count and countess , banker , business leader and dressmaker turn up for a London party at which Margaret , Duchess of Argyll , be the hostess. A vocalist sum it all up by sing to the Cole Porter tune : You 're the top , your be J. Paul Getty you 're the top , and your cash ai n't petty. In 1957 , when Fortune magazine first suggest that Jean Paul Getty be probably the world 's rich private citizen , he be ask the inevitable question : how much would he really get in cash if he be to sell his oil , realty , art and other holding ? A note of gone- are-the-better-days crept into his response. `` I would hope to realize several billion , '' he said. `` But , remember , a billion dollar be n't worth what it use to be. '' Hardships of Fame Mr. Getty , of course , do not sell out , and seven or eight year later , when his fortune have very much and very visibly increase , he be complain of the hardship of wealth and the fame that accompany it. The fame , it appear , have generate the hardships. But these be not so great a to make them unbearable , nor to render fame less desirable than obscurity. Before 1957 Mr. Getty cultivate wealth in the relative shadow of the oil business here and abroad. He be also know by some newspaper reader for his purchase of the Pierre Hotel in New York and for his five marriage and an equal number of divorces. Once , however , the awesome vastness of his rich be make generally know he acquire celebrity. This he burnish by write article in mass-circulation magazine and by put his name to two books. '' For Young Executives One be `` My Life and Fortunes , '' publish in 1953 by Duell , Sloan & Pearce. The other be `` How to Be Rich , '' issue in 1965 by Playboy Press and consist in part of article Mr. Getty have compose , he say , for the `` young executive and college student , '' who read Playboy magazine. He also permit himself to be the subject of a biography. `` The Richest American , '' by Ralph Hewins , which be publish by Dutton in 1960. The oilman 's grandson , J. Paul Getty 3d , be kidnap in Italy in 1973 , and the oilman be ask to pay a $ 16 million ransom. He balk on the ground that `` I have 14 other grandchild and if I pay one penny now , then I 'll have 14 kidnap grandchildren. '' Eventually , however , the Getty family do pay $ 2.8 million , but how much Mr. Getty contribute be never disclosed. A List of Grievances Mr. Getty 's principal grievance about be very rich be these : People beseech him for money. People overcharge him or expect him to tip generously. He could never be certain that he be like for himself. Most people , the oilman say he have discover after 1957 , be `` so economically illiterate that they assume most of my fortune be in cash , '' whereas in fact all the fold money he have be a million dollar ; and that be so parsimoniously budget by his accountant that he rarely carry more than $ 25 in his pockets. The result of this lamentable public ignorance be that he receive , he say , 3,000 letter a month from stranger , all seek money. Recounting his plight in a magazine article entitle `` It 's Tough to Be a Billionaire , '' Mr. Getty say that `` I never give money to individual '' because `` it 's unrewarding and wrong. '' Returning to this theme in 1965 in a Saturday Evening Post article entitle `` The World Is Mean to Millionaires '' ( why he have diminish his wealth status since 1958 be not explain ) , Mr. Getty say : `` If I be convince that by give away my fortune I could make a real contribution toward solve the problem of world poverty , I 'd give away 99.5 percent of all I have immediately. But a hard-eyed appraisal of the situation convince me this be not the case. '' `` However admirable the work of the best charitable foundation , it would accustom people to the passive acceptance of money , '' he added. This , he believe , be corrupting. Always Handed the Bill As for be gouge , Mr. Getty say that at luncheon or dinner with friend waiter automatically hand him the bill. `` It 's not the money I object to , it 's the principle of the thing that bother me -- to say nothing of the monotony of it , '' he wrote. `` Even the simple , everyday matter of tip can become a major problem , '' he continued. `` If I tip well , someone be certain to accuse me of show off. If I do n't overtip , that someone will be the first to sneer `` penny-pincher ! '' '' Mr. Getty say he find himself lonely because so many people like him for his bank balance while ignore his other virtues. `` Time be the only yardstick by which I can judge who be -- and who be n't -- really friend , '' he say , add significantly : `` I 've know many people for year who have never ask me for anything. '' Providing Incentives Was be so rich worth all the trouble ? Mr. Getty be ask when he attain the age of 73. `` Though our reward may be small , '' he say of himself and his fellow Midases , `` we be , if our society be to remain in it present form , essential to the nation 's prosperity. We provide others with incentive which would not exist if we be to disappear. '' Although the oilman obviously like to talk about his money , he insist that it be all rather vulgar. `` I do n't think there be any story in be know a a moneybag , '' he assert in his Oklahoma drawl. `` I 'd rather be consider a businessman. '' Indeed , business be Mr. Getty 's life. One of his former wife once remark , perhaps astringently , that business be his `` first love '' and that wealth be merely a byproduct. Describing how he often work 16 and 18 hour a day to handle the complex transaction of his multifarious business dealing , Mr. Getty seem to agree. `` I ca n't remember a single day of vacation in the last 45 year that be not somehow interrupt by a cable , telegram or telephone call that make me tend to business for at least a few hour , '' he write in 1965. `` Such work schedule and the need for devote the majority of my time to business have take a heavy toll of my personal life. '' Boss of His Business He make a point of be the bos of all of his business , even at one time make his executive stand at attention in his presence. When the head of one of his company venture a proposal , Mr. Getty cut him off. `` Who do that fellow think he be ? '' he said. `` Why , he 's nothing but a damned office boy. '' In a less irritated moment , he say of property that include `` Tidewater Oil , Skelly Oil and Getty Oil , `` I own my own companies. How many others do ? There be just a few like me left. '' Mr. Getty seem to alternate between express pride over his undoubted entrepreneurial genius and boast about his penny-saving habits. He like to recount , for example , how he have once wait with a party of friend to get into a dog show at a reduced price. `` I 've always watch thing like that , '' he said. He also like to be thrifty in other way -- wash his own sock , for one thing. `` I have do it and I 'll probably do it again , '' he tell one interviewer. Mr. Getty be seat at the time in the cushioned comfort of a Sheraton armchair in Sutton Place , his elegant 72-room mansion near Guildford , Surrey , 35 mile from London. This be one of several home , the others be a place at Malibu Beach , Calif ; a spot at Mina Saud on the Persian Gulf , and a 15th-century palace and nearby castle at Ladispoli , on the coast northwest of Rome. He first begin to occupy his Italian estate in 1966 , when the rigor of British winter drive him from London. Bought Residence From Duke After 1959 the oilman 's principal residence be in Britain. Previously he have lead a restless life , run his business for many year from hotel suites. After World War II , he virtually expatriate himself from the United States. He could usually be find in those year at the George V in Paris or the Ritz in London. He buy the 400-year-old Sutton Place in 1959 from the Duke of Sutherland for about $ 840,000 because it be convenient for his Middle East oil enterprise and because , he say , it be cheaper in the long run than living in a hotel. Typically , one of Mr. Getty 's first renovation be the installation of oil central heating. He also substitute a highly mechanized team of four gardener for the previous 24 who have tend the 700-acre , two-swimming-pool estate , on which there be also 30 cottage and lodge , tennis court and a trout stream. Sutton Place be soon make into a garrison in conformity to Mr. Getty 's penchant for privacy. An elaborate security system be instal , and every room , include the 14 bathroom ( one of them with gold fixture ) be wired. Windows and door be bar , too ; and 'No Trespass ' sign be erect to warn visitor of the giant Alsatian dog that have the run of the place. Mr. Getty transfer part of his art collection to Sutton Place. Valued at more than $ 4 million , it include work by Tintoretto , Titian , Gainsborough , Romney , Rubens , Renoir , Degas and Monet. Perhaps the most talked about feature of the mansion however , be the pay telephone booth that Mr. Getty have instal so that his guest , a he explain it , do not need to feel they be impose on their host. Mr. Getty 's seem ambiguity perplex his business associate and friends. He be a somber man who stand imposingly at 5 foot 11 inch and who weigh a muscular 180 pounds. A long fleshy nose dominate his pale , stern face with it pinched lips. He have blue eye beneath heavy lids. His hair , which he touch up from time to time , be dark and carefully brushed. When he wear gold-rimmed spectacle for read he look rather professorial. Indeed , he possess a keen mind and a tenacious memory -- one so full of detail , it be say , that he could recite with ease the circumstance of complex financial dealings. Mr. Getty have a better-than-average knowledge of petroleum geology ; know his way about in the art world ; be fluent in English , German , French and Italian and could get along commendably in Spanish , Arabic , Russian and Greek ; and could read Latin and ancient Greek without too many hesitations. He constantly worry about the state of his health. He eat health food , chew each mouthful 33 time ; munch maple sugar candy between meal , work at Bernarr Macfadden body-building exercise and walk two mile a day wear a pedometer to calculate his mileage. He like to pretend to poverty by wear rumpled suit and sweater out at the elbow. He also like to practice the prerogative of wealth by attend splendid social gathering and by escort comely woman many year his junior to parties. He be a friend of the Duke and Duchess of Windsor and of many correspondingly notable and fashionable people here and abroad. Posed With Beatle He think of himself a a man who yearn for privacy. Yet certainly after Fortune emblazon his wealth , he court publicity. His appearance in the British press be quite frequent , both a contributor ( `` How to Make a Million Dollars '' ) and a a subject , in which capacity he be photograph contemplate masterpiece in the Hanover Gallery ; be fit for a hat at Lock 's ; get a haircut in St. James 's ; drive a Lotus racing car at 85 mile an hour around the Goodwood Circuit ; pose with Ringo Starr , the Beatle , at a birthday luncheon at Trader Vic 's in the London Hilton ; masticate at a Foyes literary luncheon and grapple with the twist at a party in his Sutton Place for child from a Church of England home. Mr. Getty be an art collector of note who write about his hobby in a book , `` The Joys of Collecting '' ( 1965 ) , and who explain some of his expertise in another book , `` Europe in the Eighteenth Century '' ( 1949 ) . His collection , of more than 600 item , be house partly in Sutton Place and partly in a gallery of his ranch home at Malibu. Mr. Getty start his collection in the nineteen- thirties. He purchase the house and 60-acre ranch near Los Angeles in 1943 , and later he add the gallery wing. At that time he place the estate under a trust fund a the J. Paul Getty Museum , which be open to the public in 1954. Some art object be give to the Los Angeles County Museum. These include the legendary Ardabil Persian Carpet that have be make on the royal loom of Tabriz in 1535 and Rembrandt 's `` Martin Looter. '' Other Malibu item include the Persian `` Coronation Carpet , '' 18th-century Beauvais tapestry , 18th-century French and English furniture , rock crystal , chandelier and fine example of Greek and Roman sculptures. There be also a somewhat less fine bust of the donor. 'Born at Right Time' All this , and additional acquisition be house after 1973 in a Roman villa-style museum on Mr. Getty 's Malibu property. The building , fashion after one found in the ruin of a town near Pompeii , be often criticize by art professional but it delight the public , which clamor for ticket of admission. Mr. Getty credit his global oil empire ( and the rich it gush for him ) to his father 's foresight and his own luck and ingenuity. `` In build a large fortune , '' he once say , `` it pay to be bear at the right time. I be bear at a very favorable time. If I have be bear earlier or later , I would have miss the great business opportunity that exist in World War I and later. `` I suppose it take a long time and it take extraordinary circumstance to be bear at the right time and have cash money available at the right time. I be fortunate due to my father 's foresight and my good luck. In the Depression I do what the expert say one should not do. I be a very big buyer of oil company stocks. '' Born in Minneapolis Dec. 15 , 1892 , Jean Paul Getty be the son of George Franklin Getty , a lawyer who go into the oil business in Oklahoma in 1903 and two year later move to California. There Paul be reared. He attend Harvard Military Academy and Polytechnic High School , both in Los Angles , graduate in 1909. In the next two year he study at the University of Southern California at Los Angeles and the University of California at Berkeley. Then he go to Oxford for two year where , in 1914 , he take his diploma in politics and economics. At 21 he arrive in Tulsa Okla. , ready for work and determine to make a million in two years. This be the site of his millionaire father 's Minnehoma Oil Company. `` I start in September , 1914 , to buy [ oil ] lease in the so-called red-beds area of Oklahoma , '' Paul Getty say afterward. `` The surface be red dirt and it be consider impossible there be any oil there. My father and I do not agree and we get many lease for very little money which later turn out to be rich leases. '' Made His Million By buy and sell oil lease with his father 's backing young Getty make his million by June , 1916 , and retire to Los Angeles , where he live a gaudy , girl-filled life for two years. In 1919 he return to business with his father in buy and sell lease and drill wildcat wells. More money roll in. In 1923 , when he be 30 , Mr. Getty marry Jeannette Dumont , 18. She be the mother of his first child , George Franklin Getty 2d , and the first of his five wives. The others , also all young than himself , be Allene Ashby , a Texas rancher 's daughter , whom he marry in 1925 ; Adolphine Helmle , a German girl , whom he marry in 1928 and who be the mother of his second son , Jean Ronald ; Ann Rork , a film starlet , whom he marry in 1932 and who be the mother of two son , Eugene Paul and Gordon Peter ; and Louise Dudley Lynch , a debutante and cabaret singer , whom he marry in 1939 and who be the mother of a son , Timothy , who die at the age of 12. His parent be divorce in 1958. Most of Mr. Getty 's former wife have a good word for him and he for them. He also express regret for all his divorce `` because I do n't like anything to be unsuccessful. '' Left $ 500,000 by Father Sharpening his oil talent to the point of genius in the nineteen-twenties , Mr. Getty accumulate about $ 3 million , include a one-third interest in a company that be to evolve into the Getty Oil Company. Mr. Getty 's father be please by his son 's business acumen but shock by his marriage , and when he die in 1930 he leave his son only $ 500,000 of an estate of $ 10 million. Most of the estate , which have sprung from a $ 5,000 oil investment in 1903 , go to Paul Getty 's mother. In the Depression he pick up the Pacific Western Oil Corporation , a hold company with large oil reserve and a heavy cash balance. He also dicker with his mother to win a controlling interest in the Getty concern. Then , in a drawn-out series of maneuver in which he display an extraordinary patience and shrewdness , he obtain control , by 1953 , of the Mission Corporation and it holding in Tidewater Oil ( then call Tide Water Associated Oil Company ) and Skelly Oil Company. These company with their reserve , refinery and retail business eventually become part of a pyramid of corporation , at whose apex stand the Getty Oil Company , which be more than 80 percent own by Mr. Getty. They constitute the chief ingredient of his fortune in the United States. In a complicated rearrangement in 1967 , Mr. Getty merge the Tidewater Oil Company and the Mission Development Company into the Getty Oil company. The survive company then have asset of more than $ 3 billion , a figure since multiply after oil price increase in 1973. Shortly afterward , he estimate that his profit be 10 percent of assets. Mr. Getty be ask then what satisfaction he derive from make so much money. `` It be just to prove that you can keep step with the regiment , '' he reply , allude to Exxon , Gulf and Texaco , the other giant oil corporation , he seem to regard a his rivals. Book on Oil Business In the year Mr. Getty be wheel in oil stock and battle Standard Oil for control of Tidewater and Skelly , he live mostly in an enormous penthouse at 1 Sutton Place , New York , that he have lease from Mrs. Frederick Guest. He conduct a vigorous social life there and also find time to write his first book , `` History of the Oil Business of George Franklin Getty and J. Paul Getty , 1903-39. '' He also get into the hotel business in that period by purchase the Pierre at Fifth Avenue and 60th Street for $ 2,350,000 in 1938. Twenty year later he sell most of the suite to resident while retaining , through a subsidiary company , the service room -- the bar , restaurant and reception rooms. To the rear of the Pierre , at 600 Madison Avenue , be the 22-story Getty Building , which he build in the late fifty and which he own through Getty Oil. He also own , again through corporate device , a skyscraper in Los Angeles , an office building in Tulsa and the Pierre Marques Hotel at Revolcadero Beach near Acapulco , Mexico. The day the United States enter World War II , in 1941 , Mr. Getty dispatch a telegram to an old friend , Under Secretary of the Navy James V. Forrestal. The message , quote in Mr. Getty 's autobiography read : `` I be 49 but in good health , have own three yacht and be experience in their care and maintenance. If Navy can use me in any capacity , please advise. Regards. '' The Navy reject him for sea duty , but Secretary Frank Knox suggest he do something about the Spartan Aircraft Company , a Skelly and hence Getty subsidiary in Tulsa. He do , and in the war Spartan manufacture trainer and plane part under Mr. Getty 's personal direction. Afterward , the company convert profitably to production of mobile homes. In the postwar year Mr. Getty execute the most daring coup of his business career when , in 1949 , he obtain a 60-year concession in Saudi Arabia 's half of the Neutral Zone , a barren tract lie between Saudi Arabia and Kuwait , in which no oil have be discovered. He pay King Saud $ 9.5 million in cash for the concession and agree to pay $ 1 million a year for it duration whether or not oil be struck. Gamble Pays Off After an investment of $ 30 million , the gamble pay off when the Getty interest hit oil in enormous quantity in 1953. Production from that field , which be in excess of 16 million barrel a year , help to elevate Mr. Getty into the billionaire class. In addition to his holding in oil ( include a tanker fleet with a ship name for him ) , real estate , trailer home and hotel , Mr. Getty have interest in the Minnehoma Insurance Company and the Spartan Cafeteria Company , all in Oklahoma. Mr. Getty 's ability ( and agility ) in amass his fortune awe most of his business contemporaries. `` He be comparable to Henry Ford , Commodor Vanderbilt or Andrew Mellon , '' one Wall Street broker said. His son be awe , too. One of them , George , who die in 1973 , once put it this way : `` Mr. Getty be the smart businessman I know. Coming to see him be like visit Mount Olympus. '' Mr. Getty be incline to agree that he occupy some sort of special status , although he be modest in his expression. `` I 'm a bad bos , '' he say self-analytically. `` A good bos develop successors. There be nobody to step into my shoes. '' Mr. Getty be survive by three son , J. Ronald Getty , J. Paul Getty Jr. , and Gordon Peter Getty , 16 grandchild and one great-grandchild .