September 10 , 1976 OBITUARY Mao Tse-Tung : Father of Chinese Revolution By Fox Butterfield Special to The New York Times HONG KONG , Sept. 9 -- Mao Tse-tung , who begin a an obscure peasant , die one of history 's great revolutionary figures. Born at a time when China be wrack by civil strife , beset with terrible poverty and encroach on by more advanced foreign power , he live to fulfill his boyhood dream of restore it to it traditional place a a great nation. In Chinese term , he rank with Chin Shih-huang , the first Emperor , who unify China in 221 B.C. , and be the man Chairman Mao most like to compare himself to. With incredible perseverance and consummately conceive strategy , he harness the force of agrarian discontent and nationalism to turn a tiny band of peasant into an army of million , which he lead to victory throughout China in 1949 after 20 year of fighting. Along the way the army fought battle as big a Stalingrad and suffer through a heroic march as long a Alexander's. Then , after establish the Chinese People 's Republic , Mao launch a series of sweeping , sometimes convulsive campaign to transform a semifeudal , largely illiterate and predominantly agricultural country encompass almost four million square mile and a fifth of the world 's population into a modern , industrialized socialist state. By the time of his death China have manufacture it own nuclear bomb and guide missile and have become a major oil producer. With China 's resurgence , Mao also chart a new course in foreign affair , put an end to a century of humiliation under the `` unequal treaty '' impose by the West and win new recognition and respect. Finally , in 1972 , even the United States abandon it 20 year of implacable hostility when President Richard M. Nixon journey to Peking , where he be receive by a smile Mao. At the same time he brook no opposition to his control. To consolidate his new regime in the early 50 's he launch a campaign in which hundred of thousand be executed. In the late 50 's , despite criticism from other party leader , he order the Great Leap Forward , ultimately cause widespread disruption and food shortages. Throughout his year in power he topple one of his rival after another in the party. In the Cultural Revolution he risk throw the country into chaos. While China achieve enormous economic progress under Mao , some critic felt his constant political campaign and his emphasis on conformity finally reduce many Chinese to a dispirit , anxious mass ready to go along with the late shift in the political wind. Complex Figure One of the most remarkable personality of the 20th century , Mao be an infinitely complex man -- by turn shrewd and realistic , then impatient and a romantic dreamer , an individualist but also a strict disciplinarian. His motif seem a mixture of the humanitarian and the totalitarian. He himself once comment that he be `` part monkey , part tiger , '' and perhaps after all he be rive with the same contradiction he be fond of analyze in the world around him. A Chinese patriot , a combative revolutionary , a fervent evangelist , a Marxist theorist , a soldier , a statesman and poet , above all Mao be a moralist who deeply believe , a have Chinese since Confucius , that man 's goodness must come ahead of his mere economic progress. Like many Chinese of the past 100 year , anger by the insult of imperialism , he want to tear China down to make it stronger. He envision create in China an egalitarian , revolutionary utopia in which mass enthusiasm provide the motive force. `` I have witness the tremendous energy of the mass , '' Mao write in 1958 in the midst of the Great Leap Forward , one of his big but ultimately most disruptive campaigns. `` On this foundation it be possible to accomplish any task whatsoever. '' The two sentence be a striking summary of his thought. Unlike many great leader , Mao never exercise , or seek , absolute control over day-to-day affairs. But the man who rise from humble beginning in a Hunan village become virtually sovereign , if not a living god , to the 800 million Chinese. His very word be the doctrine of the state. Printed in million of little red plastic-bound book a `` Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse- tung , '' they be take to possess invincible magic properties. Power , Prestige and Anxieties Although Mao be a devoted Leninist who , like his Russian predecessor , stress the need for a tightly organize and discipline party , he come to cast himself above his party and seek to replace it with a personal cult when it thwart him. Despite awesome power and prestige , in the late year of his life -- from about 1960 onward -- he seem obsess by anxiety that the Chinese revolution be in danger of slip back into the old elitism and bureaucratic way of imperial China. This danger appear all the great , in his eye , because of the concurrent development in the Soviet Union of what he term `` revisionism. '' In Mao 's view , Nikita S. Krushchev 's emphasis on material incentive to increase consumer- oriented production and the clear emergence of a privileged party elite be anathema. Looking at the problem in China , Mao complain in 1964 , with perhaps characteristic exaggeration , `` You can buy a branch secretary for a few pack of cigarette , not to mention marry a daughter to him. '' To revitalize China , to cleanse the party and to insure that the revolution survive him , Mao launch the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in 1966. As he concede later , it have consequence even he do not foresee. Party Unity Undermined Hundreds of thousand of youngster be mobilize a Red Guards. Often unruly , give to fight among themselves , they roam the country and humiliate and chastise Mao 's opponent in the party after his call to `` bombard the headquarters. '' After two year of turmoil , economic disruption and even bloodshed , order be finally restore , with help from the increasingly powerful army under Lin Piao , then Minister of Defense , and some survive party leader of a less radical bent such a Prime Minister Chou En-lai. But Mao have severely undermine the critical and long-standing unity of the party , forge in the 1930 's during the epochal Long March -- an anabasis of 6,000 mile that take the fledgling army over mountain , river and wasteland from Kiangsi , in South China , to Shensi , in the northwest. Foremost among those purge in the Cultural Revolution be Liu Shao-chi , head of state , and Teng Hsiao-ping , the Secretary General of the party , who be label `` capitalist roaders. '' Mr. Liu , for year one of Mao 's close associate , have serve a head of state since 1959 , when Mao relinquish the post in order to give his potential successor more experience. Mao 's only official post after that be Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party 's Central Committee. Marshal Lin , for his role in keep the army behind Mao and his constant and fulsome praise , be term `` Comrade Mao Tse-tung 's close comrade in arm and successor '' and his inheritance be engrave in the 1969 party constitution. But Marshal Lin last only two year ; accord to the official version , he die in a plane crash in Mongolia in 1971 after try to escape to the Soviet Union when his plot to kill Mao be discovered. Even more bizarre , Mao insist in letter and speech that have since reach the outside world that he have be suspicious of Marshal Lin as early a 1966 and have use him only to help get rid of Mr. Liu. For several year after Marshal Lin 's death , the redoubtable Mr. Chou , a master administrator and conciliator , help the visibly age Mao lead the country and embark on what seem a sustained period of economic growth. But Mr. Chou 's death from cancer in January 1976 leave the daily leadership in the hand of Mr. Teng , the former party Secretary General whom Mr. Chou resurrect in 1973 , evidently with Mao 's approval , and instal a senior Deputy Prime Minister and likely successor. An Even Quicker Fall Mr. Teng then fell victim to Mao 's suspicion even more quickly than have Mr. Liu and Marshal Lin. Only three month after Mr. Chou 's demise , Mr. Teng be strip of his post , castigate once again a a `` capitalist-roader within the party '' and accuse by Mao of misinterpret his personal directive by overstress economic development. In these late year there be some who think that Mao appear a an age autocrat , give more and more to whim. His invitation last winter to Mr. Nixon to revisit Peking , the scene of his great triumph a President , be view a a possible sign of a man become divorce from reality , though it be understandable in Chinese term a a kind gesture to a good friend. Mao make his last public appearance in 1971 ; in publish photograph since then he often look like a sick man. His apparent difficulty in control the movement of his hand and face and his slurred speech stir speculation that he have suffer a stroke or have Parkinson 's disease. Yet he continue to receive a succession of foreign visitor in his book-lined study , sit slouch down in a tartan-covered chair , and he apparently remain active in the political conflict that divide Peking. One of his last act , it be say , be to select a final successor , Hua Kuo-feng , a relative unknown who have spend his early party career in Mao 's home district , Hsiang-tan , in Hunan. Whether the two men have a close personal relationship be not clear. Rift With Moscow In recent year Mao have also be preoccupy with China 's monumental quarrel with the Soviet Union , one of the pivotal development of the postwar world. From the Chinese side the conflict be partly doctrinal , over Mao 's concern that Soviet revisionism be a dangerous heresy that threaten to subvert the Chinese revolution. It be partly political and military , concern with Mao 's effort first to resist Moscow 's domination of the Chinese party and later to defend against Soviet troop on China 's border. It be partly territorial , over Peking 's contention that Czarist Russia have annex Chinese territory. Although few outsider perceive it until the quarrel surface in the early 1960 's , it be clear now that the trouble have it origin in the early contact between the Chinese Communists and the Russians in the 1920's. It be a period when Mao and others in the newly organize Chinese party be grope for a way to power , and Stalin , from the distance of Moscow give them order that repeatedly lead them into disaster. Stalin and his representative from the Communist International who serve a adviser in China -- Mao dub them `` imperial envoy '' -- first direct the Communists to ally with Chiang Kai-shek 's Nationalists. Then , after Generalissimo Chiang turn on the Communists in 1927 , massacre thousand , Stalin order the party to anticipate a `` revolutionary upsurge '' in the city by the ( largely nonexistent ) proletariat. Mao be shorn of his post and power in the early 1930 's a a result of direct Soviet interference. It be only after the Communists be force to begin the Long March in 1934 , after more error in strategy , that Mao win command because of his genius for organize and lead peasant guerrilla in a revolution in the countryside. His First Journey Abroad When Mao travel triumphantly to Moscow -- it be his first journey abroad -- at the end of 1949 , soon after set up his government , he immediately run into the first foreign policy crisis of the People 's Republic of China in the form of a two-month argument with Stalin over term of an aid agreement and Soviet concessions. Although Mao be to try the Soviet model of economic development , with it emphasis on heavy industry , for a few year , by the mid-1950 's he come to have doubt about it , both for it utility in a basically agricultural country such a China and because of the bureaucratic , elitist and capitalistic tendency -- material incentive -- it bring with it. A series of event in the mid- and late-1950 's turn this history of uneasy relation into bitter wrangling and eventually open arm clashes. First among these be Nikita S. Khrushchev 's speech in 1956 denounce Stalin for his brutality and personality cult. Mao , who by then envision himself a the world 's major Marxist-Leninist thinker and revolutionary , be catch by surprise. He resent not be consult , and he be put in an awkward position by revelation by Mr. Khrushchev , then the party leader. There follow in rapid succession the evident Soviet complicity in the affair of Peng Teh-huai , the Chinese Defense Minister who be purge in 1959 after criticize Mao for the chaos of the Great Leap Forward : Moscow 's failure to support Peking in a border clash with India , the offshore islands crisis with Taiwan and Washington , and finally the abrupt withdrawal of all Soviet technician in July 1960 , cancel hundred of agreement to build factory and other installations. At the same time Mr. Krushchev label the Chinese leader a madman in a speech to the Rumanian Party congress , and Mao be soon to tell his colleague that `` the party and state leadership of the Soviet Union have be usurp by revisionists. '' The conflict reach it climax in the winter of 1969 , when Soviet and Chinese patrol clash along the frozen bank of the Ussuri River. Thereafter the Russians continue to build up their army , navy and air force along the Chinese frontier until a fourth of their troop be station in the area. Mao spent hour lecture every visit head of state on the danger of Soviet expansionism -- hegemonism , a he term it. His belief that Soviet `` social-imperialism '' be the great threat to peace enabled him to take a more sanguine view of the United States and help bring about the gradual improvement in relation after 1972. An Austere Style Although Mao command enormous authority -- in 1955 , in a casual talk with local official , he overturn the provision of the five-year plan fix only a day before by the National People 's Congress -- he shun the trapping of might. He seldom appear in public , perhaps to preserve a sense of awe and mystery , and he eschew fancy dress or medal , in conformity with the simple standard he himself have set during his guerrilla days. Whatever the occasion , he wear only a plain gray tunic button to the neck and trouser to match that come to be call a Mao suit in the West and for a period in the 1970 's become a fashion craze. Edgar Snow , the American journalist who in 1936 become the first Westerner to meet Mao , felt that his style owe much to the simplicity , if not roughness and crudeness , of his peasant upbringing. He have the `` personal habit of a peasant , plain speaking and plain living , '' Mr. Snow report after a visit to the Communists ' guerrilla headquarters in Shensi , near Yenan. Mao be completely indifferent to personal appearance ; he live in a two-room cave like other peasant `` with bare , poor , map-covered walls. '' His chief luxury be a mosquito net , Mr. Snow find , and he own only his blanket and two cotton uniforms. `` Mao 's food be the same a everybody 's , but be a Hunanese he have the southerner 's ai-la , or love of pepper , '' Mr. Snow wrote. `` He even have pepper cook into his bread. Except for this passion , he scarcely seem to notice what he ate. '' In the classic `` Red Star Over China , '' the first public account of Mao , Mr. Snow write that he find Mao `` a gaunt , rather Lincolnesque figure , above average height for a Chinese , somewhat stoop , with a head of thick black hair grown very long , and with large search eye , a high- bridged nose and prominent cheekbones. '' The account continue : `` My fleeting impression be of an intellectual face of great shrewdness. '' `` He appear to be quite free from symptom of megalomania , '' Mr. Snow say -- the cult of Mao would not begin until the first `` rectification '' campaign in 1942. But , Mr. Snow add , `` he have a deep sense of personal dignity , and something about him suggest a power of ruthless decision. '' Seeming Reserve and Aloofness Agnes Smedley , another journalist who encounter Mao in Yenan at that time , felt that though he could communicate intensely with a few intimate friend , he remain on the whole reserved and aloof. `` The sinister quality I have at first felt so strongly in him prove to be a spiritual isolation , '' she related. `` As Chu Teh [ the military commander ] of the Red Army be love , Mao Tse-tung be respected. The few who come to know him best have affection for him , but his spirit dwelt within himself , isolate him. '' Other American visitor -- diplomat , army officer and journalist -- who troop to Yenan in the 1940 's during an optimistic interlude when Washington hop to bring Mao and Chiang together to fight the Japanese , inevitably be impress by Mao 's obvious earnestness and by his willingness to sacrifice personal comfort for the pursuit of an idea. In these he contrast all too clearly with the corruption and indifference of most Nationalist leaders. Some of Mao 's dedication , toughness and reserve may also have be the product of his bitter personal experience along the road to power. His sister and his second wife , Yang Kai-hui , be execute in 1930 by General Chiang ; a young brother be kill fight a rear-guard action during the Long March ; another young brother be execute in 1943 in Sinkiang , and Mao 's eldest son be kill in the Korean War. Another son , accord to Red Guard source during the Cultural Revolution , be say to have go mad because of the way he be bring up by a `` bourgeois '' family after his mother be executed. Mao also have several close brush with death. In 1927 , when he be organize peasant and worker in Hunan , he be capture by local pro-Kuomintang -- that be , pro-Nationalist -- militiaman , who march him back to their headquarters to be shot. Just in sight of their office , Mao break loose and flee into a nearby field , where he hide in tall grass until sunset. `` The soldier pursue me , and force some peasant to help them search for me , '' he relate to Mr. Snow. `` Many time they come very near , once or twice so close that I could almost have touch them , but somehow I escape discovery. At last when it be dusk they abandon the search. '' Mindful of Cost to Family He be certainly mindful of the cost of the revolution to his family and friends. In a talk in 1964 with Mao Yuan-hsin , the son of his executed brother , Mao recall : `` Very many member of our family have give their life , kill by the Kuomintang and the American imperialists. You grow up eat honey , and thus far you have never know suffering. In the future , if you do not become a rightist , but rather a centrist , I shall be satisfied. You have never suffer -- how can you be a leftist ? '' Perhaps his loss contribute to Mao 's attitude toward his enemies. Unlike Stalin , Mao never seek to put vast number of his opponent in the party to death. Instead , in a very Chinese , even Confucian , way , he believe in the power of education to reform them and send them off to labor camp or the countryside for reindoctrination and redemption. However , he do not cavil at kill those whom he consider true counterrevolutionaries. One of the first instance of this occur in late 1930 in the small town of Futien , in the Communists ' base area , which Mao have build up since 1927. In put down a revolt by soldier who challenge his rule , Mao have 2,000 to 3,000 officer and men executed. In the early 1950 's , to consolidate the Communists ' power , Mao launch a violent campaign against counterrevolutionaries. According to an estimate accept by Stuart Schram , Mao 's most careful and sensitive biographer , from a million to three million people , include landlord , nationalist agent and others suspect of be `` class enemy , '' be executed. `` There be no evidence whatever , '' Mr. Schram write , that Mao `` take pleasure in kill or torturing. But he have never hesitate to employ violence whenever he believe it necessary. No doubt , Mao regard it all a a natural part of revolutionary struggle. He give no quarter , and he ask for none. '' As Mao himself put it , in one of the most celebrated passage in his writing , his 1927 `` report of an investigation into the peasant movement '' : `` A revolution be not the same a invite people to dinner or write an essay or paint a picture or embroider a flower ; it can not be anything so refined , so calm and gentle , or so 'mild , kind , courteous , restrain and magnanimous ' [ the virtue of Confucius a describe by a disciple ] . A revolution be an uprising , an act of violence whereby one class overthrow the authority of another. To put it bluntly , it be necessary to bring about a brief reign of terror in every rural area. '' Little be know about Mao 's personal life or habit , which he keep shelter from the glare of publicity. He be an inordinate cigarette smoker , and during the Long March , when cut off from regular source of supply , be say to have experiment by smoke various leaves. Perhaps because of his habit , his voice be husky and he cough a good deal in later life. He apparently like to work 13 or 14 hour a day , and Mr. Snow find that he frequently stay up until 2 or 3 in the morning reading and go over reports. Despite infirmity in his last year , Mao have an iron constitution that he consciously develop a a student in Changsha , the provincial capital of Hunan. 'No Time for Love or Romance' In this Mao and his student friend -- '' a serious-minded little group '' that `` have no time for love or romance , '' Mao recall -- be try to overcome the traditional Chinese prejudice that any physical labor or exercise be low class. Mao himself be so much a product of this tradition that when the Chinese revolution of 1911 break out and he join the army for a few month in a burst of enthusiasm , he spend much of his salary of $ 7 a month to pay carrier to fetch his water since intellectual do not do that kind of work. Physical strength , courage and military prowess remain a basic theme of Mao 's life. Even his first publish writing , an essay write in 1917 , be a plea that Chinese exercise more. `` Our nation be want in strength , '' it began. `` The military spirit have not be encouraged. '' Whether , in another period -- July 1966 -- Mao actually take his widely publicize swim in the Yangtze for 65 minute be perhaps more a matter of legend than of fact. But his approach to swim typify his dogged pursuit of an objective. `` I say that if you be resolve to do it , you can certainly learn , whether you be young or old. '' Mao once advise his principal military officer in discuss the need to improve themselves. `` I will give you an example. I really learn to swim well only in 1954 ; previously I have not master it. In 1954 , there be an indoor pool at Tsinghua University [ in Peking ] . I go there every day with my bag , change my clothes , and for three month without interruption I study the nature of water. Water do n't drown people. Water be afraid of people. '' Wide and Voracious Reader A voracious reader , Mao enjoy both the Chinese classic and novel he have devour a a boy , and Western history , literature and philosophy , which he read in translation. He often impress his visitor with an apt allusion to literature or a salty proverb , but he could be remarkably offhand and whimsical for the leader of a country. In the 1950 's , when he be still head of state , he once greet a particularly tall Western diplomat with the exclamation : `` My God ! As tall a that ! '' Mao 's informal style , his pithy and frequent use of Chinese metaphor and his transcendent charisma make him a natural leader for the mass of peasants. A Chinese writer observe that `` Mao Tse-tung be fundamentally a character from a Chinese novel or opera. '' In his late year Mao spend most of his time in his simple , yellowish residence inside Peking 's Forbidden City , cut off from all but a small group of people. Some of these be female nurse who help him walk ; others be the three woman interpreter who usually translate for him when there be foreign visitors. Given his difficult Hunan accent and speech problem , one of the woman have to translate his word into comprehensible Mandarin Chinese. Assigned to do that be Wang Hai-jung , whom some believe be his niece but others think be the daughter of one of his favorite teachers. In any event , in the spring of 1976 , after the downfall of Teng Hsiao-ping , Miss Wang and the two others be suddenly replace without an announcement , stir speculation that someone else in the entourage be jealous of their position. In Classical Vein For all the overwhelming change Mao bring to China , the drama of how he and others at the top of the Communist hierarchy reach decision seem a tale from the Ming Dynasty court. Who Mao 's aide be , for example , who arrange his appointment , prepared document for him to read and sign in his study behind the red velvet drape , or carry his order to the Central Committee -- all this be not know outside China. One key figure in the mystery be certainly Chiang Ching , his fourth wife , an outspoken , sometimes vitriolic woman who claim the mantle of his most faithful disciple. Mao consider that he have be marry only three time -- his first wife be a peasant girl whom his parent marry him to when he be only 14 and she be 20. He never live with her , and a he tell Mr. Snow , `` I do not consider her my wife and at this time give little thought to her. '' His second wife , Yang Kai-hui , the woman execute in 1930 , be the daughter of one of Mao 's most influential teacher in Changsha. Yang Chang-chi , a professor of ethics. Professor Yang be to introduce the young Mao to Li Ta-chao , a brilliant nationalistic intellectual and writer in Peking who be one of the founder of the Communist movement in China. Although Mao have sometimes be adjudge an ascetic man , bent only on the pursuit of revolution and power , he evidently could also be sentimental and romantic. In 1937 , in reply to a commemorative poem write by a woman whose husband be a Communist leader kill in battle , Mao compose the following verse : I lose my proud poplar , and you your willow , Poplar and willow soar lightly to the heaven of heavens. Wu Kang , ask what he have to offer , Presents them respectfully with cassia wine. The lonely goddess in the moon spread her ample sleeve To dance for these faithful soul in the endless sky. Of a sudden come word of the tiger 's defeat on earth , And they break into tear of torrential rain. The Poplar and the Willow The official interpretation accompany a late collection of Mao 's poem point out that his second wife 's surname mean `` poplar '' while the name of the man kill in battle mean `` willow. '' According to an ancient legend , Wu Kang , mention in the third line , have commit certain crime in his search for immortality and be condemn to cut down a cassia tree on the moon. Each time he raise his ax the tree become whole again , and thus he must go on fell it for eternity. The tiger in the seventh line refers to the Kuomintang regime Mao be fight , and , hence , the last couplet describe the emotion of Mao 's lose companion at the final triumph of the revolution. The official interpretation find that the poem contain a `` large element of revolutionary romanticism. '' In 1928 , while Mao 's second wife be still alive and he be 35 , he begin live with an 18-year- old , Ho Tzu-chen. By some account she be a forceful character and a commander of a woman 's regiment ; she be also say to have be the daughter of a landlord. In any case she marry Mao in 1930 , after Miss Yang be execute , and later accompany him on the perilous and exhaust Long March , one of the few woman to take part. One of the five child she bore Mao be bear on the march. The rigor evidently break her health , and not long after reach the Communists ' new base area in Yenan , in the northwest , she be send to the Soviet Union for medical treatment. While she be away , there arrive in Yenan a minor movie actress from Shanghai , Lan Ping , who , in contrast to the plain-living and isolated Communists , must have seem glamorous and attractive. According to one version , she come to Mao 's notice after ostentatiously sit in the front row at one of his lecture and clap loudly. It be apparently love at first sight for Mao , and Miss Lan -- with her name change to Chiang Ching -- be soon live in Mao 's cave house. Their affair reportedly anger some of Mao 's colleague , who felt that he have betray his faithful companion of the Long March , Miss Ho , a genuine Communist , for the seductive Miss Chiang. To win approval for their marriage Mao be say to have pledge that Miss Chiang would stay out of politics. This may have be the origin of the widespread suspicion of and distaste for her among party leader that have dog her since. Cultural Revolution Miss Chiang do keep a low profile for much of the next three decade , but in 1964 , when Mao grow dissatisfy with the party and prepared to launch the Cultural Revolution , he turn to her a one of the few people he could trust. She undertake a vigorous reform of the popular traditional opera and the movie , demand that they inject heavy dos of `` class struggle '' into every performance and paint all hero in the white white and villain in the black blacks. She also line up a leftist literary critic in Shanghai , Yao Wen-yuan , who be willing to write a scathing attack on a play , `` Hai Jui Dismissed from Office , '' that be an allegorical criticism of Mao. The publication of the article in November 1965 in Shanghai -- Mao could not get it print in Peking , where his opponent be in control -- signal the start of the Cultural Revolution. Miss Chiang be soon promote to a commanding position in the group Mao establish to direct the Cultural Revolution , and she vastly increase her unpopularity by make stinging personal attack on many lead officials. When the Cultural Revolution subside Miss Chiang 's authority be reduce , but in the following year she continue to try to exert her influence. She may have be instrumental in the downfall of Mr. Teng early in 1976. He be accuse among other crime of fail to attend any of her model opera and of try to cut off a state subsidy to her pet production brigade near Tientsin. Not Even a Telephone Call How Mao regard his controversial wife be difficult to say. She once indicate to an American scholar , Roxane Witke , that she and Mao be not always close personally. In 1957 , when Mao make his second trip to Moscow she happen to be there in the hospital but he neither stop in to see her nor phoned , she related. Later , at the start of the Cultural Revolution , Mao write her a letter that be often cite by her detractor in the party. `` I think you also ought to pay attention to this problem , '' he wrote. `` Do n't be obsess by victory. It be necessary to constantly remind ourselves of our own weakness , deficiency and mistakes. I have on countless occasion remind you of this. The last time be in April in Shanghai. '' Although Miss Chiang have a reputation among Chinese for be rancorous and spiteful , Americans who meet her during the visit to Peking by Presidents Nixon and Ford find her gay and vivacious. Miss Witke be impressed with her evident devotion to Mao 's cause and felt she have suffer from be a woman in a world where men predominated. Mao 's apparent fondness for woman and the checkered pattern of his married life contrast sharply with the monotonous austerity and Puritanism he enforce since 1949. Romance be now frown on a a decadent bourgeois idea and the age when woman may marry have be push back to 25 and for men to 28. Marriage be not the only instance of a certain willingness on Mao 's part to bend the rule for himself. Though he insist that all play , novel , poem and painting follow the often-stultifying code of socialist realism -- '' So far a we be concern , art and literature be intend for the people , '' he say in talk at Yenan in 1942 that become the basis of a rigid artistic canon -- he continue to write poetry a he choose , much of it in difficult classical form with obscure allusion to the now-discredited Chinese classics. This contradiction , Mr. Schram , his biographer , note , `` seem to fill him with a mixture of embarrassment and pride. '' Chinese Patriot Looking into Mao 's endlessly complex character , Mr. Schram conclude that he be fundamentally a Chinese patriot. Mao date his attainment of `` a certain amount of political consciousness '' from the reading of a pamphlet in 1909 , when he be 16 , that deplore China 's `` loss '' of Korea , Taiwan , Indochina , Burma and other tributary states. In 1936 , speak with Mr. Snow , Mao still recall the opening sentence of the pamphlet : `` Alas , China will be subjugated. '' In Mao 's case his native xenophobia be to be reinforce by his discovery of Leninism , in which imperialism be blame for the backwardness of country like China. But , Mr. Schram write , while Mao become `` a deeply convinced Leninist revolutionary , and while the category in which he reason be Marxist category , the deep spring of his personality be , to a large extent , to be find in the Chinese tradition , and China 's glory be at least a important to him a be world revolution. '' Mr. Schram note that in the closing year of Mao 's life , he go so far a to subtly play down the importance of Marxism-Leninism in the Chinese revolution , envision it only a a storehouse of political techniques. This be in some way a throwback to the view of 19th-century conservative Chinese imperial official who want to strengthen China against the West but insist that it borrow only Western `` technique '' like gunboat and parliament without bring in `` Western learning , '' which might subvert the Chinese essence. As Mao put it in 1965 , consciously refer to the 19th-century formulation : `` We can not adopt Western learning a the substance. We can only use Western technology. '' 'Proletarian ' Consciousness Mao 's contribution to Marxism-Leninism lay not in his theoretical writing , which be often plod and in which he show little interest himself , but in his Sinification of Marxism. When the Chinese Communists be flounder and face extinction because of their orthodox concentration on the city and the proletariat , Mao discover the peasantry. He succeed in impose a party organize along tight Leninist line and , animate by certain basic Marxist tenet , on a largely peasant base. With suitable indoctrination , a Mao saw it , both the Chinese peasantry and Chinese intellectual , who make up much of the party 's leadership , could develop a `` proletarian '' consciousness. As Prof. Benjamin I. Schwartz of Harvard write in his pioneering study , `` Chinese Communism and the Rise of Mao , '' it be `` a heresy in act never make explicit in theory. '' The other basic element in Mao 's approach to revolution be his inordinate belief in the power of the human will to overcome material obstacle and his conception that the necessary energy to propel the revolution lay store among the masses. The potential energy of the peasantry be borne home to him with sudden force in 1927 , when he embark on the investigation of the peasant movement in his home province that form the basis of his famous report. The liberation Mao find at work in village after village , with peasant overthrow their landlord , have an enormous impact on him. Beginning with these two basic insight -- the importance of the peasantry to revolution in China and the power of the human will -- Mao go on to elaborate the strategy and tactic for the entire revolution. First , he recognize the importance of win the support of the people , who be , a he put it in his widely quote formulation , like the ocean in which the guerrilla must swim like fish. Talking with Andre Malraux in 1964 , Mao relate : `` You must realize that before u , among the mass , no one have address themselves to woman or to the young. Nor , of course , to the peasants. For the first time in their life , every one of them felt involved. '' Careful Rules of Behavior Similarly , to keep the allegiance of his guerrilla fighter , who receive no pay and often inadequate food and weapon , Mao develop careful rule of behavior. `` The reason why the Red Army have be able to carry on in spite of such poor material condition and such frequent engagement , '' he write , `` be it practice of democracy. The officer do not beat the men ; officer and men receive equal treatment ; soldier be free to hold meeting and to speak out ; trivial formality have be do away with ; and the account be open for all to inspect. The soldier handle the mess arrangements. All this give great satisfaction to the soldiers. '' For military tactic Mao draw on his boyhood reading of China 's classic swashbuckling novel such a `` The Romance of the Three Kingdoms '' and `` The Water Margin , '' which describe in vivid detail the exploit and strategems of ancient warrior and bandits. Not surprisingly Mao 's military tactic -- which be to be an important role in Vietnam -- bore a close resemblance to those of Sun Tzu , the military writer of the fifth century B.C. The basic problem be to find a way for a guerrilla force to overcome General Chiang 's much large and well equip army. To this end Mao revise two principle -- concentration of force so that he attack only when he have a numerical advantage , and surprise. `` We use the few to defeat the many. That be no longer a secret , and in general the enemy be now well acquaint with our method. But he can neither prevent our victory nor avoid his own loss , because he do not know when and where we shall act. This we keep secret. The Red Army generally operate by surprise attacks. '' Slogan for the Troops Mao 's military precept be sum up in a four-line slogan his troop memorize : `` The enemy advance ; we retreat. '' `` The enemy camp ; we harass. '' `` The enemy tire ; we attack. '' `` The enemy retreat ; we pursue. '' To these Mao be to add the concept of a base area where his guerrilla could rest and replenish their supply , and from which , over time , they could expand. In the end , this strategy lead to victory. The Moment of Victory The supreme moment come on Oct. 1 , 1949 , when Mao , at age 54 , stand on the high balcony of Tien An Men , the Gage of Heavenly Peace in Peking through which tribute-bearers have once come to prostrate themselves before the emperor , and proclaim the People's Republic of China. Processions have fill the square in front of the scarlet brass-studded gate. The air be chilly with the wind from the Gobi. Mao , wear a drab cloth cap and a worn tunic and trouser , have Mr. Chou and Marshal Chu with him. Below them the immense throng shout : `` May Mao Tse-tung live 10,000 year ! '' Suddenly there come a hush. Sliding up the immense white staff in the square be a small bundle that crack open a it near the top to reveal a flag 30 foot broad , blood red , with five yellow star in the upper leave quadrant. Guns rear in salute. On cue the crowd break out in the new national anthem , and Mao step to the microphone amid more cheers. `` The Central Governing Council of the People 's Republic of China today assume power in Peking , '' he announced. A week before , speak to the Chinese People 's Political Consultative Conference , he say : `` Our nation will never again be an insulted nation. We have stand up. Let the domestic and foreign reactionary tremble before us. '' His word come 28 year after he and 11 others found the Chinese Communist Party in Shanghai. Its membership then be 52. `` A small spark can start a prairie fire , '' Mao once said. It had. Peasant Origins Mao Tse-tung be bear in a tile-roofed house surround by rice field and low hill in Shaoshan , a village in Hunan Province , in central China , on December 26 , 1893. His father , Mao Jen-sheng , be a tall , sturdily build peasant , industrious and thrifty , despotic and high-handed. Through hard work , save and some small trading he raise himself from be a landless former soldier to what his son later describe a the status of a `` rich peasant , '' though in the China of those day that hardly mean be wealthy. Mao 's mother , Wen Chi-mei , be a hardy woman who work in the house and fields. A Buddhist , she exhibit a warm-hearted kindness toward her child much in contrast to her husband 's patriarchal sterness. During famine , when her husband -- he disapprove of charity -- be not watch , she would give food to the poor who come begging. The China into which Mao be bear be a restive empire on the point of it final breakup , which come in 1911. Since the middle of the 19th century the ruling Ching Dynasty have be beset by rural uprising , most notably the Taiping revolt in the 1860 's , and by the encroachment of foreign power that challenge China 's traditional belief in it superiority. The mandarin who govern on behalf of the emperor in Peking seem helpless to stop either the internal decay or the foreign incursions. Corrupt , smug , the product of a rarified examination system base on the Confucian classic , they procrastinated. China have no industry , and it peasant , 85 percent of the population , be mire in poverty and ignorance , subject to the constant threat of starvation and extortionate demand by landlords. In the Fields at Age 6 At age 6 Mao be set to work in the rice field by his father , but because he want the youngster to learn enough character to keep the family 's account , he also send him to the village primary school. The curriculum be the Confucian Analects , learn by rote in the old style. Mao prefer Chinese novel , `` especially story of rebellion , '' he later recall , which he use to read in school , `` cover them up with a classic when the teacher walk past. '' At 13 Mao leave the school , work long hour on the farm during the day and keep the account at night. His father frequently beat Mao and his two young brother and give them only the most meager food , never meat or eggs. At this point there occur an incident that Western writer have seize on a a seminal clue to Mao 's late life. During a reception Mao 's father begin to berate him for be lazy and useless. Infuriated , he flee to a nearby pond , threaten to jump in. Eventually the quarrel be resolve by compromise when Mao agree to kowtow -- on one knee only -- in exchange for his father 's promise to stop the beatings. `` Thus the war end , '' Mao recall , `` and from it I learn that when I defend my right by open rebellion my father relent , but when I remain meek and submissive he only curse and beat me the more. '' Some scholar have also note the possible influence on Mao of grow up in Hunan. A subtropical region , it many river and mountain make it a favorite haunt for bandit and secret societies. Hunanese be also famed for their vigorous personality and their political talent as well a their love of red pepper , and they have produce a disproportionate number of leader in the 19th and 20th centuries. Going to Another School Although out of school , Mao retain his passion for read in his spare time , and at 16 , over his father 's opposition , enrol in a modern high primary school nearby. It be at this school , in a busy market town , that Mao 's real intellectual and political development began. In newspaper a cousin send him he learn of the nationalistic late 19th-century reformer , and in a book , `` Great Heroes of the World , '' he read about Washington and Napoleon ( from his early day Mao be fascinate by martial exploit ) . Most of his fellow student be son of landlord , expensively dress and genteel in manner. Mao have only one decent suit and generally go about in an old , frayed coat and trousers. Moreover , because he have be force to interrupt his education for several year , he be much old than the others and tower above them. As a result this tall , rag , uncouth `` new boy '' meet with a mixture of ridicule and hostility. The experience may also have leave it mark in his attitude toward the landlord class. After a year wanderlust take Mao off to the provincial capital , Changsha , where he enter a junior high school. The year be 1911 , the time of the overthrow of the Manchu Dynasty , and he be catch up in the political turmoil that sweep the country. He cut off his pigtail , a rebellious act , and it be then that he join a local army unit. After several more month of drift and scan classified ad in the press for opportunity , he spend half a year in the provincial library , where he read translation of Adam Smith 's `` Wealth of Nations , '' Darwin 's `` On the Origin of the Species '' and Rousseau 's `` Social Contract. '' He also saw a map of the world for the first time. In 1913 Mao enrol in the provincial normal school in Changsha , where he receive his last five year of formal education. Although it be really only a high school , it standard be high , and Mao be particularly influence by his ethic teacher , Prof. Yang Chang-chi , whose daughter he be later to marry. Professor Yang , who have study in Japan and Europe , advocate combine Western and Chinese idea to prod China back to life. Through him Mao soon find himself in touch with the mainstream of intellectual life , which be then catch up in what be call the May 4th Movement , an explosive nationalistic effort to modernize Chinese culture. His First Published Writing It be at this time that Mao publish his first writing , an article for the popular Peking Magazine Hsin Ching Nien , or New Youth , on the need for physical fitness to build military strength. He also begin to display his genius for leadership , set up a radical student group. Having graduate from the normal school in 1918 , Mao set off that fall for Peking. The timing be critical. It be a period when intellectual be turn from one Western `` ism '' to another in search of the late and most potent elixir to revive their nation. In Mao 's case , a he later write , he arrive just when `` the salvo of the October Revolution '' in Russia be bring Marxism to China. Mao secure a menial job a a library assistant at Peking University under Li Ta-chao , who have publish an influential article , `` The Victory of Bolshevism , '' and who have just found the first Marxist study society in China. Mao be still somewhat `` confused , look for a road , '' but he be become `` more and more radical. '' Early the next spring he leave Peking for Shanghai , where he saw off some friend on their way to study in France ; he be reluctant to go because of his lack of ability in foreign languages. Over the next two year he move between Shanghai , Peking and Changsha , teach part of the time and throw himself into organize radical student group and edit two popular journal that be suppress by the local warlord government. A Tendency Toward Populism One article he publish at the time , `` The Great Union of the Popular Masses , '' which hold that the vast majority of Chinese be progressive and constitute a mighty force for change , reflect what Mr. Schram have call Mao 's populist tendency. In the biographer 's opinion , `` this idea can be regard a the bridge which lead him from the relatively conservative and traditionalist nationalism of 1917 to a genuinely Marxist viewpoint. '' In the fall of 1920 Mao copy the example of his former bos in Peking , Mr. Li , who have just establish a small Communist group there , and form one in Changsha. The following July Mao and the 11 other delegate meet in Shanghai to form the Chinese party. The first congress be force by a police raid to flee from it original meeting place in a girl ' school to a holiday boat on a nearby lake. Filled with a new sense of zeal , Mao return to Hunan , where , in orthodox Marxist fashion , he set about organize labor union and strikes. He have find his true vocation a a revolutionary. The embryonic party fell heavily under the influence of the Russians , who help engineer an alliance between the Chinese Communists , and the much strong Nationalists of Sun Yat-sen. Stalin 's goal in this , a in all his later move in China , do not necessarily coincide with those of the Chinese Communists , and herein lay the source of much of the late friction. Stalin want first to secure a friendly buffer on his eastern flank , so have to avoid any upheaval that would invite Western intervention. Second , he seek control over the Chinese party. His policy of alliance work well enough for the first few year , give the Communists a chance to expand , but in 1927 it suddenly become a disaster when General Chiang , who have succeed to leadership of the Nationalists in 1925 , turn on the Communists and carry out his massacre. Patriotism Near the Surface Perhaps because of Mao 's populism and his highly nationalistic feeling , he be one of the most enthusiastic supporter of the alliance. His patriotism be always near the surface. Criticism of his dual role have a fortuitous result , eventually make him uncomfortable enough so that in 1925 he return to his native village for a rest and , in the process , encounter a wave of peasant unrest. `` Formerly , I have not fully realize the degree of class among the peasantry , '' he tell Edgar Snow. From this time on Mao be to take a major interest in the peasantry -- first lecturing at the Kuomintang 's Peasant Movement train institute in Canton in 1926 , then in early 1927 make his renowned inspection of the Hunanese countryside , and finally in the fall of 1927 , after the Communists split with General Chiang , he lead his small survive band of supporter up into the Chingkang-shan Mountains to start the search for power all over again -- on his terms. Party Wrangling The period from 1927 to 1935 , when Mao finally win command of the party , be fill with complex wrangling over leadership and policy. The principal figure in the party , who remain in the security of the international settlement in Shanghai , and Stalin keep look for a `` revolutionary upsurge , '' and in accordance with conventional Marxist dogma plan attack on cities. Mao , cut off in the countryside , be condemn for his peasant `` deviation , '' though he be not often inform of the late shift in line or of his demotion until much later. Twice in 1927 and 1930 , he be direct to lead attack on city , both end in catastrophic defeats. Mao be to recall , `` Long ago the Chinese Communists have first-hand experience of some of Stalin 's mistakes. '' The Chingkangshan area where Mao gradually work out his own strategy be a storybook setting ; a range of precipitous mountain on the border between Kiangsi and Hunan , it be an almost impregnable vastness populate only by a few simple village and group of bandits. By ally with these bandit and draw on the peasant , whom he reward by reduce rent , Mao build his band of 1,000 soldier into 100,000 by 1934. A capital be declare at Juichin , in southern Kiangsi. Mao 's very success prove his undoing. In 1931 the party Central Committee move up to Kiangsi from Shanghai and proceed to strip him of his post in the party and army , with Mr. Chou replace him a chief commissar in 1933. One of Mao 's few steadfast supporter at this time be Mr. Teng , whom he be to oust from high position in 1976. The loss of control be doubly grave because it coincide with the fifth of General Chiang 's encirclement campaign to wipe out the Communists. The previous effort have fail in the face of Mao 's tactic , withdraw when outnumber and then launch surprise attack in overwhelm force on isolated units. Now the other Communist leader try the Nationalists head on , but General Chiang have 700,000 men -- a seven-to-one advantage -- and on the advice of a Nazi general , Hans von Steeckt , slowly strangle the Communists with a ring of barbed wire and machine-gun emplacements. Flight Was the Only Answer The only answer be flight. On Oct. 15 , 1934 , the main body of the Communist army break through the Nationalist line and head southwest , begin the Long March. Neither their destination nor their purpose be clear. Some thought of find a new base area ; others , include Mao , spoke of go north to fight the Japanese , who have be expand far and far into China since 1931. Of the 90,000 Communists who break out , only 20,000 would eventually reach the new base area in Shensi , in the northwest , over a year and 6,000 mile later. For all it hardship , the Long March both save and strengthen the Communists , give them a legion of invincibility , a guerrilla ethic , a firm discipline and unity , and a new leader -- Mao. He be finally give command after several more blunder along the march , when the army stop at the remote town of Tsunyi , in Kweichow Province , in January 1935. Tsunyi have be capture without fire a shot by use a ruse straight out of `` The Romance of the Three Kingdoms , '' involve capture Kuomintang uniform and banners. A New Party and a New State In Yenan , just below the Great Wall , the area where Chinese civilization originally develop over 3,000 year before , Mao proceed to build a new party and state fully in his own image. This be a critical period , for the idea he work out in Yenan he would turn back to nostalgically in the late 1950 's and 60 's , when he launch the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution. Among them be the sending of party cadre down to the countryside for ideological remolding and the stress on self-reliance , mutual aid team on farm and popularize education. His mood at this time be perhaps best suggest by his poem `` Snow , '' write in February 1936 shortly after his arrival in the northwest. A ring affirmation of his link with China 's glorious past and his love for the land , it read : This be the scene in that northern land ; A hundred league be seal with ice , A thousand league of whirl snow On either side of the Great Wall One vastness be all you see. From end to end of the great river The rushing torrent be frozen and lost. The mountain dance like silver snakes. The highland roll like waxen elephant , As if they seek to vie in height with the Lord of heaven , And on a sunny day See how the white-robed beauty be adorn with rouge , enchantment beyond compare. Lured by such great beauty in our landscape Innumerable hero have rival one another to bow in homage. But ala , Chin Shin-huang and Han Wu-ti be rather lack in culture , Tang Tai-tsung and Sung Tai-tsu have little taste for poetry , And Genghis Khan , the favorite son of heaven for a day , know only how to bend his bow to shoot great vultures. Now they be all past and gone. To find hero in the grand manner , We must look rather in the present. Incarnation of Resistance The most decisive stroke by Mao at this time be his genius in make the Communists the incarnation of Chinese resistance to the Japanese. The Japanese invasion , which begin in 1931 in Manchuria and culminate in full-scale war in 1937 , have provoke an enormous wave of popular resentment. In the face of this , General Chiang continue to insist that his army would fight the Communists first and deal with the Japanese later. This strategy backfire in December 1936 , when pro- Nationalist troop under Chang Hsueh-liang , the young warlord whom the Japanese have drive from Manchuria , kidnap General Chiang at Sian , near the Communists ' base area. He be release only after agree to a second united front with the Communists to fight the Japanese. Although friction be obvious from the start , the agreement give Mao a badly need breathing spell and the chance to expand Communist area across the whole of North China under the guise of fight the Japanese. For this the Communists be well prepare by their guerrilla training. By the end of the war in 1945 , Communist troop , rename the Eighth Route Army , have increase to a formidable force of a million men cover an area inhabit by 100 million people. By an accident of history the Japanese invasion be to prove `` perhaps the most important single factor in Mao 's rise to power , '' Mr. Schram conclude in his biography. Using this time of relative stability to read and write broadly , Mao systematize his thought. Several of his most important book and speech be produce in the Yenan period , include `` On Protracted War , '' `` The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese Communist Party , '' `` On New Democracy , '' and `` On Practice '' and `` On Contradiction. '' 'Out of Barrel of a Gun' One of his most-quoted speech come in 1938 : `` Every Communist must grasp the truth : 'Political power grow out of the barrel of a gun. ' Our principle be that the party command the gun , and the gun will never be allow to command the party. But it be also true that with gun at our disposal we can really build up the party organization. '' In 1942 , to discipline the thousand of new official the party be enrol and to insure their fidelity to his thought , Mao launch the first rectification campaign. It be the beginning of thought reform , and it be also the start of the cult of Mao. He lend the cult a hand by order the study of his works. ( In the Cultural Revolution he would promote an article praise his thought that he have help compose. ) The rectification campaign have another purpose -- to end what Mao saw a overreliance on Soviet guidance : `` There be no such thing a abstract Marxism , but only concrete Marxism. What we call concrete Marxism be Marxism that have take on a national form. Consequently the Sinification of Marxism -- that be to say , make certain that in all of it manifestation it be imbue with Chinese peculiarity -- become a problem that must be understood and solve by the whole party. '' It be a call for independence from Moscow. For a brief time in 1944-45 Mao and Americans have a short-lived courtship. American diplomat and journalist who be allow into Yenan at this time , when Washington hop to bring the Communists and Nationalists together against the Japanese , be invariably impress by Mao and his army 's accomplishments. Mao , for his part , look to the possibility of win some of the United States aid that be flow to General Chang for use against Tokyo. `` The work which we Communists be carry on today be the very same work which be carry on earlier in America by Washington , Jefferson and Lincoln , '' say an encouraging editorial in the official party newspaper on July 4 , 1944. But General Chiang 's intransigence block all effort in this direction. When the war end in 1945 , Washington endeavor to play a dual role. On the one hand it help General Chiang by continue aid to him and airlift thousand of his troop to occupy Japanese position in Manchuria ahead of the advance Communists. On the other hand it sponsor negotiation for a coalition government. At the urging of the Americans Mao fly to Chungking -- his first airplane flight -- where he hold 43 day of ultimately futile talk with General Chiang. In November 1945 President Harry S. Truman dispatch Gen. George C. Marshall to China a his special envoy ; he would continue try to arrange a cease-fire and coalition government until January 1947 , but full-scale civil war have break out early in 1946. General Chiang be vastly overconfident. He have American backing , apparent neutrality on the part of Stalin , who be not eager to see Mao win , and a four-to-one numerical advantage. But his army be rack by corruption , punish inflation and an incompetent officer corp in which promotion be base entirely on loyalty. The general war-weariness and hostility of the populace to the Nationalists also play a role. By the middle of 1947 the Nationalists ' advantage have be reduce to two to one , and by mid- 1948 the two side be almost even. Nationalist general begin surrender in pack , and within a year it be all over. In Soviet Path Over the next five year much of China 's development follow the orthodox Soviet model. Mao have proclaim in 1949 that henceforth China would `` lean to one side '' in cooperation with the Soviet Union , and so it seemed. The first five-year plan ( 1953-57 ) place emphasis on heavy industry , centralize planning , technical expertise and a large defense buildup in the Soviet pattern. Several technical school require course in ballroom dancing , a the Russians have do since Peter the Great. Part of this may have be the result of what Mao later maintain be his decision in 1949 to retreat to a `` second line '' and leave `` day to-day work '' to others. He do this , he say , `` out of concern for state security and in view of the lesson of Stalin in the Soviet Union. '' `` Many thing be leave to other people , so that other people 's prestige be build up , and when I go to see God there wo n't be such a big upheaval in the state , '' he wrote. `` It seem there be some thing which the comrade in the first line have not manage too well. '' Whatever the case , China be disrupt in 1950 by the Korean War. Although it exact origin be still obscure and controversial , the weight of evidence seem to indicate that it be basically a Soviet initiative and that Mao be not consulted. The war have terrible consequence for the new state. It prompt President Truman to order the defense of Taiwan , which General Chiang have retreat to in 1949 ; it freeze Mao 's relation with Washington for two decade ; it cost ten of thousand of Chinese life and fund urgently need for reconstruction. The war over , Mao begin to grow impatient with the speed of China 's development and the way socialism be be introduced. In 1955 he order an acceleration in the tempo of collectivization in the countryside. In a speech that July he seem to be return to his belief in the power of the human will to overcome material obstacle ; it be a precursor of thing to come : `` In China 1955 be the year of decision in the struggle between socialism and capitalism. The first half of 1955 be murky and obscure by dark clouds. But in the second half the atmosphere change completely. Tens of million of peasant household swing into action. It be a if a range tidal wave have sweep away all the demon and ghosts. '' Mao Shifting His Gears If over the succeeding year China often appear to follow a zigzag course , it must have be more than in part a result of shifting of gear a Mao alternate between his warlike , utopian outlook and his more prudent realism in the face of obvious economic difficulties. In 1956 , follow Mr. Khrushchev 's revelation of Stalin 's excess , the riot in Poland and the uprising in Hungary , Mao take a new tack and proclaim the policy of `` let a hundred flower bloom. '' He hop that some relaxation of tight control would bring forth useful but limited criticism of the party to avert similar problem in China and at the same time encourage Chinese intellectual to become good Communists. But he do not intend full-scale liberalization. In a speech `` On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People , '' in February 1957 , Mao outline his own typically two-sided or contradictory rationale for this. China should have both more freedom and more discipline , an impossibility in Western eye but not to Mao who saw similar contradiction or dichotomy everywhere. He say , `` If there be no contradiction and no struggle , there would be no world , no progress , no life , and there would be nothing at all. '' The trick lay in analyze contradiction correctly. As he put it in 1957 : `` Within the rank of our people democracy stand in relation to centralism and freedom to discipline. They be two conflict aspect of a single entity , contradictory as well a united , and we should not one-sidely emphasize one to the detriment of the other. '' Mao 's tendency to reason in this fashion owe much to the dialectic of Marxism , but it may also have have it origin in the Chinese theory of yin and yang , the two great alternate force , which Mao absorb a a boy. Vast Outpouring of Criticism When , contrary to Mao 's expectation , the hundred flower policy lead to a vast outpouring of criticism that call the Communist Party itself into question , he quickly switch to the other side of his formula -- discipline -- and institute a tough rectification campaign. It be at this time that he make his second trip to Moscow in November 1957 , and create a sensation by declare that there be no need to fear nuclear war. `` I say that if the worse come to the bad and half of mankind die , the other half would remain , while imperialism would be raze to the ground , and the whole world would become socialist : in a number of year there would be 2.7 billion people again and definitely more. '' This accord with his deeply hold belief that men , not machine or weapon , be the decisive factor. In 1947 , in an interview , he have declare : `` The atom bomb be a paper tiger use by the U.S. reactionary to scare people. It look terrible , but in fact it isn't. Of course , the atom bomb be a weapon of mass slaughter , but the outcome of a war be decide by people , not by one or two new type of weapon. '' It be a guerrilla 's view. In Mao 's recollection , this period , the winter of 1957-58 , mark a great watershed in China. His misgiving about the Soviet Union have reach the breaking point , and he resolve to put an end to copy the Russians. He reach back to the wellspring of his experience in Kiangsi and Yenan , re-emphasize the countryside and the potential energy of the peasantry to overcome material obstacles. China be to make `` a great leap forward. '' By reorganize the peasant into commune , Mao would release their energy , vastly increase agricultural production and catch up with the West overnight. It be a vision , not a plan. As Mao describe it : `` China 's 600 million people have two remarkable peculiarity ; they be , first of all , poor , and secondly blank. That may seem like a bad thing , but it be really a good thing. Poor people want change , want to do thing , want revolution. A clean sheet of paper have no blotch , and so the new and most beautiful word can be write on it. '' All China go to work at a fever pitch. Peasants set up backyard blast furnace to make their own steel , the symbol of industrialization. Cadres become dizzy with success and report a 100 percent jump in agricultural production in a single year. A jingle by peasant in Hunan catch the mood : `` Setting up a people 's commune be like go to heaven. The achievement of a single night surpass those of several millennia. '' It be not so easy. Terrible dislocation ensue , food grow scarce and there be even some starvation. It take three year to restore the economy. Leader Attacked These step lead to the first serious challenge to Mao 's leadership since the early 1930's. At a Central Committee meeting in the summer of 1959 at the mountain resort of Lushan , he be boldly criticize by Peng Teh-huai , then Minister of Defense. Under the impact of Mr. Peng 's attack , Mao become tense and irritable. `` Now that you have say so much , let me say something , will you , '' he finally tell the group. `` I have take sleeping pill three time , but I can not to seep. '' Candidly accept some of the onus for the disaster , he declare : `` The chaos be in a grand scale , and I take responsibility. I be a complete outsider when it come to economic construction , and I understand nothing about industrial planning. '' But with devasting tactical skill Mao also counterattack and oust Mr. Peng from his post. This do , Mao be satisfy to leave the running of China to others , and over the next few year concentrate on foreign affair , particularly the grow quarrel with Moscow. Foreign policy often seem to swing almost as wildly a domestic political campaign ; from intervention in Korea to the Bandung ( Indonesia ) Conference and the five principle of peaceful coexistence , from call for world revolution to President Nixon 's trip and the Shanghai communique. Behind these shift , scholar agree , it be Mao himself who make all the fundamental decision , even if Mr. Chou be often China 's ambassador to the world. Moreover , underneath these swing Mao adhere to several deeply hold ideas. First , China would pursue a strictly defensive policy , it would not , for example , intervene in Vietnam. `` Others may come and attack u , but we shall not fight outside our border , '' Mao tell the Central Committee , `` I say we will not be provoked. '' Helping Third World Revolts Second , he be commit to support revolutionary movement in the third world. But with his penchant for reason in contradiction , he work out a way of conduct correct diplomatic relation with a government at the same time a he aid Communist guerrilla dedicate to overthrow it. Third , Mao be dedicate to make China a great power again , and he recognize early that only by build it up economically and militarily would the imperialist , lead by the United States , come to accept it. Time prove him right. In the mid-1970 's , after the thaw in relation with the United States , China 's formerly hostile neighbor in Southeast Asia follow suit. At the same time Mao become increasingly obsess with the Soviet Union , both a an external threat and a a heretical internal system that might subvert the Chinese revolution. After the 1959 encounter with Mr. Peng , Mao may have already felt that the party have betray him and be in the hand of the bureaucrat who want to follow the Soviet example of gradual growth base on a party elite , material incentive and heavy industry. In addition , Mao come to have doubt about China 's youth ; a he tell Mr. Malraux in August 1965 , `` This youth be show dangerous tendencies. '' `` Humanity , leave to it own , do not necessarily re-establish capitalism , but it do re-establish inequality , '' he said. `` The force tend toward the creation of new class be powerful. '' `` Revolution and child have to be train if they be to be properly bring up , '' he added. `` Youth must be put to the test. '' The Test : Cultural Revolution The test , which Mao launch that fall , be the Cultural Revolution. In many way it be the long culmination of his life , bring together his favorite themes. `` Once class struggle be grasp , miracle be possible , '' he remark not long before the start of the Cultural Revolution in what might be his motto. The movement be also his ultimate revolt against the influence of the Soviet Union -- it elitism and bureaucracy. Mao remain uncertain of what would follow him. As he tell Edgar Snow in 1965 , in 1,000 year even Marx and Lenin might `` appear rather ridiculous. '' Last year , in a poem address to the die Chou En-lai , he put it more poignantly : Loyal parent who sacrifice so much for the nation Never fear the ultimate fate. Now that the country have become red , who will be it guardian ? Our mission , unfinished , may take a thousand years. The struggle tire u , and our hair be gray. The poem conclude : `` You and I , old friend , can we just watch our effort be wash away ? ''