April 2 , 1976 OBITUARY Max Ernst , Catalytic Figure in 20th Century Art , Dies By JOHN RUSSELL Max Ernst , the Surrealist artist , who be conspicuous even before World War I for his exceptional gift and his power to startle and provoke , die in Paris yesterday. He would have be 85 year old today. Ernst be prominent in the Dada movement as well a in the Surrealist movement ; he make his mark a painter , sculptor , writer and maker of enigmatic objects. But above all he function a a source of imaginative energy and a a witness to the evolution of the century. He be an indispensable observer , but he be also an indispensable participator : a one- man early-warning system who over and over again suggest that Europe be in a bad way and likely to get worse. His importance be not so much that he make covetable work of art -- though he do indeed do that , and in great number -- but that , as much a Sigmund Freud or Franz Kafka , he be a part of his time. Max Ernst be bear on April 2 , 1891 , in the little town of Bruhe , near Cologne , Germany. His father , Phillpp Ernst , be a schoolmaster who teach the deaf. He be also a stern disciplinarian , something of a mystic and a particularly pedestrian Sunday painter. Max Ernst be bring up in the strict Roman Catholic tradition , but his inquiring and insubordinate nature soon bring him into conflict with his family , his school and his church. Deciding that small-town thought and small-town way be not for him , he become a precocious student both of Nietzsche and of Freud , whose `` Interpretation of Dreams '' come out while Max Ernst be in high school. He also concern himself with abnormal psychology and in particular with the artistic achievement of mental patient , which be then begin to be investigated. Good Judge of Talent He travel as and when he could from the age of 15 , visit museum , paint and draw from nature , discover a kinship with the early German painter who could be see , then a now , in the museum in Cologne. By the time he enter the University of Bonn in the winter of 1908-9 he have read all the new book and see many of the new painting that be set the tone for the 20th-century in Europe. He learn fast , and he be a very good judge of talent in others. He soon come to know the `` Young Rhineland '' group , which include Franz Marc and August Macke , both of whom make a considerable mark a painter before be kill in the first week of World War I. He be one of the young Germans who meet the French poet Guillaume Apollinaire and the French painter Robert Delaunay when they visit the Rhineland in 1913. This confirm him in the belief that Paris be the city in which he most want to live. Meanwhile , he show his work in the First German Autumn Salon in Berlin in 1913 ; his fellow exhibitor include Paul Klee , Marc Chagall and member of the Italian Futurist group. He get to Paris briefly in 1913 , but any plan for a longer sojourn be confound in August 1914 by the outbreak of World War I. Ernst serve throughout the war in the German Army , partly in France and partly in what be now Poland. He be a reluctant but apparently invulnerable soldier whose immunity to even the heavy blow on the head be such that his comrade nickname him `` the man with the iron skull. '' He manage to go on painting , and in 1916 he again show his painting in Berlin ; on that occasion he make the acquaintance of George Grosz. Through his contact in the art world he know of the Dada movement , which have begin in New York and Zurich and eventually make it way to Cologne , Hanover , Berlin and Paris. One of it co-founders , Jean Arp , have be a friend of his since 1914 ; and when Ernst be discharge from the Army in 1918 and make his way back to Cologne , it turn out that he and Arp be of one mind about the state of the world and the state of art. `` We young people come back from the war , '' he say later , `` in a state of stupefaction at the absurdity , the total swinishness and imbecility of what have go on for four years. We have to get back somehow at the 'civilization ' which be responsible for the war. '' Magic in His Fingers Ernst be ideally suit to the provocative and wholly unexpected method of the Dada movement. Like it other progenitor -- Francis Picabia , Marcel Duchamp , Man Ray , Kurt Schwitters and Arp -- he take it for grant that the physical life of what he produce might be short. Using whatever material lay at hand -- old engraving , object find in the street , news photograph -- he turn out to have magic in his finger ' ends. ( It be a magic that be still in full operation nearly 60 year later ) . He want to restate the claim of the imagination at a time when Europe have ground to a halt and every single one of the belief on which the prewar world have be found have prove to be false. Dada in Cologne be a matter of intense exasperation both to the British army of occupation and to the German police. Ernst be delight when the police close the Cologne Dada exhibition , and even more delighted when they come to him a few day later and say : `` Would you mind open up again ? Having to shut it down have give the police such a bad name. '' Not long after his return to Cologne he marry Louise Strauss , an art historian , and in 1920 his son , Jimmy , be born. ( Jimmy Ernst have for many year be well know in New York a a painter ) . The circumstance of Max Ernst 's life do not , however , favor a settled domesticity. He be determine to get to Paris , where he already have a certain reputation with Andre Breton , the future author of the `` Surrealist Manifestoes , '' and with Tristan Tzara , one of the founder of Dadaism. His first Paris exhibition be hold at the Galerie au Sans Pareil in 1921 ; it consist of collage that he have mail in a brown paper parcel , and it establish him immediately a an artist conspicuous for his nimble wit , his seemingly unlimited power of invention and his dazzling way with the French language. Known for 'Celebes' During the summer of 1921 Ernst 's link with France be far consolidate by his meeting with the poet Paul Eluard , who thereafter become one of his close friends. In 1922 he enter France illegally and set up house with Eluard and his wife , Gala ( later to become Mrs. Salvador Dali ) . Before long he become know for such monumental painting a `` The Elephant Celebes '' ( now in the Tate Gallery in London ) , `` Oedipus Rex '' and `` Ubu Imperator. '' These combine solid craftsmanship with imagery that have never lose it power to disturb. But the notion of settle down a a man who keep office hour , paint regularly for an annual exhibition and , in general , fit into the traditional pattern of the art world be abhorrent to Ernst in the mid-1920 's a it have be immediately after his discharge from the Army. He act by instinct and on impulse. In 1924 , for instance , he sell his entire output to a dealer in Dusseldorf and set out for the Far East to join Eluard on what seem to their friend to have be an unmotivated escapade. Unfettered Imagination By the time he return to Paris in October 1924 , Breton have publish his `` First Surrealist Manifesto. '' The role of the unconscious in art have be formulate in term not altogether unlike those that Ernst might have formulate for himself a a student before 1914 ; and he himself be regard a one of the principal ornament of the Surrealist movement. He continue to invent new way of make and combine image , some of them calculate , others involuntary. He aim at all time to keep his imagination unfettered ; and for that the procedure of traditional painting in oil often seem to him too slow , too labored , too lack in spontaneity. It be for this reason that so many of his most memorable achievement be owe to technique of a freakish or idiosyneratic sort. Rubbing on wood , cut with a sharp pair of scissors , import ready-made element like the one use in the `` Two Children Threatened by a Nightingale , '' which be now in the Museum of Modern Art in New York , he keep expectation at bay. In his art he be a born solitary , even if at time he draw close to friend like Arp and Joan Miro or be delight to join with Eluard in publish a book of poem in which it be very difficult to tell which line be owe to which hand. In the Surrealist Group , over which Breton rule a an absolute autocrat , he be an irreducible renagade to whom the very name of discipline be odious. It be not surprising that in 1926 he fell afoul of Breton for have make stage design ( with Miro ) for a Diaghilev ballet call `` Romeo and Juliet. '' There ensue between Ernst and Breton a hostility that continue until the day Breton died. It be in 1927 that Ernst begin on the great series of premonitory image that be in effect a portrait of the Europe that be to come. In `` The Horde , '' he show a demonic army on the march. In `` A Vision Inspired by the Porte St. Denis at Night , '' he show for the first but by no mean the last time a great city shutter and shattered. Disquiets of a more intimate sort be hint at in paint after painting. ( After his divorce from his first wife Ernst , in 1927 , marry Marie-Berthe Aurenche ; but it be not until his long and happy third marriage to the American painter Dorothea Tanning that he cease to take the gloomy possible view of the conjugal tie ) . In 1929 , Ernst publish what he call his `` collage-novel , '' `` La Femme 100 Tetas. '' Like it successor , `` Une Semaine de Bonte '' ( 1934 ) , this be make up primarily of altered engraving : plate from 19th-century pulp novel , magazine of adventure or manual of technical instruction he recombine in way that could never be predicted. Taken together , these two book form an encyclopedia of our century 's anxiety ; and one astonishing for it resource , it fiendish wit and it rare moment of lyrical repose. In 1933 , the year the Nazis come to power in Germany , Ernst paint `` The Petrified City , '' in which an unnamed acropolis be see to have be turn to stone in the aftermath of an unidentified catastrophe. Paintings like `` The Barbarians March West '' ( 1935 ) and `` The Angel of Hearth and Home '' ( 1937 ) leave the spectator in no doubt that Ernst consider both society in general and the institution of domesticity to be in the bad possible way. The war dance of the suppose angel in `` The Angel of Hearth and Home '' be indeed one of the most sinister image in modern painting. Moved to Avignon Ernst have be single out for disfavor among the Nazis ever since 1933 , when he make it quite clear in `` Europe After the Rain I '' that in his view Europe be threaten by a calamity that could be liken to a great flood tide of filth. All Nature be poison for him by the change that he saw in mankind. But instinct lead him even at the bad of time to build an ark for himself ; and in 1938 he move with the painter Leonora Carrington to a house not far from Avignon , France , which he set himself to restore and decorate a if he would be live there forever. With the outbreak of World War II he find himself , on the contrary , in trouble with the French , who intern him a an enemy alien. When the German army force the French to surrender , it become a matter of life and death for him to escape from France. Few men could be more difficult to imprison , but even after repeat escape it be as much a he could do to make his way , with the help of his son , Jimmy , and other Americans , to the United States. In 1941 , he arrive in New York with Peggy Guggenheim , who eventually become his fourth wife. He have his first show in New York at the Julien Levy Gallery in 1932 , and in 1936 Alfred Barr include him in the `` Fantastic Art , Dada , Surrealism '' exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art. Though not unknown , therefore , he find it difficult to make a living by his work in the United States during World War II. Once again he decide to make himself an ark : this time in Sedona , Ariz. , which he first visit in 1943. It be during that year that he paint the large picture call `` Vox Angelica , '' which be in effect a pictorial autobiography divide into well-judged compartments. Unlike many Europeans who come to the United States a exile at that time , Ernst take an enormous delight in the landscape , the speech habit and the imaginative tradition of the United States. What he do not so much care for -- and what never cease to rouse him to a fine fury of imprecation -- be the accusation of `` moral turpitude '' that come his way when his tempestuous private life finally come to an idyllic culmination in the company of the young painter Dorothea Tanning. This accusation be silence when he and Miss Tanning be marry in 1946 , but it never cease to rankle him that it should ever have be leveled. Arizona and the Colorado River be a source of unending pleasure to Ernst , a be the film of W. C. Fields and his new wife 's natural gaiety of spirit and freedom of speech. But fundamentally he be still a European , and once World War II be over , he begin to think of return to France. A first postwar visit to Paris in 1950 be the occasion of heartwarming re-encounters with Arp , Eluard , Tzara , Alberto Giacometti and others. But in practical term it be not quite so successful , since Ernst even at the age of 59 have nothing like the reputation he deserved. He be , indeed , the last of the old master of modern art to be give his due. But when he be award the grand prize for paint at the Venice Biennale in 1954 , public feeling at last begin to swing his way ; and over the next 20 year his reputation mount steadily and without interruption. He be , almost to the end of his life , a terrific worker. Nothing stop him. If his doctor be worry about his heart , Ernst take the cardiogram and use it a an ingredient in a picture. If his doctor tell him to stop work altogether , Ernst take off his painting overall and use them too a an ingredient in a picture. If illness come his way , he bore it with a Roman stoicism. He have all the honor that he care to accept in the 1960 's and 70's. All the exhibition , also. ( The last great Ernst show be one that begin at the Guggenheim Museum in New York in 1975 and later move to the Grand Palais in Paris ) . To those who meet him at those time it seem a if fame have long ago take him by one hand and fortune by the other. But it have not be so : for him to survive at all have need a heart of iron and a nature of steel. The late work lent itself even so to a euphoric interpretation. It have an enforced gaiety , a freshness and a felicity of invention that rarely fail him even when the demand for new work come in at a rate that would have daunt a man half his age. There be still magic in his finger ' end , just a he have the same command of language , the same upright and fiery stance before life and the same spectacularly fine look that have astonish his new friend in France more than 50 year earlier. He carry himself to the end a what he be : the only one of his kind .