December 21 , 1976 OBITUARY Mayor Richard Daley of Chicago Dies at 74 By PAUL DELANEY Special to The New York Times CHICAGO , Dec. 20 -- Mayor Richard J. Daley , head of this city 's Democratic machine and one of the most powerful Democrats in the country for more than two decade , die today of a heart attack. The 74-year-old Mayor , last of the big-city boss , be stricken after 2 P.M. and collapse on his way to lunch on the Near North Side. He be take to the office of his private physician , at 900 North Michigan Avenue , where he be treat a emergency equipment and vehicle stand by. He be pronounce dead at 2:55 o'clock. Earlier in the day , Mayor Daley attend the annual Christmas breakfast for department head , where they surprise him with round-trip ticket to Ireland for him and Mrs. Daley. At noon , during dedication ceremony for a new gymnasium on the Far South Side , he be ask to shoot the first basketball. He sink the shot on his first try. The portly , red-cheeked Irish-American be elect in 1975 to his sixth four-year term. The previous year he have suffer a stroke that keep him from his civic duty for four month , lead to speculation , even among close associate and friend , that he would not be able to run again. He not only win , but score overwhelming victory in the primary and general election , a usual. The Mayor will be immediately succeed by Alderman Wilson Frost , president pro tem of the City Council. Mr. Frost , who be black , will serve until the council convene a special meeting to elect an act Mayor from among the Aldermen. Then , a special election will be set within three month for the remain two-and-one-half year of Mayor Daley 's term. However , confusion set in immediately over the procedure for succession. Mr. Frost , arrive at City Hall , be ask whether he be now the Acting Mayor , in accordance with the law. `` Yes , I be , '' remark the top-ranking black associate of Mayor Daley. But Deputy Mayor Kenneth Sain say it be his understanding that there would be no Acting Mayor until the council hold it election. The death leave the city 's Democratic machine in disarray. There never be a successor because the Mayor never allow a line of succession to develop. Therefore , political observer expect a pitched battle among the Democrats not only for Mayor , but for party chairman , a post Mr. Daley also held. The battle be see develop among the following faction : Some of his old contemporary and possibly one of his son will make a try at take over. They include his son , Senator Richard M. Daley ; Secretary of State Michael J. Howlett , the Mayor 's hand-picked candidate in a losing effort in the gubernatorial race last month ; Lieut. Gov. Neil F. Hartigan , another of the Mayor 's loser last month , and Alderman Michael A. Bilandic. Younger machine politician frustrate over the tight-fisted control of the party machinery by the Mayor be a factor. Among them be Alderman Edward R. Vrdolyak and Edward M. Burke. The independent , who bitterly oppose Mayor Daley , be not expect to be much more of a threat with his death. Blacks represent the big single block of voter in the city , and be crucial to the success of the machine. But they be severely divide , with some tie tightly to the machine. In Command Since 1955 The Mayor have dominate politics in this city since his first term , in 1955 , after work his way up from precinct politics. He also become a force in national Democratic politics a Illinois be one of those key , big industrial state that have be crucial to Democratic Presidential aspirants. But recent time show a definite decline in his power. He lose several post that help him maintain that power , include the Governor 's seat and the office of State 's Attorney. The decline could also be see in the state legislature , where his force have suffer several major setback , include attempt to seek additional fund for Chicago 's schools. As in life , a veil of secrecy surround the event of the Mayor 's last minutes. For two hour , the nature of his illness be leave to unconfirmed report of his choke on food while eat with friend to collapse on the sidewalk. The police close off the section around the office building a throng of holiday shopper on the avenue talk about the unknown illness. Doctors from Northwestern University 's Hospital , four block away , be call in and emergency equipment , include an ambulance , stood by a report circulate that the ill Mayor would be take to the hospital. And at Northwestern , there be report that medical personnel be stand by await his arrival. Then the Announcement This go on for nearly two hour , and even when the ambulance wheel away , it rear window cover , many person think it be take him to the hospital. It be finally announce at about 4 P.M. by Mr. Kenneth Sain that Mayor Daley have died. Later , the Mayor 's physician , Dr. Thomas J. Coogan Jr. , say Mr. Daley have come to his office complain about chest pains. The doctor say he take a cardiogram and leave the examine room to alert the hospital that the Mayor would be come over. When he return to the room , Dr. Coogan say he find that Mr. Daley have be stricken. The doctor work on the Mayor , assist by his associate. They be join by fire department paramedic and doctor from Northwestern University. They work on him until 3:40. Dr. Coogan say while he be out of the room the Mayor speak to his son , Richard M. Daley , on the telephone. The Mayor 's wife , Eleanor , and their three daughter and four son and their wife be with him at the time of death. Dr. Coogan say the Mayor die of ventricular fibrillation , a disordered heartbeat that he term `` one of the lethal rhythm of the heart. '' Unchallenged Leader By SETH S. KING In any case study of America 's great political machine , it be commonly accept that the Cook County Democratic organization be the large , richest and the last in the nation still at full thrust. For more than 20 year the unchallenged driver of this awesomely powerful vehicle be Richard J. Daley. From the day in 1953 when he seize it control until he die , Mr. Daley drive the Cook County machine , and the machine direct virtually every municipal function perform for the people of Chicago and many of those offer resident of the suburb in Cook County that surround Chicago on three sides. Knew Ward Functions He understand every bolt and gear in the machine , and how to utilize it power. No detail of it function be too small for him to bother with , even after 20 year at it head. He understand the block by block development of the machine , begin with the precinct captain , who hold card file on every resident in their precinct and who call on every one of them before Election Day to make certain that each understood whom the organization be supporting. He know the working of the ward committeeman , who direct the precinct captain and stand ready to see that the garbage of the faithful voter be pick up and the pothole in their street be filled. And he understand the use of the more than 35,000 city and county job ( non-civil service ) available to those machine 's worker who deliver the vote in their precincts. The wealthy captain of Chicago 's industry and real estate , most of whom be Republicans and live in the suburb , know little of Richard Daley 20 year ago. But they soon learn that he be a eager for their prosperity and expansion a they be , and they soon put aside philosophical difference they may have have with him and become reliable source of fund and approval. In return , they could count on the machine for the best of tax break and the least of zone problems. For almost all of those 20 year , Mr. Daley be also the dominate force among Illinois Democrats. And with his tight grip on the state 's large convention delegation , he have be one of the most potent figure in the selection of the Democratic Party 's Presidential candidates. `` Daley mean the whole ball game '' the late Senator Robert F. Kennedy once say when assess the decide factor in Democratic conventions. The Mayor do indeed play a major role in gain the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1952 and again in 1956 for Adlai E. Stevenson , whose election a Governor of Illinois have depend heavily on Mr. Daley 's efforts. The Mayor , who already have an abide friendship with Joseph P. Kennedy , a fellow Irish-American whom he understand and appreciate , be certainly the decisive force in nominate John F. Kennedy in 1960 and elect him President that fall. The Mayor deliver a 465,000-vote plurality in Cook County for Mr. Kennedy , and many political scholar still insist that the Cook County machine 's ability to produce badly need vote from the graveyard be what win Illinois for Mr. Kennedy , who carry the state by a feeble 8,858 vote and thus defeat Richard M. Nixon in the nation. Rowdy Convention Mr. Daley savor his convention role and he be delight , in 1968 , when Chicago be once again select a the site of the Democratic National Convention. But this pleasure turn sour when the already divide and disorganize Democrats belabor each other in the party 's bad brawl and the Chicago police bloody the strident young antiwar activist outside the Amphitheater in teargas turmoil. Few who follow these antic will ever forget the televised sequence show Mr. Daley draw a finger across his jowl in a signal to the podium to cut the microphone a Senator Abraham A. Ribicoff spoke of thing the Mayor do not want heard. Hubert H. Humphrey , Mr. Daley 's candidate , win the 1968 nomination. But the Democratic Party be leave in shamble and Mr. Daley be look upon by many in the national party a an anachronistic ogre. While the Democrats in Chicago , as well a many of his nonpolitical constituent , still regard their Mayor with admiration , his stand in the national party suffer still further. Senator George McGovern and the young liberal in the party who support him be alien to Mr. Daley and so be the organizational reform Mr. McGovern push onto the national party. The Mayor ignore these reform and in 1972 suffer the ignominy of rejection when Alderman William Singer , a brash young independent Democrat , join with Rev. Jesse L. Jackson , the black leader of Operation PUSH , to unseat the Daley-controlled convention delegation. The Mayor go to the convention in Miami , but it door be close to him. Back in the Fold The age Mayor be welcome back to the National Democratic fold in the wake of Mr. McGovern 's defeat. He be once again court by the nation 's party regular at the Democrats ' miniconvention in Kansas City in 1974. But last November 's election show clearly that his influence in statewide politics be eroding. He turn out 65 percent of the city 's vote for Mr. Carter , but he could not pull in enough down-state support to win Illinois for the former Georgia Governor. No one be a more thorough product of his environment than Richard J. Daley. He be bear on May 15 , 1902 , in a modest brick house in the Bridgeport neighborhood of Chicago , the son of an Irish-American sheet-metal worker and union activist. He grow up on that same block and when he die he be still live in another modest brick bungalow at 3536 South Lowe Avenue , a few door down from his birthplace. Bridgeport be a tough , blue-collar area of Irish-Catholics , part of the `` Rack of the Yards '' district west of Chicago 's odorous stockyard and pack houses. Mr. Daley attend the neighborhood parochial school and De La Salle Institute , a Catholic secondary school. Short and powerfully build , he play hard , fought hard in the neighborhood gang , and from an early age work hard , deliver paper and later push cattle through the stockyard pens. But the stockyard be no place that young Daley want to spend his life , and he quickly recognize that in Chicago , an Irish Catholic boy could find happiness and a good living in politics. Mr. Daley become a precinct captain when he be 21 and shortly thereafter , put the stenographic training he have receive at De La Salle to good use , he become a clerk in the City Council. His friend and even his detractor agree that he work hard , stayed sober and never appear to lose his vision of power at the top of the political heap. He hold city job while he become a ward committeeman and then a legislator , spend nearly 10 year in the State Assembly and State Senate. There he be know a the man who would always attend meeting a he be suppose to , always behave himself by abstain from the fleshpots of Springfield , and who become a recognize expert on finance and taxation. He have also put himself through DePaul University and it law school. And he have marry a neighborhood Irish-American girl name Eleanor Guilfoyle , whom he and everyone else who know her call `` Sis. '' As he become a member of the Cook County Democratic Central Committee and his political weight increase , he throw it behind some atypical figures. Mr. Daley be an active force in Adlai Stevenson 's successful campaign for Governor in 1948 , the election to the Senate that same year of a Chicago University economist name Paul Douglas , and in the surprising victory of Harry S. Truman in Illinois. Kept on Winning A grateful Governor Stevenson name Mr. Daley Director of State Revenue. But in 1953 , he rise to a far more important pinnacle : Cook County Democratic chairman , the top of the political heap and a position that he would jealously guard until his death. Two year later , in 1955 , when the machine have tire of the amateurish reform of Mayor Martin J. Kennelly , a Democrat , Mr. Daley lead the move to dump Mr. Kennelly. He get himself `` draft '' for Mayor and , after a rough primary , smother Mr. Kennelly. He then go on to win a free-swinging , Chicago-style general election , replete with the familiar charge of vote fraud , against Republican Alderman Robert Merriam. Every four year after that Mr. Daley run again and win , each time by an increasingly large margin a the machine prosper and the Republican opposition become more enfeebled. In the 22 year that he head Chicago 's municipal government , Mr. Daley become synonymous with the city 's image : burly , rough , powerful , restless and , except for it burgeon black resident , a study in middle-class prosperity. He quickly become know a a brick and mortar man , and for most of his tenure Chicago grow upward in a continuous building boom. Not all of this time be smooth. The Mayor suffer the embarrassment of periodic police scandals. In his later term Chicago 's white begin flee to the suburb at a rate of 55,000 a year. As the city 's black population grow large , the machine 's control over it slipped. Mr. Daley weather the painful period of the open-housing march of the late Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in 1966. But he be emotionally shake and furious at the rioting and destruction in the city 's two black ghetto in the wake of Dr. King 's assassination in April 1968. It be then that he issue his `` shoot to kill '' order on arsonist and place himself beyond the touch of the blacks. In his final term the machine still have the city 's throttle in it grip. It still tolerate nothing more than verbal opposition from without and maintain the strict obedience from within. The Mayor have the unwavering support of virtually all the 50 alderman on the City Council. Nonetheless , there be misfire that injure his pride and peace of mind. In the primary of 1972 , Dan Walker , a highly successful corporation lawyer , upset all the form sheet by beat Paul Simon , the choice of the Mayor and the regular Democratic organization , in the race for Governor. That fall Mr. Walker , who make many caustic remark about machine politician before he make a pre-election peace with Mr. Daley , edge the incumbent Republican , Richard Ogilvie , and become Governor. He also become a rival in Democratic politics to Mr. Daley. Even more damaging be the machine 's defeat in the fall of 1972 in the election for state 's attorney , the county chief prosecutor. Equally a bad , with the election of Richard M. Nixon in 1968 , the United States Attorney for the Chicago district be now a Republican. The machine do not rest easily in the Mayor 's last years. Several of the machine 's top gear , some of them Mr. Daley 's old and closest political associate , be indict on Federal and county charge of conspiracy and bribery , and some be convicted. While none of this implicated Mr. Daley directly , he do suffer the embarrassment of the disclosure of his young son John represent a local insurance firm that suddenly get more than $ 3 million in city insurance premium , after young Mr. Daley have come to work for the firm a a beginning agent. Even so , Mr. Daley seem both politically and physically indestructible a he begin his 72d year and his 20th year in office. When he suddenly enter the hospital in early May 1974 , it be learn he have suffer a mild stroke and that , while he have appear a robust and vigorous a ever , he have also be suffer from a mild form of diabetes and high blood pressure. Mayor Daley be survive by his wife , Eleanor , and by seven child -- Richard , Michael , John , William , Mary Carol , Eleanor , and Patricia , and by 10 grandchild .