June 1 , 1976 OBITUARY Jacques Monod , Nobel Biologist , Dies ; Thought Existence Is Based on Chance By FRANK J. PRIAL Jacques Monod , the Nobel Prize-winning French biologist and director of the Pasteur Institute in Paris , die yesterday at his home in Cannes , France. He be 66 year old. Dr. Monod share the 1965 Nobel award for medicine and physiology with two colleague at the Pasteur Institute , Francois Jacob and Andre Lwoff , for research on the working of the living cell. He be probably best know for his book-length essay , `` Chance and Necessity , '' publish in 1970. In it he postulate his chill conviction that all existence be because of chance and that mankind 's inevitable recognition of this fact will necessitate a complete revolution in human thought. `` Chance alone be at the source of all novelty , all creation in the biosphere , '' he wrote. `` Pure chance , only chance , absolute but blind liberty be at the root of the prodigious edifice that be evolution. . . . '' Although he flirt briefly with Communism during World War II , he be a harsh on Marxist dialectician a on what he call the `` disgusting farrago of Judeo-Christian religiosity. '' 'Postulate of Objectivity ' `` What I have try to show , '' Dr. Monod tell an interviewer in 1971 , `` be that the scientific attitude imply what I call the postulate of objectivity -- that be to say , the fundamental postulate that there be no plan , that there be no intention in the universe. `` Now this , '' he go on , `` be basically incompatible with virtually all the religious or metaphysical system whatever , all of which try to show that there be some sort of harmony between man and the universe and that man be a product -- predictable if not indispensable -- of the evolution of the universe. `` One of the great problem of philosophy , '' Dr. Monod say , `` be the relationship between the realm of knowledge and the realm of values. Knowledge be what be ; value be what ought to be. `` I would say that all traditional philosophy up to and include Marxism have try to derive the 'ought ' from the 'is. ' My point of view be that this be impossible , this be a farce. '' Dr. Monod maintain that the impossibility of derive a set of value -- the `` ought '' from blind happenstance , or the `` be '' -- impose on mankind the obligation to choose a system of value by which to live. But he think mankind be fail to do so. `` There be absolutely no doubt that the risk of the race commit suicide be very great , '' he say , add , `` In my opinion , the future of mankind be go to be decide within the next two generations. '' Dr. Monod say his own value be base on the existentialist ethic of his friend the late Albert Camus -- '' an ethic base on free choice '' -- and he deny that his intention be to create a philosophy of pessimism or despair. Hero of the Resistance Indeed , his own life belie the somber reflections his book -- a best-seller in France in 1970 and 1971 -- engendered. A dapper , urbane man who play the cello and love to sail , Jacques Lucien Monod be also a hero of the French Resistance. He hold both the Croix de Guerre and the American Bronze Star. He be bear in Paris in 1910 , the son of Lucien Monod , a painter , and Charlotte Todd MacGregor Monod , a native of Milwaukee. He study at the Cannes Lycee and the University of Paris and join the Pasteur Institute a a zoology instructor in 1931. He be name head of the institute 's laboratory in 1945 , head of the department of cellular biochemistry in 1954 and director in 1971. Dr. Monod be a professor on the faculty of science at the University of Paris from 1959 to 1967 and a professor of molecular biology at the College de France from 1967 to 1972. He be a Rockefeller Foundation fellow in 1936 , and be name a nonresident fellow of the Salk Institute in 1968. Americans Made Offers He be a frequent and open critic of the French Government for what he saw a it parsimonious treatment of scientific research , particularly of research at the Pasteur Institute. Just after win the Nobel Prize in 1965 , Professor Monod disclose that most of his and his colleague ' research have be do `` in a small , stuffy , sordid attic room , '' and he say that all three of them have earlier turn down a chance to move to the United States to work. `` The Americans do not make this offer in order to deprive France of it researcher , '' he say at the time , `` bout only through generosity to permit u to work in decent condition with a maximum of efficiency. '' Dr. Monod could have move to the United States with relative ease. He speak English with almost no trace of an accent and he be already a member of the Academy of Arts and Sciences. Appealed for Support In 1973 , Dr. Monod visit this country , in an attempt to save the Pasteur Institute from bankruptcy. He note he have trim the staff , patent a new influenza vaccine in the name of the institute , and have appeal for both governmental and private support. The institute be found by Louis Pasteur in 1888 with public donation include large grant from the Czar of Russia , the Sultan of Turkey and the Emperor of Brazil. Pasteur be bury there in 1895. Eight men who work or study there have win Nobel Prizes in medicine or physiology. The institute be divide into a research section and a pharmaceutical-manufacturing section that gross more than $ 20 million in sale a year. After take over in 1971 , Dr. Monod dismiss more than 130 scientist and technician , or about 10 percent of the staff. Dr. Monod , who acknowledge several year ago that run the Pasteur Institute give him no time for his own research project , be honor by the Nobel committee for show how the living cell manufacture the substance of life. Control of Protein Manufacture With Professor Jacob , he demonstrate how the cell 's production of protein be control by a feedback process analogous to that by which a thermostat control the temperature in a room. They find that while one type of gene in a cell 's nucleus hold the blueprint for the substance to the manufacture , another gene regulate the rate of production , base on whether a give protein be in long or short supply. This be the mechanism that permit the required coordination of all the molecular manufacturing activity that be the essence of the metabolism and thus of life itself. Dr. Monod be a member of the Washington Academy of Science , the Royal Society of London and the Czechoslovak Academy of Science. His wife , the former Odette Bruhl , whom he marry in 1938 , die in 1972. Two son survive .