June 11 , 1976 OBITUARY Adolph Zukor Is Dead at 103 ; Built Paramount Movie Empire By ALBIN KREBS Adolph Zukor , who make entertainment history in 1912 when he offer the American public it first feature-length film , die at his Century City apartment in Los Angeles yesterday. He be 103 year old. Mr. Zukor `` take a nap and die at 4 o'clock in the afternoon , '' accord to a spokesman for the Paramount Pictures Corporation , of which Mr. Zukor serve a chairman of the board emeritus after help to build the film empire. The death be attribute to natural causes. Adolph Zukor be the completely atypical movie tycoon -- unflamboyant , deliberate , mild-mannered , predictable , almost self-effacing. While other pioneer in the motion picture industry , such a D.W. Griffith , Samuel Goldwyn and Louis B. Mayer , with their well-publicized feud , rage and personal eccentricity , become celebrity almost as well-known a the star who appear in their film , Mr. Zuker could have be mistake for an ordinary businessman , like the fur merchant he once be , or perhaps a banker. But Mr. Zukor , who prefer to work from behind the scene , be a true visionary who shrewdly saw , well before most others do , that the motion picture could become the great mass entertainment and artistic medium that it be today. His fascination with and confidence in the movie go back to a day in 1901 , when he stand on tiptoe ( he be 5 foot 5 inch tall ) in front of a penny arcade peepshow machine and view his first movie , a two-minute reel call `` Fun in a Boarding House. '' In 1903 , scarcely a decade after the motion picture have be invent , Mr. Zukor invest in a Union Square penny arcade feature movie peepshow , and in 1912 he make entertainment history when he daringly offer the American public it first feature-length film , `` Queen Elizabeth , '' star Sarah Bernhardt. By the mid-twenties , Mr. Zukor have become president of the giant movie production and distribution empire know today a the Paramount Pictures Corporation. 'Look Ahead a Little' It be his policy a he put it , to `` look ahead a little and gamble a lot '' on the future of the movie business. As recently a 1953 , when he be 80 year old and Hollywood be morbidly worried that it most feared enemy , television , would put it out of business , Mr. Zukor sound a confident visionary note. `` Rather than lose the public because television be here , '' he ask , `` would n't it be smart to adopt television a our instrument ? '' Which , of course , be precisely what happen in the next decade. Mr. Zukor 's view of his success be disarmingly simple. `` I have vision -- calculated vision -- and the circumstance be fortunate , '' he say late in 1968 in an interview for this article. `` I want to be a merchant when I be a boy. And that be what I be now and always have be -- a merchant. '' Had he not want so much to be a merchant , Mr. Zukor might very well have become a rabbi. `` I have the devil of a time persuade my uncle , Kalman Liebermann , who be a rabbi himself , that I be n't cut out for the theological call , '' he said. Mr. Zukor be bear in Riese , Hungary ; on Jan. 7 , 1873. His father , Jacob , who operate a general store in the small village of thatched-roof hut , die when he be a year old , and his mother , the former Hannah Liebermann , die when he be 7. Adolph and a brother , Arthur , who do become a rabbi , go to live with their Uncle Kalman. Started at $ 2 a Week When he be 16 yea old , and with $ 40 sew into the lining of his overcoat , Adolph Zukor arrive at the immigration center at Castle Garden in New York Harbor. His first job be sweep the floor in a fur store and he be pay and he be pay $ 2 a week , but he soon learn to be a fur cutter and be make $ 4. In 1892 Mr. Zukor buy a $ 10 railroad ticket to Chicago , where he go into the fur business with a New York acquaintance , Morris Kohn. Then , a in late life , Mr. Zukor be a bit on the shy side , prefer to stay in the shop to do the cut while Mr. Kohn solicit order for furs. The business prospered. While in Chicago , Mr. Zukor meet Lottie Kaufman and marry her in 1897. They have two child , Eugene , who become a Paramount executive in 1916 , and Mildred. The Zukors and Mr. Kohn move their fur business to New York in 1900 and in 1903 join with Mitchell Mark in the operation of a penny arcade in a former butcher shop on 14th Street at Union Square. The Automatic Vaudeville Company , a it be call , soon open branch in Philadelphia , Boston and Newark , with new capital furnish by Marcus Loew , another fur merchant , who eventually be to become president of Loew 's Inc. , parent company of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures. The penny arcade offer a variety of entertainment machine , include phonograph with individual listening device and movie peepshow that feature brief , storyless films. Mr. Zukor , become increasingly fascinate with anything have to do with motion picture , begin , in 1906 , plow his profit from the arcade into Hales ' Tours , a venture that prove disastrous. In small theater build to simulate railroad coach , travelogue be project on a screen , accompany by recording of train whistle , rumble wheel and ring bells. `` The illusion be create among the spectator that they be travel through the country they view on the screen , '' Mr. Zukor recall year later. `` It be a good business for a time , but the novelty soon wear off , and we lose a lot of money -- myself and some friend in the fur trade. I eventually reimburse all of them. '' The touring car be convert into nickelodeon theater , which , because they offer long , large move picture than the penny arcade , be become increasingly popular. `` You have to understand , '' Mr. Zukor explain year later , `` what be happen in this country to see why movie be catch on. From 1900 to 1910 , about nine or ten million immigrant pour in , and because nickelodeon movie be new , cheap , silent and set up no language difficulty , they become a popular pastime. '' As treasurer of Loew 's Enterprises , Mr. Zukor help forge a chain of about two dozen nickelodeon house , and the company expand into actual theater operation by convert fur shop , bakery and clothing and other store into movie exhibition halls. The film available for the movie house be severely limit , both in number and in quality , however , because the motion picture industry at the time be control by a trust. ( It be not break , in fact , until 1915 , through Sherman Act litigation. ) In 1912 Mr. Zukor resign from Loew 's Enterprises because , he say , `` I be restless and impatient to produce full-length classical play , which I believe would be the real future of films. '' Edison 's Aid Enlisted He interest Daniel Frohman , a Broadway producer , in the idea. Mr. Frohman persuade Thomas Alva Edison , a member of the film trust , to get the trust 's assurance that no legal obstruction would be erect to prevent Mr. Zukor and Mr. Frohman from exhibit a feature-length film. Having learn that American right to `` Queen Elizabeth , '' star Sandra Bernhardt , at the time the most famous actress in the world , be available for a $ 35,000 investment in the production of the French-made feature , the two partner close the deal and rent the Lyceum Theater to present the film. The night of July 12 , 1912 , be a historic one for the motion picture industry. The elite of the theater world and society figure who would not have be catch view a movie , then consider a vulgar form of entertainment , attend the premiere of `` Queen Elizabeth. '' The movie last only 40 minute , but it have be consider the first feature-length film to be show in America. It be of incredibly poor quality , and the camera be not kind to the age Miss Bernhardt , who have to hobble through her scene on a wooden leg. But if Bernhardt be willing to make movie , the fashionable crowd apparently conclude , then movie have arrived. The Lyceum resound with cheers. Mr. Zukor 's gamble have pay off. `` Queen Elizabeth '' be the first film to be show around the country on a `` roadshow '' or reserved-seat , basis , and it make about $ 200,000 for Mr. Zukor and Mr. Frohman , who form the Famous Players Film Company to produce , accord to their motto , `` famous play with famous players. '' 'Monte Cristo ' a Success The company 's first picture , in 1913 , be `` The Count of Monte Cristo , '' star a rather corpulent James O'Neill. It be a huge success , and the feature picture sweepstakes , with new company sprout up almost daily , be on. The first of the new company to merge with Mr. Zukor 's be the Jesse L. Lasky Feature Picture Play Company , which have produce the first make in Hollywood movie , `` The Squaw Man , '' direct by Cecil B. DeMille. Shoved out of the merged concern in the process be Samuel Goldwyn , later to become a legendary Hollywood producer. Mr. Zukor continue to engineer merger and consolidations. The Paramount Pictures Corporation be form to distribute film make by Famous Players-Lasky , and a dozen small company pull into Mr. Zukor 's corporate giant. The consolidation lead to formation of a nationwide film distribution system. And in 1919 , the company buy 135 theater in the Southern state , make the produce concern the first that guarantee exhibition of it own product in it own theaters. Theater Chain Grew Mr. Zukor , by then turn out 60 feature a year , make deal to show them all in theater control by Loew 's Enterprises , and he continue to add more theater to his own chain. By 1920 he be in a position to charge what he wish for film rental and he develop the concept , now the accepted practice in the film industry , by which the distributor charge the exhibitor a percentage of box-office receipts. Over objection of his board of director , Mr. Zukor buy a huge plot of ground at Broadway and 43d Street to build the Paramount Theater and office building , a 39-story monument to himself that have it grand opening in 1926. His private of- [ MISSING TEXT ] Mr. Zukor be , primarily , a businessman. He do not take the same personal , down-to- the-last-detail interest in the making of his movie that producer-executives such a Samuel Goldwyn and Louis B. Mayer did. He spend most of his time in New York , but make at least one long trip annually to Hollywood to take a look. He be a tiny , birdlike man , lean-faced and sharp-eyed , with a strong chin , a firm mouth , an aquiline nose. His hand be long and bony , and he wave them about when he spoke. He never quite lose his [ MISSING TEXT ] Mr. Zukor be an inveterate and accomplish card player -- bridge , pinochle , poker , all appeal to him. He be say to have keep associate play pinochle nonstop during train trip between New York and Los Angeles. His devotion to golf be so complete that he have an 18-hole course lay out on his 760-acre estate , the Dells , north of New City , N.Y. , in Rockland County. He live there for 30 year , until shortly after the death of his wife in 1956. Variety of Nicknames Around Paramount , Mr. Zukor be know by a variety of nickname , range from `` Sugar '' ( which Zukor mean in Hungarian ) to `` Uncle Adolph '' to `` Creepy , '' the last- name because he move so lithely and silently that he tend to startle people. Mr. Zukor have a deft way of handle artistic temperament. In the mid-twenties , for example , when Gloria Swanson be Paramount 's reign star , he import the popular Polish-born actress Pola Negri. The two prima donna loathe each other. Mr. Zukor solve the problem , he say year later , `` by keep the two lady a continent apart -- Swanson at the studio in Astoria , Queens , and Negri in Hollywood. '' For year Mr. Zukor be force to renegotiate Mary Pickford 's contract every time Miss Pickford hear that Rudolph Valentino , who star for Mr. Zukor in `` The Sheik , '' have get a salary raise. At one point Miss Pickford tell Mr. Zukor : `` You know , for year I 've dream of make $ 20,000 a year before I be 20 , and I 'll be 20 very soon. '' `` I could take a hint , '' Mr. Zukor recall wryly. `` She get the $ 20,000 , and before long I be pay her $ 100,000 a year. Mary be a terrific businessman. '' Miss Pickford have a stage mother who could upstage all stage mother , and on one occasion Mr. Zukor have to write into a Pickford contract a clause that provide the star 's mother $ 25,000 for her `` moral support. '' It be worth it , he say later , because `` little Mary make u some millions. '' Mr. Zukor become Paramount 's board chairman in 1935 but in recent year , have the title honorary chairman and chairman emeritus. He never lose interest in make -- and saving- -money for Paramount. In recent year Mr. Zukor spend the winter month in Hollywood , where his son , Eugene , lives. He maintain an apartment at 24 West 55th Street in New York , in the same building a his daughter , Mildred , the divorced wife of Arthur Loew , Marcus Loew 's son .