December 26 , 1977 OBITUARY Chaplin 's Little Tramp , an Everyman Trying to Gild Cage of Life , Enthralled World By ALDEN WHITMAN No motion picture actor so captured and enthral the world a do Charles Spencer Chaplin , a London ragamuffin who become an immortal artist for his deft and effective humanization of man 's tragicomic conflict with fate. In more than 80 movie from 1914 to 1967 , he either portray or elaborate ( he be a writer and director as well a an actor ) the theme of the little fellow capriciously knock about by life , but not so utterly batter that he do not pick himself up in the hope that the next encounter would turn out better. His harass but gallant Everyman be the Little Tramp , part clown , part social outcast , part philosopher. He be `` forever seek romance , but his foot wo n't let him , '' Chaplin once explain , indicate that romance connote not so much courtship a the fulfillment of fancy. Stumble Chaplin 's Everyman might , but he always manage to maintain his dignity and self-respect. Moreover , he sometimes fell a Goliath through superb agility , a little bit of luck and a touch of pluck. There be pathos to the Little Tramp , yet he really do not want to be pitied. The essence of Chaplin 's humor be satire , sometimes subtle a in `` The Kid '' and `` The Gold Rush , '' sometimes acerbic a in `` The Great Dictator '' and `` Monsieur Verdoux. '' `` The human race I prefer to think of a the underworld of the god , '' he said. `` When the god go slum they visit the earth. '' And what they saw mostly be uncelestial folly. In ridicule that folly Chaplin display a basic affection for the human race. He be serious and funny at the same time , and it be this blend of attitude that elevate his comedy beyond film slapstick into the realm of artistry. Rebounding From Adversity A serious theme in `` The Gold Rush , '' for example , be man 's inhumanity to man. The comedy arise from the hero 's adversity , illustrate by his boiling and eating of his shoe with the eclat of a gourmet. The element of contrast exemplify by that scene be at the root of Chaplin 's comedy. This sense of comedy tickle the fancy of million in the United States for half a century , despite some notoriety that come to Chaplin through marital and political misadventures. The Little Tramp , the comedy character that lift it creator to endure fame , be neatly accouter in baggy trouser , outsize shoe , and undersize derby redolent of decayed gentility , a fray short cutaway and a sporty bamboo cane. A jet black mustache complete the costume. What make it all fit together be that it complement Chaplin 's slight stature -- he be 5 foot 4 inch tall -- and his slimness -- he weigh about 130 in his prime years. Although Chaplin often suggest that the costume be a studied contrivance , the fact seem to be that it be arrive at by accident in 1914 when he be break into film with Mack Sennett. Sennett , famous for his Keystone Kops and other comic short , send Chaplin to Venice , Calif. , to make a bit of film eventually call `` Kid Auto Races at Venice. '' He be tell to wear something funny , and he assemble , on a grab-bag basis from other member of the company , pant belong to Fatty Arbuckle , size 14 shoe each place on the wrong foot , a tight coat , a colleague 's derby , a prop cane and a false mustache that he cut down to fit his face. The splayed shuffle be a touch make up on the spur of the moment. With a few exception Chaplin use the costume for about 25 year , and it be his symbol for a lifetime. The artistry with which it be employ , of course , evolve , so that the Little Tramp of `` Modern Times '' be a far more complex character than that in `` Kid Auto Races at Venice. '' The explanation for this be the meticulousness with which Chaplin study the structure of comedy. Desiring to make audience laugh , he analyze the ingredient of his approach to comedy and each scene that go into the whole. 'Desperately Serious ' `` All my picture be build around the idea of get me into trouble and so give me the chance to be desperately serious in my attempt to appear a a normal little gentleman , '' he write early in his Hollywood career , add : `` That be why , no matter how desperate the predicament be , I be always very much in earnest about clutch my cane , straighten my derby hat and fix my tie , even though I have just land on my head. '' One of Chaplin 's basic routine have to do with dignity. `` Even funny than the man who have be make ridiculous be the man who , have have something funny happen to him , refuse to admit that anything out of the way have happen , and attempt to maintain his dignity , '' he write in 1918. He continue : `` I be so sure of this point that I do not try to get myself into embarrass situation , but I also incriminate the other character in the picture. When I do this , I always aim for economy of means. By that I mean that when one incident can get two big , separate laugh , it be much good than two individual incidents. Achieved Artistic Control `` In 'The Adventurer ' I accomplish this by first place myself on a balcony , eat ice cream with a girl. On the floor directly underneath the balcony I put a stout , dignify , well-dressed woman at a table. Then , while eat the ice cream , I let a piece drop off my spoon , slip through my baggy trouser and drop from the balcony onto this woman 's neck. `` The first laugh come at my embarrassment over my own predicament. The second , and the much great one , come when the ice cream land on the woman 's neck and she shriek and start to dance around. Only one incident have be use , but it have get two people into trouble , and have also get two big laughs. `` Simple a this trick seem , there be two real point of human nature involve in it. One be the delight the average person take in see wealth and luxury in trouble. The other be the tendency of the human be to experience within himself the emotion he see on the stage or screen. '' In his early day in Hollywood Chaplin have little to say about how his move be construct or filmed. Later , though , he achieve artistic control , and he take infinite pain in perfect each scene , often shoot hundred of foot of film for a few minute of final screen action. `` With only a rudimentary idea in his head he concoct the story a he go along. '' Theodore Huff write in `` The Literature of Cinema. '' `` Some picture change completely in the course of production. He improvise a scene or a series of gag , then discuss the result the next day in the projection room. A bit might be use or all of it might be reshot ; or the whole project might be scrap and some other idea substituted. . . . In 'City Lights ' the meeting of the blind flower girl and the tramp take month before the variation that satisfy Chaplin be reached. '' A Train of Possibilities Some of Chaplin 's best comic situation result from his keen-eyed observation of life around him. `` I watch people inside a theater to see when they laugh , I watch them everywhere to get material which they can laugh at , '' he explained. `` I be pass a firehouse one day , '' he go on , `` and head a fire alarm ring. I watch the men slide down a pole , climb onto the engine and rush off to the fire. `` At once a train of comic possibility occur to me. I saw myself sleep in bed , oblivious to the clanging of the fire bell. This point would have universal appeal , because everyone like to sleep. I saw myself slide down the pole , play trick with the fire horse , rescue my heroine , fall off the fire engine a it turn a corner , and many other point along the same lines. `` I store these point away in my mind and some time later , when I make 'The Fireman , ' I use every one of them. `` Another time , I go up and down a move staircase in a department store. I get to think how this could be utilize for a picture , and I finally make it the basis for 'The Floorwalker. ' `` Watching a prize fight suggest 'The Champion , ' in which I , the small man , knock out a big bruiser by have a horseshoe conceal in my glove. '' Added to Chaplin 's talent for perceive the comic potential in everyday occurrence be his skill at use contrast. `` Contrast spell interest , '' he once remarked. `` If I be be chase by a policeman , I always make the policeman seem heavy and clumsy while , by crawl through his leg , I appear light and acrobatic. If I be be treat harshly , it be always a big man who be do it , so that , by the contrast between the big and the little , I get the sympathy of the audience , and always I try to contrast my seriousness of manner with the ridiculousness of the incident. '' Entering motion picture in what be virtually the medium 's infancy -- before the advent of feature-length film and , of course , sound -- Chaplin be oblige to rely on situational comedy and on pantomime , the use of mute gesture and facial expression to convey emotion. Transcending linguistic barrier , this form of body language permit the actor to be readily understand by people everywhere. Affection and Adulation `` I be know in part of the world by people who have never hear of Jesus Christ , '' Chaplin say matter-of-factly early in his career. Indeed , after only two year on the screen , `` he be unquestionably the top figure in the motion picture industry , '' accord to Mr. Huff. Audience demand for his picture be phenomenal. For example , one New York theater play his film continuously from 1914 to 1923 , stop only because the building burn down. By 1917 world-renowned performer visit his studio -- Ignace Paderewski , Leopold Godowsky , Nellie Melba , Harry Lauder. When the Nijinsky ballet play Los Angeles , it dancer spot Chaplin in the audience and halt the show for a half hour while they embrace him. His popularity at the box office win him a $ 1-million contract -- a stupendous sum in 1917 -- for eight picture over 18 months. Some notion of the adulation of the actor may be infer from the response to his bond tour in World War I -- crowd of 30,000 in New York , 65,000 in Washington , 40,000 in New Orleans. Going to Europe in 1921 -- '' The Tramp , `` Shoulder Arms '' and other of his classic have , of course precede him -- Chaplin be mob in London and Paris. The latter city declare a public holiday for the premiere of `` The Kid. '' Few men in this century in any field attain his stature with the public. `` Charlie , '' `` Charlot , '' his first name in any language bespeak affection amount to idolatry. At the same time , Chaplin widen his intellectual and social world. , meeting and become friendly with Max Eastman , the radical writer ; Upton Sinclair , the Socialist novelist ; James M. Barrie , the British playwright ; H. G. Wells , the British writer ; Waldo Frank , the novelist and critic ; Georges Carpentier , the boxer , and St. John Irvine , the British dramatist. Throughout his life , he enjoy the shuttlecock of wit with bright and learn men and women. With his success , he be take up by society figure -- Mrs. W. K. Vanderbilt , Elsie de Wolfe , Princess Xenia of Greece and hundred of others. Although Chaplin be not generally account vain , he be impressed , a the latter portion of `` My Autobiography '' attests. Written after his forced absence from the United States and in perhaps an understandable mood of irritation , the book conclude with account of his reception in Europe after 1952 by socially and governmentally prestigious people , in whose attention he basked. Other comic actor of the silent or early-sound era -- Buster Keaton , Harry Langdon , Harold Lloyd and W. C. Fields -- also enjoy acclaim and their picture be often revive ; but none , with the possible exception of Fields , create a genre. Even the Marx Brothers , in the opinion of many critic , could not rival Chaplin in creativity and fertility. One explanation be that Chaplin 's command of picture after 1917 be complete. He be the author , star , producer , director and chief cutter. Moreover , a Mr. Huff 's book note : `` He himself play every character in every one of his picture , to show the actor , men and woman , exactly how he want them to do a character or a scene. And he accompany each actor 's miming with a run commentary of suggestion , criticism or encouragement. '' In one film , `` The Great Dictator , '' he serve a hairdresser in the belief that he could do a good job than a professional coiffeur of arrange Paulette Goddard 's hair to resemble a scrubwoman's. This impulse to perfectionism , costly in term of time and film expose , cause Chaplin many moment of anxiety and self-doubt. His usual solution be to spend a couple of day in bed work through his problem. Exuberance From Confidence Over all , however , Chaplin possess an egotism that do not admit of defeat. `` You have to believe in yourself , '' -- '' that 's the secret , '' he once advise his son Charles Jr. `` I have that exuberance that come from utter confidence in yourself. '' Even a a London waif `` I think of myself a the great actor in the world , '' he recalled. Born April 16 , 1889 , in south London , Charles Spencer Chaplin be the son of a vaudevillian and a music hall soubrette , whose stage name be Lily Harley. By an early union , Chaplin 's mother , Hannah , have a son , Sydney , four year the actor 's senior. Sydney be to become his half-brother 's business manager. The elder Chaplin be a heavy drinker. `` I be hardly aware of a father , and do not remember him live with u , '' Chaplin wrote. The couple separate shortly after he be bear , and for a time Mrs. Chaplin be able to support herself. But her voice lose it quality , and `` it be owe to her vocal condition that at the age of 5 I make my first appearance on the stage. '' `` I remember stand in the wing when mother 's voice crack and go into a whisper , '' her son recalled. `` The audience begin to laugh and sing falsetto and to make catcalls. It be all vague and I do not quite understand what be go on. But the noise increase until mother be oblige to walk off the stage. When she come into the wing she be very upset and argue with the stage manager who , have see me perform before mother 's friend , say something about let me go on in her place , Captivated His Audience `` And in the turmoil I remember him lead me by the hand and , after a few explanatory word to the audience , leave me on the stage alone. And before a glare of footlights and face in the smoke , I start to sing , accompany by the orchestra , which fiddle about until it find my key. '' The lad captivate his audience , especially when `` in all innocence I imitate mother 's voice cracking , '' and he be greet by laughter and cheer and applause. Very shortly , however , Mrs. Chaplin 's fortune dwindle , and she and the two child be oblige to enter the Lambeth workhouse. Then the boy be dispatch to an orphanage outside London. `` Although we be well look after , it be a forlorn existence , '' Chaplin write of those years. The institution practice flogging , and at the age of 7 he receive a severe caning. Moreover , for suspect ringworm , his head be shave and iodined and he be put in an isolation ward. Sydney go off to sea for a while and young Charles pass through a succession of workhouses. Meantime , Mrs. Chaplin be commit briefly a insane. When she be release , the small family again live in penury , relieve slightly when Charles join a troupe of clog dancers. He never forget his day of poverty and the struggle for the necessity of life. Nor , when he be wealthy and famous , do he neglect his mother , see to it that she be well care for in her eventual emotional breakdown. Finally , he take her to California , where she died. Clog dance last only briefly , follow by week and month of catch-as-catch-can existence. `` I ( be ) newsvender , printer , toymaker , doctor 's boy , etc. , but during these occupational digression , I never lose sight of my ultimate aim to become an actor , '' Chaplin recalled. `` So , between job I would polish my shoe , brush my clothes , put on a clean collar and make periodic call at a theatrical agency ) . '' At 12 1/2 his persistence be reward , and he receive a small stage part , then tour the province a Billy in William Gillette 's `` Sherlock Holmes. '' Later , he play the part with Mr. Gillette in London , receive favorable notices. An awkward age follow , however , in which he receive several burlesque bookings. Then come a substantial run in `` Casey 's Court Circus , '' in which he impersonate a patent-medicine faker. Switch to Pantomime In this engagement , accord to the Huff biography , Chaplin decide to become a comedian. He also learn the unimportance of the spoken word. `` Once , while play in the Channel Islands , '' Mr. Huff write , `` he find that his joke be not get over because the native know little English. He resort to pantomime and get the desire laughs. '' His success land him a job with the Fred Karno Company. `` With Karno he learn the hard way , travel all over Britain and go twice to America , '' accord to John Montgomery , a writer on films. `` The repertory be vary ; there be sketch about drunk , thief , family relation , billiards champion , boxer , Turkish bath , policeman , singer who prepare to sing but somehow never start , conjuror who spoil their own trick and pianist who lose the music. . .a wide variety of subject , mixed with a little honest vulgarity. '' The Karno troupe be Chaplin 's polish school , for it teach him the rich lesson of his trade by which the actor make an audience laugh. In 1913 , Mack Sennett , then the producer of short film comedy for an insatiable public , sign the actor for $ 150 a week. `` I hat to leave the troupe , '' he recalled. `` How do I know that picture be go to be a successful medium for pantomime ? Suppose I do n't make good ? '' Nevertheless , he join Sennett in Los Angeles , and make his debut in `` Making a Living , '' a one-reeler that appear in 1914. In those early Sennett comedy , there be no scenario. `` We get an idea , then follow the natural sequence of event until it lead up to a chase , which be the essence of our comedy , '' Sennett explained. Chaplin change that by adopt an identifiable character -- the Little Tramp -- which allow the public to single him out from other comedians. 35 Sennett Films In his year with Sennett , Chaplin play in 35 film , include `` Tillie 's Punctured Romance , '' a six-reeler that also star Marie Dressler and Mabel Normand. It be the screen 's first feature-length comedy , and it be occasionally show today in various cut-up versions. Others of the Keystone , or Sennett , film have be mutilate or rearrange , accord to the Huff book , which note , `` Rarely do one come across an unmutilated Keystone original. '' The original of these film be show around the world and they inspire such song a `` When the Moon Shines Bright on Charlie Chaplin. '' The renown they bring to Chaplin enable him to shift to the Essanay Company for the then grand sum of $ 1,250 a week. For Essanay he make 14 film in 1915 , include `` The Tramp , '' his first generally recognize classic and the first in which he introduce a note of pathos. In the picture , Chaplin , a tramp , save a farmer 's daughter , play by Edna Purviance , from a robber gang , for which he be reward with a job on the farm. Routing the gang again , he be shoot in the leg and nurse by the daughter. The tramp 's happiness be unbounded until the girl 's sweetheart arrives. Realizing his fate , the tramp scribble a farewell and departs. In the fadeout , Chaplin 's back be to the camera. He walk dejectedly down a long road. Then he pause , shrug his shoulder , flip his heel and continue jauntily toward the horizon. Several variation on this theme be use in late Chaplin film , notably in `` Limelight. '' After his Essanay period Chaplin go to the Mutual Company for $ 670,000 a year. He be 26 , three year out of vaudeville and perhaps the world 's high pay performer. The sudden advent of wealth have little immediate effect on his life-style. When he sign his Mutual contract he remark , `` Well , I 've get this much if they never give me another cent -- guess I 'll go and buy a whole dozen ties. '' He be live at the time in a small hotel room and he keep away from Hollywood party , prefer to roam at night through Los Angeles 's poorer quarters. Shortly , however , he move to large quarter , hire a secretary , buy a Locomobile and acquire Toraichi Kono , a combination valet , bodyguard and chauffeur. Kono , a he be generally call , remain with the actor for about 20 year , serve a the keeper of his privacy. Fortune in the Millions In time Chaplin grow passionately attach to money. Although he be not a tightwad , neither be he a conspicuous spender , save on his own comfort. In the end , his fortune be in the millions. And he insist toward the close of his life that he have be actuate all along by money. `` I go into the business for money , and the art grow out of it , '' he said. `` If people be disillusion by that remark , I ca n't help it. It 's the truth. '' However , those who be close to Chaplin in his early film year be impress by his painstaking search for artistry. In do the two-reel `` The Immigrant '' in 1917 , for instance , he shoot 90,000 foot of film to obtain the 1,899 foot of the finish picture. His dozen Mutual film be all two-reelers. They include some rank among his best -- `` The Floorwalker '' , `` The Fireman , '' `` The Vagabond '' and `` Easy Street. '' The negative be not preserve , and the worn an duplicated print that be sometimes show at `` Chaplin festival , '' accord to critic , bear only slight relationship to the quality of the original films. His Own Producer When the Mutual contract be up , Chaplin go to First National for $ 1-million for eight picture over 18 months. For the first time he be his own producer in his own studio. Actually he make nine picture over five year , and these include some of his great achievement -- '' A Dog 's Life , '' `` Shoulder Arms '' and `` The Kid. '' Sparing of caricature , `` A Dog 's Life '' derive it humor from the parallel between a dog 's existence and that of a vagabond. `` Shoulder Arms '' be Everyman at war , and , accord to Jean Cocteau , `` It move like a drumroll. '' For `` The Kid , '' Chaplin employ Jackie Coogan , a 5-year-old with mischievous brown eyes. Hailed a `` a picture with a smile -- perhaps a tear , '' the movie be a chapter out of Chaplin 's own slum life. It contain little horseplay and much emotional intensity. Coogan 's tear be real , induce by the sad story Chaplin spun for him at necessary moments. Marriages and Divorces During the preparation of `` The Kid '' for release , Chaplin be embroil in the first of several marital and extra-marital episode that be to plague him. Good-looking and attractive to woman , he be involve in a score of more of alliance , many with glamourous actress , but these be usually discreetly handled. Not so with his first two marriages. In 1918 , when the actor be 29 , he abruptly marry 16-year-old Mildred Harris. They be divorce two year later in a fanfare of publicity. Four year afterward he marry Lolita McMurry , also 16 , whose stage name be Lita Grey. She be ensconce in her husband 's 40-room mansion , from which Chaplin soon fled. Two child , Charles Jr. and Sydney , be bear of the union , which end in 1927 after a sensational divorce case , in the course of which Chaplin picture be bar in some state at the urging of woman 's clubs. The actor 's third wife be Pauline Levy , a chorus girl whose film name be Paulette Goddard. The two meet in 1931 , when Miss Goddard be 20 , and accord to Chaplin , be marry in 1936. They be divorce in 1942 without public fuss. Meantime , in 1941 , the actor meet Joan Berry , a 21-year-old aspiring actress know a Joan Barry. She later charge that he be the father of her daughter , and Chaplin be once again the subject of lurid headlines. He be indict for allegedly take Miss Barry across state line for immoral purpose , but this charge be drop and he be acquit of three related accusations. Miss Barry , however , file a paternity suit , in which blood test demonstrate that Chaplin be not her child 's father. Nonetheless , a jury find against him and he be order to support the infant. In the midst of these trouble , in 1943 , Chaplin , then 54 , marry 18-year-old Oona O'Neil , the playwright 's daughter , over her father 's vigorous objections. Their marriage prove happy and lasting , and it produce eight children. Chaplin 's late film be make for United Artists , a company he found in 1919 with three Hollywood friend , Mary Pickford , Douglas Fairbanks , Sr. and David Wark Griffith. Chaplin 's initial picture for this concern be `` A Woman of Paris , '' a comedy of manner that he produce and direct without star in it. Considered a milestone in screen history for it influence on movie style , it be base in part on the life of Peggy Hopkins Joyce , briefly Chaplin 's mistress , and it stress social sophistication. In it Adolphe Menjou make his debut a a suave philanderer. `` The Gold Rush '' -- '' the picture I want to be remember by , '' Chaplin say -- come out in 1925 and it once again confirm his hold on the public. It have be frequently revive and much analyzed. Less successful with the critic be `` The Circus , '' which open in 1928. It seem to lack the feeling of `` The Gold Rush , '' and it comedy twist be short on flair. Its shortcoming , however , appear less evident in revivals. Starting work on `` City Lights '' in 19218 , the actor face a crisis in the advent of talkies. He be fearful that spoken dialogue would impair the character of The Tramp , cause difficulty in his reliance on pantomime and cut into foreign sales. Moreover , many of Chaplin 's effect have be achieve by undercranking the camera , a feat impossible at the set speed of a motor-driven sound camera. After some thought , Chaplin decide to defy the new technology , and `` City Lights '' be produce a a silent picture with a musical score. The story of the blind flower girl , play by Virginia Cherrill , use more than 800,000 foot of film over two years. The tragicomedy be an enormous triumph when in open in 1931 , and outgrossed many slick sound film in revival over the last 40 years. Many critic rank `` City Lights '' a among Chaplin 's great creations. Reputation a Radical The picture 's appeal be one factor in Chaplin 's conquer tour of Europe and the Orient -- a whirl of meeting with statesman , writer , artist and celebrities. Returning to Hollywood , he embark upon `` Modern Times , '' a satire on mass production , which at the time give the actor a reputation a a radical. `` It [ the picture ] start from an abstract idea , an impulse to say something about the way life be be standardize and channelize , men turn into machine -- and the way I felt about it , '' he say of his witty social parable. The Little Tramp disappear with `` Modern Times , '' and with `` The Great Dictator '' Chaplin join the sound-picture ranks. A ferocious ridicule of Hitler and Mussolini , the film have grow in stature over the year a it political implication have be , accord to critic , more fully realized. `` I want to see the return of decency and kindness , '' Chaplin say at the time. `` I 'm just a human be who want to see this country a real democracy . . . '' Despite `` The Great Dictator , '' the nineteen-forties be difficult year for Chaplin. His private life provide a headline festival for the tabloid press ; he be vex by income tax trouble ; his wartime speech call for a Western second front to crush Hitler irk many conservative ; and `` Monsieur Verdoux '' do poorly at the box office. This fugue of trouble be intensify by the advent of the cold war. The actor come under fire for introduce Henry A. Wallace at a rally and for protest the deportation of Hanns Eisler , the composer and a onetime Communist. Westbrook Pegler , the columnist , denounce him , and Representative John E. Rankin , a right-wing legislator from Mississippi , demand his deportation. Chaplin 's life `` be detrimental to the moral fabric of America , '' Mr. Rankin assert , urge that he be keep `` off the American screen and his loathsome picture be keep from the eye of American youth. '' Finally , in 1952 , the actor , a British subject , be virtually exile by the United States. While he be sail to Britain on vacation , the Attorney General announce that he could not re-enter the country unless he could prove his `` moral worth. '' Piqued , Chaplin spend the rest of his life in Europe , settle on a 38-acre estate at Vevey , Switzerland. A Special Academy Award In 1972 , however , amends of a sort be make to Chaplin. He visit the United States to receive a special Oscar from the Motion Picture Academy and to accept accolade in New York. By this time the once-bubbling actor have age into senility. He could do little more than bow and smile in response to expression of affection for him and his art. Meantime , critical opinion vindicate Chaplin 's belief that `` Verdoux '' be a brilliant picture. Its satire of a business- and war-minded world be more appreciated in the context of opinion in the 1960 's and 70 's than it have be in the late 40's. Apart from `` Limelight , '' Chaplin 's final film -- '' The King in New York '' and `` A Countess From Hong Kong '' -- be account by many critic a lesser works. In his decline year Chaplin look back with happiness on his early day in the movie at Keystone and Essanay. `` I be able to try anything in those day , '' he said. `` I be free . ''