May 11 , 1977 OBITUARY Joan Crawford Dies at Home By PETER B. FLINT Joan Crawford , who rise from waitress and chorus girl to become one of the great movie star , die yesterday of a heart attack in her apartment at 158 East 68th Street. She give her age a 69 , but some reference work list her a two to four year older. Miss Crawford have be a director of the Pepsi-Cola Company since the death of her fourth husband , Alfred N. Steele , the board chairman of the company , in 1959 , but she have not be actively involve in the business in recent months. A spokesman for Pepsi-Cola say Miss Crawford have no history of cardiac trouble and have appear to be in good health except for recent complaint of back pains. Miss Crawford be a quintessential superstar -- an epitome of timeless glamour who personify for decade the dream and disappointment of million of American women. With a wind-blown bob , mock eye and swirl short skirt , she spin to stardom in 1928 , frenziedly dance the Charleston stop a table in the silent melodrama `` Our Dancing Daughters. '' As a frivolous flapper she quickly make a series of spin-off , include `` Our Modern Maidens , '' `` Laughing Sinners '' and `` This Modern Age. '' Endowed with a low voice , she easily make the transition to sound picture and go on to become one of the more endurable movie queens. Her career , a chorine-to-grande dame rise , with some setback , be due largely to determination , shrewd timing , flexibility , hard work and discipline. Self-educated and intensely professional , Miss Crawford study and train assiduously to learn her art. She make the most of her large blue eye , wide mouth , broad shoulder and slim figure and eventually become an Oscar-winning dramatic actress. From Youth to Aged In more than 80 movie , she adapt easily to change time and tastes. When audience begin to tire of one image , she toil to produce a new one. She make the change with pace-setting makeup , coiffure , costume -- and craftsmanship. From a symbol of flame youth in the Jazz Age , she successively portray a shopgirl , a sophisticate , a tenacious woman fight for success in love and/or a career in a male-dominated milieu , and later a repress and anguish old woman. Exhibitors vote her one of the 10 top money-making star from 1932 through 1936 , and in the late 1930 's she be one of the highest-paid actresses. With a finely structure , photogenic face and highstyle gown usually design by Adrian , she idealize what many woman wish to be. In 1945 , when her career seem to be founder , she rebound a a doting mother and ambitious waitress who rise to wealthy restauranteur in `` Mildred Pierce , '' a role that win her an Academy Award a best actress. 'A Script Stealer' Despite the Cinderella-type role in many of her early movie , which many reviewer come to term `` the Crawford formula , '' she fight tenaciously for varied and challenging part , just a she later fight to remain a great star , with what one writer call `` the diligence of a ditchdigger. '' In her autobiography , `` A Portrait of Joan , '' write with Jane Kesner Ardmore and publish in 1962 by Doubleday & Company Inc. , she acknowledge that `` I be always a script stealer , '' which get her into `` Our Dancing Daughters. '' She boldly cajole producer , director and writer to gain good roles. When Norma Shearer refuse to play a mother in the 1940 drama `` Susan and God , '' Miss Crawford be offer the role. She respond , `` I 'd play Wally Beery 's grandmother if it 's a good part ! '' Her major portrayal include a wanton stenographer in the star-studded adaptation of Vicki Baum 's `` Grand Hotel '' ; Sadie Thompson , W. Somerset Maugham 's vulgar but vulnerable prostitute , in `` Rain '' ; Crystal , a husband-stealing siren in Clare Boothe Luce 's satire `` The Women '' ; a scarred blackmailer in `` A Woman 's Face '' ; a schizophrenic in `` Possessed , '' and the target of a homicidal husband in `` Sudden Fear. '' Quarrels Publicized With dedication and skill , she also make commercial success of what many reviewer score a inferior vehicle with implausible plot and synthetic dialogue. In 1962 she begin a new career in the horror genre , with `` What Ever Happened to Baby Jane ? '' co-starring Bette Davis. In later year , the indomitable Miss Crawford be involve in a number of publicized quarrel because of what some colleague call her imperiousness , and her admitted bluntness toward actor that she regard a incompetent , undisciplined or unprofessional. She revel in be a star and exhaustively cultivate her fan club and fan , predominantly woman , with gift and personally write note -- key effort in maintain their steadfast loyalty. She express delight in have `` a hundred people clutch at my coat , clamor for autographs. '' Life imitate art in the late 1950 's when , between movie , she embark on a career a a businesswoman -- a representative-in-glamour for the Pepsi-Cola Company. Elected to Board In 1955 she marry Alfred N. Steele , the company 's board chairman and chief executive officer. Her previous marriage to three actor -- Douglas Fairbanks Jr. , Franchot Tone and Phillip Terry -- have end in divorce. Mr. Steele log more than 100,000 mile a year in revitalize the soft-drink company 's worldwide activities. She start travel with him , fly to gala opening of new bottle plant and convention and serve a hostess of party on their trip , as well a in their spacious East Side Manhattan penthouse. In 1959 , two day after her husband die of a heart attack , she be elect the first woman director of the company 's board. She make score of national tour , promote Pepsi-Cola and her films. Accompanying her be large entourage and at least 15 trunk and suitcase for a wardrobe of up to 10 costume change a day. In New York , Miss Crawford become a lead benefactor , fund-raiser and honorary official for dozen of philanthropy , explain to an interviewer in 1971 , `` I 've be on the receive end of so much good that I feel I have to give something back. '' Among her many honor be election a a fellow of Brandeis University and designation in 1965 a the first Woman of the Year by the United Service Organizations of New York for her quality a `` an actress , an executive , humanitarian. '' The actress have long want to have child , but , she write , she be plague by miscarriages. She adopt four child : Christina , who also become an actress : Christopher , and Cynthia and Cathy , who be twins. Of French and Irish descent , Miss Crawford be bear Lucille LeSueur in San Antonio. She list her birth date a March 23 , 1908 , but many reference work put it at two to four year earlier. Her parent , Thomas and Anna Johnson LeSueur , separate before her birth , and her mother soon marry Henry Cassin , owner of a vaudeville theater in Lawton , Okla. She be know for year a Billie Cassin. Quit Stephens College Her youth be harsh. Her family , include her elder brother , Hal LeSueur , move to Kansas City , Mo. , about 1916. Her mother and stepfather soon separated and , from the age of 9 , she have to work , first in a laundry , help her mother , and then in two private school , St. Agnes Academy and the Rockingham School , where she be the only working student , cooking , wash dish , wait on table and make bed for 30 other youngsters. She do not object to work , she recall , but to be treat a a slave. Work prevent her from attend classes. The wife of Rockingham 's headmaster often punish her , with broom-handle flogging , she write , and falsify her record , which enable her to enter Stephens College in Columbia , Mo. , a a work student. After about three month , aware that she be not academically prepared , she withdraw : Dancing be her main outlet , and in her early teen she win a Charleston contest in a Kansas City cafe. She work a a salesgirl , pinch penny for dance lessons. M.-G.-M. Screen Test Vowing `` to be the best dancer in the world , '' she go to Chicago , where she dance and sing in a cafe , and then to Detroit , where J. J. Shubert , the producer , pick her from a nightclub chorus line to dance on Broadway in his 1924 revue `` Innocent Eyes. '' Spotted by Harry Rapf , a talent scout for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer , she be offer a screen test. Passing it , she sign a six-month contract for $ 75 a week , and on Jan. 1 , 1925 , set out for Hollywood. The freckle-faced , 5-foot-4 1/2-inch-tall dancer be a little plump , but soon slimmed down by daily jogging , decade before it be voguish. She plunge into her movie apprenticeship a a chorus girl in `` Pretty Ladies , '' a Zasu Pitts comedy ; an ingenue in `` Old Clothes '' with Jackie Coogan , and a featured dancing role in `` Sally , Irene and Mary. '' She be vote a Wampas `` baby star , '' win a new contract and , because Lucille LeSueur be regard as awkward to pronounce , be give the name Joan Crawford , the win entry in a movie-magazine contest. She gain experience and billing play opposite such actor a Lon Chaney , William Haines and John Gilbert , and rocket to fame in `` Our Dancing Daughters. '' She pass the talk and sing test in 1929 , in `` Untamed , '' co-starring Robert Montgomery , and make eight movie over the year with Clark Gable , most of them box-office hits. They include `` Dancing Lady , '' glide with Fred Astaire in his movie debut , and `` Strange Cargo. '' At M.-G.-M. Miss Crawford occasionally break away from stereotype casting and win acclaim for distinctive performances. But the best role go to Greta Garbo and Norma Shearer , the wife of Irving G. Thalberg , the studio 's executive production manager. After the two actress retire , Greer Garson get the plums. Frustrated by formula film , which she term `` undiluted hokum , '' Miss Crawford ask Metro to drop her contract in 1942 , and she leave the studio after 17 years. She join Warner Brothers , but reject script for more than two year until her triumphal return in `` Mildred Pierce , '' adapt from a mordant novel by James C. Cain. Image Is Ageless In this and many other movie , she show , a Richard Schickel write in `` The Stars , '' publish in 1962 , a mastery `` of what the trade know a the 'woman 's picture ' , '' in which `` she suffer incredible agony of the spirit in her attempt to achieve love and or success. The woman suffer along with Miss Crawford , but be reassure by what they know of her own career , which clearly state that a woman can triumph in a man 's world. '' In her late career she project a kind of ageless image. Her role include the emotionally confused `` Daisy Kenyon , '' a carnival girl and convict in `` Flamingo Road , '' a shrew in `` Harriet Craig , '' a hoofer in `` Torch Song , '' a western ranch-gang leader in `` Johnny Guitar , '' a lonely spinster who marry a psychotic youth in `` Autumn Leaves '' and many other vehicle of ordeal and anguish. After `` . . .Baby Jane , '' Miss Crawford , tenaciously hold on to stardom , make a number of thriller , some of them grisly , and appear occasionally in television drama and episodes. She long talk of go on the stage , but uncharacteristically say later that she lack `` the gut '' to appear before a large live audience. Imposed Discipline In Hollywood she have determinedly improve herself , develop culture and polish. Her first marriage , to Douglas Fairbanks Jr. , introduce her to the exotic social world of Pickfair , the home of Douglas Sr. and Mary Pickford. Franchot Tone help her study classical drama and innovative act techniques. Miss Crawford later describe her marriage to them and to Phillip Terry a `` dollhouse '' unions. But her marriage to Mr. Steele , she say , give her great emotional stability than she have ever known. Some interviewer write that she impose her perfectionism on her four adopted child , be overly strict with them. To these assertion , she reply : `` I 've try to provide my child with what I do n't have : constructive discipline , a sense of security , a sense of sharing. '' `` Sloppiness have never be tolerate in our home , nor have rudeness , '' and `` They 're go into a world that be n't easy , a world where unless you be self-sufficient and strong , you can be destroyed. '' Some year ago , leave Manhattan 's `` 21 '' Club , she be greet by a group of construction worker , one shouting , `` Hey , Joanie ! '' She cordially shake hand with several of them. One survey her carefully and remark : `` They do n't make them like you anymore , baby. '' Miss Crawford be survive by her four child : Mrs. Cathy Lalonde , Mrs. Cynthia Jordan Crawford , Christina Crawford , and Christopher , and four grandchildren. Funeral plan have not be complete last night. May 12 , 1977 The obituary of Joan Crawford in The Times yesterday incorrectly give the address of her New York apartment. She live at 150 East 69th Street .