January 15 , 1977 OBITUARY Career Built on Style and Dash Ended with Invasion of Egypt By ALDEN WHITMAN Robert Anthony Eden spend more than 30 year in public life , but when he finally become Prime Minister in 1955 , his tenure last only 21 month and end in a gloomy fiasco for Britain and himself in the failed effort to invade Egypt over control of the Suez Canal. The failure ( more diplomatic than military ) of the attack in October 1956 , draw upon Eden the condemnation of world opinion and tend to obscure his success a a political leader who have be in the House of Commons since 1923 and who have lead his Conservative Party to a notable electoral victory in 1955. The failure also tend to countervail his undoubted gift a an international negotiator and his achievement a Foreign Secretary , a post he occupy with great diligence and eclat for more than 10 year between 1935 and 1955. Apart from the first three year , when he be Stanley Baldwin 's and Neville Chamberlain 's Foreign Secretary , Eden serve under Winston Churchill , whose forceful omnipresence serve to conceal his protege 's strength and weaknesses. Groomed by Churchill for the Conservative leadership and for the Prime Ministership , the publicly popular and photogenic Eden seem typecast for success ; he prove to be a man out of step with history whose pertinacity be to policy and practice 20 year out of date. It be his further misfortune that Britain have wan a a world power and be oblige to trail in the wake of the United States. 'Police Action ' Taken Thus , in July 1956 , when President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt nationalize the Suez Canal , Eden react by support the sort of preventive `` police action '' that he would have like to have mount against Hitler and Mussolini in the late 1930's. By identify the Egyptian nationalist strongman with the prewar Fascists , Eden commit a historical blunder. The invasion , he contend then ( and 10 year later in an interview for this obituary article ) , be aim at maintain the sanctity of international agreement and at prevent future unilateral denunciation of treaties. It also , he say , have avert a large war in the Middle East. Anglo-French troop , he argue , move in after the Israelis have enter Egypt , and his purpose be to halt the fighting and prevent new clash `` because the United Nations could not do so in time. '' At the same time Eden fault the United States for force him to withdraw ; but he take credit for United Nations action in patrol the Israeli-Egyptian borders. Intransigent toward Nasser , Eden say of the invasion : `` Peace at any price have never avert war. We must not repeat the mistake of the prewar year by behave a though the enemy of peace and order be arm with only good intentions. '' And , recall the incident in his 1967 interview , he declare : `` I be still unrepentant about Suez. People never look at what would have happen if we have do nothing. There be a parallel with the 30's. If you allow people to break agreement with impunity , the appetite grow to fee on such things. `` I do n't see what other we ought to have done. One can not dodge. It be hard to act rather than dodge. '' Earldom in 1961 Eden 's defense , warmly deliver in a resonant and ready baritone , carry no regret for his virtual departure from active politics. In ill health at the time of Suez , he be almost in tear when he resign the Prime Ministership. After a period of recuperation in which he begin to write his memoir , he accept an earldom in 1961 and enter the House of Lords a Lord Avon. In his advanced a in his young year , Eden be impeccably tailor and coiffed. His guardsman 's mustache , once black , have be trim to medium size , but his eyebrow ( a French paper once call him `` Lord Eyelashes '' ) be as bushy a ever , although they , like his hair and his mustache , be silvery gray. His distinctively blue eye be penetrate , and his face be ruddy. His manner be suave and polished , for long experience have equip him with a fund of ready pleasantry and a capacity for gracious conversation. Eden 's popularity , a good deal of which survive Suez , be traceable in part to his glamour. He become Foreign Secretary for the first time at the age of 38. He have be valorous in war and he cut a dash in the tradition of the romantic hero of fiction. His black homburg ( the `` Anthony Eden hat '' ) be his trademark ; it give him a touch of youthful freshness , a pleasant contrast to his predecessor , Sir Samuel Hoare and Sir John Simon. As an advocate of rearmament and firmness against the menace of Fascism in the 30 's , he acquire the reputation of be the polished diplomat who be get the good of those bully on the continent. He personify a generation 's striving for peace and European tranquility ; and , in World War II , he typify his country 's fashioning of Allied unity to defeat Hitlerism. Much a man with a sense of noblesse oblige , Robert Anthony Eden be bear in County Durham on June 12 , 1897 , in the glowing afternoon of the British Empire , of which his ancestor be a part. One be Royal Governor of colonial Maryland ; another be Earl Grey , whose Reform Bill of 1832 bring the middle class into electoral politics ; and the family baronetcy have be establish in 1672 by Charles II. Sir William Eden , Anthony 's father , be an eccentric country squire who , besides have an interest in foxhunt and gardening , be a better-than-average amateur painter and a first-rate boxer. His advice to his son , frequently give , be : `` There be only one thing in life , and that be to run straight. Do n't , for God 's sake , play a double game. '' Anthony 's mother , the former Sybil Frances Grey , be a gentle , cultivated woman and a great beauty whose portrait be paint by James McNeill Whistler. Young Anthony enter Eton in 1911 , where he enjoy a mild success a an athlete and win a prize for excellence in divinity subjects. Pictures show a tall , slim , slightly rabbit-toothed youth star gravely from under an Eton topper. In 1915 , at the age of 18 , he go to France to fight a a member of the King 's Royal Rifle Corps. Years later , when he be din with Adolf Hitler , a lance corporal in the war , they discover that they have be opposite each other on the Somme front. Hitler draw a diagram of the position from memory on the back of a menu , which Eden keep a a souvenir. Eden , who conceal his youthfulness behind a very bushy mustache , win the Military Cross for save a soldier 's life and emerge from service a a brigade-major. In the war , his eldest brother , John , have be kill , a be a young brother , William. Timothy , Eden 's survive elder brother , inherit the baronetcy. `` War I hat for all I have see of it among my family and friend , '' Eden say afterward , `` for the death , muck and misery , the pound shell-fire and the casualty clearing stations. '' At Oxford , which Eden enter after the war , he take a first in Oriental language ( Persian be his specialty ) and dabble in painting. He get his start in politics in 1922 by be beat for the House of Commons. `` A year later , '' he reminisce `` a by-election at Warwick and Leamington give me an unexpected opportunity to defeat my sister 's mother-in-law , the Countess of Warwick , who have take up the cause of socialism. I represent this constituency , or rather it remain faithful to me , for more than 33 years. '' Wed a Banker 's Daughter A fortnight before the by-election , Eden marry Beatrice Helen Beckett , daughter of Sir Gervase Beckett , a banker and owner of the politically influential Yorkshire Post. It be a fashionable marriage that promote his career not only among the peer and squire of Yorkshire , but also among their kind who be run the Conservative Party. Through these association Eden learn to respect the party 's hierarchy , an attitude that be say to have keep him later on from fracture his relation with the leadership over point of principle. Eden 's wife be not so devoted to politics a he , and in June 1950 he win a divorce on the ground of desertion. She have be in the United States for some time. Two son , Simon and Nicholas , be bear to the couple. Simon be kill in World War II , and Nicholas be the heir to the earldom. In the House of Commons or a a campaigner , Eden be a determine but not brilliant speaker. His manner control even under sharp attack in the House , he rarely make a fighting comeback or a telling rebuttal. Patient repetition be his rhetorical device. Despite this handicap , Eden 's rise be spectacular. After only three year in Parliament he be designate parliamentary private secretary to Sir Austen Chamberlain , the Foreign Secretary and a half-brother of Neville Chamberlain. Between 1926 and 1929 Eden acquire his basic training in foreign affair at a time when Sir Austen be among the strong champion of the League of Nations. In 1931 Eden be name Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs , and in 1934 he be put in charge of League of Nations Affairs with full ministerial rank , first a Lord Privy Seal and then a Minister Without Portfolio. As a minister , Eden be frequently Britain 's spokesman at League session and conference in Geneva , and he meet Hitler for the first time in 1934 , about a year after he have become the German Chancellor. `` Hitler be an oddly sympathetic character , '' Eden recall in his 1967 interview. `` He take pain to be reasonable and be extremely well-informed , but intractable in negotiations. '' Acutely aware of the Nazi menace from the outset , Eden begin to counsel British firmness and rearmament , but his private view fail , for some time , to evoke a wide response in a smug British society that be certain Hitler could be contain or should be appeased. Shortly after his visit to Berlin , Eden journey to Rome for the first of many meeting with Mussolini. The Italian-Ethiopian War be brewing , and Eden try in vain to persuade the Italian dictator to submit the dispute to the League of Nations. `` Mussolini , contrary to myth , never shout at me , '' Eden recall in 1967. `` He be very sober , quiet and depressing. He have a journalist 's mind , active and play with different subject , with a good deal of knowledge. '' Mussolini , for his part , scoffed at Eden publicly a `` the best dressed fool in Europe. '' Named Foreign Secretary In December 1935 , in the middle of the short and brutal war , Hoare be oblige to resign a Foreign Secretary amid public outcry over a proposal to appease Mussolini. Prime Minister Baldwin pick Eden to replace him. Then only 38 , he be the young Foreign Secretary in almost 100 years. He be a strict taskmaster , an industrious reader of dispatch and telegram , an endless negotiator and a tireless conciliator ; but he be more the instrument than the arbiter of foreign policy. Thus , in the spring of 1936 , when Hitler march into the demilitarized zone of the Rhineland and when France , Belgium and Czechoslovakia urge united action on Britain , Eden could do no more than warn Germany of the consequence of it actions. Similarly , in the Spanish Civil War , he support a policy of nonintervention , which deprive the Republican Government of it right to buy arm for it defense while permit Hitler and Mussolini openly to arm Franco. His private attitude , however , be far more anti-Fascist than his public action , a circumstance that eventually cause him to resign in 1938. The break with Neville Chamberlain come in early 1938 , when the Prime Minister want to begin talk with Mussolini on an overall settlement with Italy that would recognize her conquest of Ethiopia. Eden , who favor a policy of obduracy , resigned. At the time Eden 's critic charge that he quit over protocol , not principle ; that he be miff because Chamberlain be deal with Mussolini behind his back. 'I Could Not Agree ' `` I have resign because I could not agree with the foreign policy which Mr. Neville Chamberlain and his colleague wish to pursue , '' he write in his memoirs. Expanding on this in his 1967 interview , Eden say in a tart voice : `` It be not over protocol , Chamberlain 's communicate with Mussolini without tell me. I never care a goddamn , a tuppence about protocol. `` The reason for my resignation be that we have an agreement with Mussolini about the Mediterranean and Spain , which he be violate by send troop to Spain , and Chamberlain want to have another agreement. I think Mussolini should honor the first one before we negotiate for the second. I be try to fight a delaying action for Britain , and I could not go along with Chamberlain 's policy. '' Eden remain out of the Government for 18 month , but he be not inactive in privately promote opposition to Fascism. For this his popularity be enormous. Despite sharp difference , Eden be recall to the Cabinet a Secretary for the Dominions at the outbreak of World War II in September 1939. He regard it a a war assignment , but his position become far more congenial when Churchill step in a Prime Minister in May 1940 , for Eden be back a Foreign Secretary in December of that year. In this situation his contribution to forge the Grand Alliance against Hitlerism be enormous. Not only do he deal with the Allied envoys in London , but also he travel to Washington to confer with President Franklin D. Roosevelt and to Moscow to negotiate with Marshal Josef Stalin. He be at all the Big Three conferences. Of the statesman with whom he deal in the war , Eden like Roosevelt for his `` true charm , '' but he admire Stalin a `` the able negotiator I have ever see in action. '' `` He have a very clear sense of purpose , '' Eden remark in 1967. `` He be never violent in speech , nor brash , but quiet and [ he ] insist on the thing that matter to him. Stalin be ruthless and cruel , no doubt , but remarkable. '' In his memoir Eden be less enthusiastic about Roosevelt. `` Roosevelt be familiar with the history and geography of Europe , '' he wrote. `` Perhaps his hobby of stamp collecting have help him to this knowledge , but the academic yet sweep opinion which he build upon it be alarm in their cheerful fecklessness. `` He seem to see himself dispose of the fate of many land , Allied no less than enemy. He do all this with so much grace that it be not easy to dissent. Yet it be too like a conjurer , skillfully juggle with ball of dynamite , whose nature he fail to understand. '' Eden leave the Foreign Office when the Churchill Government be defeat by Labor in July 1945 , but he retain the post of Conservative Party leader in the House of Commons. In the interval between 1945 and his return a Foreign Secretary in 1951 , he have the job of explain to Conservatives in Parliament and to his party at large the merit of membership in the United Nations and of cooperation with the United States. It be one of the paradox of his life that , have speak out for the United Nations and the United States , he lead his Government into the Suez adventure in defiance of both. Compounding the irony be Eden 's misgiving about American foreign policy under Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and President Dwight D. Eisenhower. Eden be irk by Dulles 's policy of `` brinkmanship , '' or display of muscle , in relation with the Communist world. He be also critical of the United States decision not to sign the 1954 Geneva accord on Vietnam , of which he be an architect. Eden 's private life in the early 1950 's be a mixture of great happiness and severe illness. One occasion for happiness be his marriage in 1952 at the age of 55 to Clarissa Spencer-Churchill , 32- year-old niece of his good friend and mentor. Another be the bestowal on him of the Order of the Garter in 1954 , which make him Sir Anthony Eden. His illness -- a gastric and gall-bladder disorder- -occurred a year earlier and oblige him to undergo surgery at the Lahey Clinic in Boston. On Churchill 's resignation a Prime Minister on April 5 , 1955 , Eden , who have be his deputy as well a Foreign Secretary , succeed to the post for which his experience and his temperament seem to have especially and brilliantly prepared him. But an auspicious beginning lead rapidly to an inglorious end. A year after attend a summit meeting that create `` the spirit of Geneva , '' he be embroil in the Middle East. His trouble begin build to a climax in July , 1956 , when Egypt nationalize the Suez Canal Company , in which Britain and France hold a major stake. In the House of Commons Eden announce that he could not accept any scheme for the future of the canal that would leave it `` in the unfettered control of a single power , which would exploit it purely for purpose of national policy. '' A Suez Canal Users Association be set up which Nasser quickly denounce a design to `` rob Egypt of the canal. '' Then , on Oct. 29 , Israeli force invade Sinai , avowedly to eliminate Egyptian commando base from which attack into Israel have assertedly be made. But , a later historical research have make clear , the Israeli invasion be a result of secret collusion with France , in which Eden joined. `` Although Eden doubtless do his best to avoid direct commitment , '' Hugh Thomas write in `` The Suez Affair , '' `` there now seem little doubt that he do indeed nail Britain 's color to the unfamiliar mast of Franco-Israeli collaboration. '' Mr. Thomas conclude that Eden 's statement to the House of Commons that there be `` not foreknowledge that Israel would attack Egypt '' be `` a straightforward lie. '' Dealings Acknowledged In his 1967 interview ( which he stipulate would not be use until after his death ) , Eden acknowledge secret dealing with the French and `` intimation '' of the Israeli attack. He insist , however , that `` the joint enterprise and the preparation for it be justify in the light of the wrong it [ the Anglo-French invasion ] be design to prevent. '' `` I have no apology to offer , '' Eden declared. In any event , hard upon the Israeli invasion , Britain and France open their offensive. It be all over by Nov. 6 , when a cease-fire be accepted. By then the United Nations General Assembly have adopt , 64 to 5 , a United States resolution call for a cease-fire. Eden 's popularity in Britain drop , and even Churchill remark , `` I 'm not sure I should have dare to begin ; but I be sure I should not have dare to stop. '' His health break by the strain of failure , Eden resign on Jan. 9 , 1957. Harold Macmillan succeed him. Between bout of illness over a bile-duct disorder and the writing of his political memoir , Eden and his wife vacation abroad , notably in Barbados , and lead a retired country life in Britain. The memoir , in three volume , be draw largely from his official diaries. They be title `` Facing the Dictators , '' `` The Reckoning '' and `` Full Circle. '' In 1961 he be elevate to the peerage a the Earl of Avon. He be make a viscount at the same time. His full title be Viscount Eden of Royal Leamington Spa in the County of Warwick , and Earl of Avon. After he take his seat in the House of Lords , Eden continue to comment on foreign affairs. Urged Bombing Halt In a television interview in 1966 he call on the United States to halt it bombing of North Vietnam and to concentrate on develop a peace plan `` that might conceivably be acceptable to Hanoi. '' The bombing of North Vietnam , he argue , would never settle the conflict in South Vietnam. `` On the contrary , '' he declare , `` bombing create a sort of David and Goliath complex in any country that have to suffer -- a we have to , and a I suspect the Germans have to , in the last war. '' In his retirement , Eden turn to paint and garden for relaxation. `` Painting be one of my great interest , '' he say in his 1967 interview. `` Unlike most politician , I stop paint when I become a politician , so I take my pleasure in enjoy art , not in create it. `` Although I have never be rich , I have try to buy picture that please me. Paintings have be a very pleasant escape for me. When I do n't want to listen to other politician speak , I would always think of my paintings. It be essential to have some diversion like that , otherwise you will go mad. `` The Foreign Office be a terribly stern taskmaster. The amount of detail and the number of telegram I be oblige to read left very little time for read other thing , so I have not find it relax to read. Of course , if my wife say , 'You must read this , ' I try to. '' Eden smiled. It be the smile of a man who seem happy to be remove from the world of immediate affair .