September 17 , 1977 OBITUARY Maria Callas , 53 , Is Dead of Heart Attack in Paris By RAYMOND ERICSON Maria Callas , the soprano whose intensely dramatic portrayal make her the most exciting opera singer of her time , die of a heart attack yesterday at her home in Paris. She be 53 year old. Miss Callas have tell some friend this summer that she be concerned about her health , but other associate report that she have be in perfect health and be prepare to write her autobiography for a New York publisher. She once say , `` Wherever I be , it be hectic. '' This may even have be an understatement. Controversy , legend and myth surround the soprano throughout the major part of her career. Those who admire her felt that she be one of the great opera singer of all time , while others believe that her vocal inadequacy preclude any such claim. Disputes and legal action seem to arise wherever she sang. Her private life be seldom out of the limelight. Yet there be no denying that it be the magic of her personality that make every move of hers newsworthy. 'Awesome Stage Projection' A balanced reaction to Miss Callas 's artistry be express by Harold C. Schonberg , the music critic of The New York Times , after her return to the Metropolitan Opera in 1965 in the title role of Puccini 's `` Tosca. '' `` If you want brain , an awesome stage projection , intensity and musicianship , Miss Callas can supply those commodity more than any soprano around , '' Mr. Schonberg wrote. `` But if you look for voice and vocal splendor in your Tosca , Miss Callas be not the one to make you happy. '' Earlier in the review he have write that `` her conception of the role be electrical. Everything at her command be put into strike use. She be a woman in love , a tiger cat , a woman possess by jealousy. . . . This be supreme acting , unforgettable acting. '' There be no question that Miss Callas spark new interest in the largely forgotten bel canto opera of the 19th century. These be the word of Bellini , Donizetti and Rossini , most of which have not be hear since the era when they be written. They be consider too difficult and too uninteresting musically to be worth reviving. Miss Callas show that they could be sing , that the melody and all the embellishment that be think to be for virtuoso display could be turn to genuine dramatic use. It open up a whole new repertory for singer such a Joan Sutherland and Beverly Sills to follow the path set by Miss Callas. When the soprano be tell that she be consider temperamental , her answer be , `` I will always be as difficult a necessary to achieve the best. '' Everyone who work with her agreed that she be a hard worker , willing to rehearse more than expect , even when a role or a production be not new. Early in her career she sing as many a 16 role in one season , and she be a quick study. Her own interest in bel canto grow in 1948 in Venice , when she learn the difficult part of Elvira in Bellini 's `` I Puritani '' in five day in order to substitute for an ail singer. Unhappy Manhattan Childhood Maria Anna Sofia Cecilia Kalogeropoulos be bear Dec. 3 , 1923 in Manhattan 's Flower and Fifth Avenue Hospitals , her Greek parent have arrive in the United States a few month earlier. Her father be a pharmacist. Years later , in discount the rumor that she have be bear in Brooklyn , Miss Callas say that she remember live in Upper Manhattan over a drugstore own by her father. She attend Public School 164 at Wadsworth Avenue and 164th Street in Washington Heights , and by the age of 9 be sing for her schoolmates. The soprano speak often of her unhappy childhood , which be mar by the squabble between her parent and her jealousy of her old sister -- Maria be squat , while her sister be attractive and favor by the parents. The family return to Athens when Maria be 13. She win a scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music , where one of her teacher be Elvira de Hidalgo , a famous Spanish soprano in her day. She remember Maria a be `` square and fat , but she put such force , such sentiment , such wonderful interpretation into all she sang. She would want to sing the most difficult coloratura , scale and trills. Even a a child her willpower be terrific. '' Before she be 15 , the student be sing the dramatic role of Santuzza in Mascagni 's `` Cavalleria Rusticana. '' Four year later she make her official debut with the Athens Opera. At the end of World War II , she go back to New York on her own. She audition for the Metropolitan Opera at the time that Edward Johnson be the general manager. She be offer the title role in Puccini 's `` Madama Butterfly '' and Beethoven 's `` Fidelio. '' `` Fidelio '' be to have be sing in English. Miss Callas recall the impossibility of sing Butterfly : `` I be then too fat -- 210 pounds. '' As for `` Fidelio '' : `` Opera in English be so silly. Nobody take it seriously. '' She turn down the offers. She come close to make her American debut in Chicago with a group of Italian singer , but that fell through for financial reasons. In 1947 , she be give a contract to appear in Verona , and she sail for Italy. She make her debut in the famous Arena in the title role of Ponchielli 's `` La Gioconda. '' Also make his debut in the opera be the late American tenor , Richard Tucker. Met Conductor in Verona In Verona , Miss Callas meet one of her most important mentor , the Italian conductor Tullio Serafin. He take her to Venice , where she sing role that require a dramatic voice , Isolde in the Wagner opera , Turandot in the Puccini opera , even Brunnhilde in Wagner 's `` Die Walkure. '' In other city she sing the name part in Verdi 's `` Aida '' and Bellini 's `` Norma. '' The natural goal of every opera singer in Italy then , a now , be La Scala in Milan. Miss Callas sing an Aida there in 1949 , but it be not in the regular season. She would not join the company officially until 1951 , because already independent minded. She would sing only lead role in major opera and would not share a percentage of her salary with a powerful artist agency in Milan. In the early 50 's , Miss Callas sang in a number of rarely hear opera in Italian houses. These include Haydn 's `` Orfeo ed Euridice , '' Gluck 's `` Alceste '' and Cherubini 's `` Medea. '' She have a notable triumph in the last work , which be stag by Luchino Visconti and conduct by Leonard Bernstein. She be offer a contract at the Met in 1952 by the general manager , Rudolf Bing , but this do not work out because she would not come to New York without her husband , Giovanni Battista Meneghini , who be unable to get a visa. In this period , she have gain experience and a large measure of success not only in Italy , but also in South America , Mexico and Covent Garden in London. She take off 70 pound , which leave her at a slim 135 pounds. At 5 foot 8 inch tall and with a face make striking by her broad cheekbone , she become one of the handsome woman of the operatic stage. She finally make her United States debut in 1954 , with the Chicago Lyric Opera , in the role of Norma. Two year later , on Oct. 29 , she sing the same part for her debut at the Metropolitan Opera. By this time her reputation be such that announcement of her appearance generate long line outside the box office of the house where she be to sing. Although critical reaction be usually mixed because of the individual timbre of Miss Callas 's voice and the flaw in her technique , she be ecstatically receive for her musicianship , her personal appeal and the originality of her characterizations. Miss Callas 's voice , which some critic maintain be man-made rather than natural , have three sections. At the top it be incline to be steely , even shrill , and the high note be often little more than shrieks. The middle voice could have a cover sound or could be velvety ; use at a soft level , it be beautiful. But in the low register it could be edgy again. Technically , the soprano often do thrill thing with the tonal coloration and with the fioriture , and she could sing a descending chromatic scale dazzingly. But sometimes , too , the voice would not respond smoothly to the demand she make on it. Having conquer many of the great opera company of the world , the soprano begin to have trouble with them. In Chicago she be serve with a lawsuit backstage during a performance , and she say she would never sing there again. She be accuse of break a contract with the Vienna State Opera over a question of fees. She cancel an engagement with the San Francisco Opera just before the season open , plead illness , and the company prefer charge against her with the American Guild of Musical Artists , the singer ' union. At the gala opening of one season in Rome , she sing the opening act of `` Norma '' and then refuse to go on after that , because of laryngitis. At the Met , she quarrel with Mr. Bing over a matter of date and repertory , and he cancel their contract. She do not show up for scheduled performance at the Edinburgh Festival and at Athens. All these action make headline , and Miss Callas earn a reputation for temperamental behavior. She have an answer to these charge , in most case explain that she would not sing unless she or perform condition be at their best , and this be the reason for her walk out on performance or contracts. `` To me , the art of music be magnificent , and I can not bear to see it treat in a shabby way , '' she say in a Life magazine interview in 1959. `` When it be respect and when the artist who serve it be respect , I will work hard and always give my best . . . I do not want to be associate with inferior staging , taste , conduct or singing. '' Valuable Artist and Attraction In fact , most of the feud be patch up , and Miss Callas return to sing with the various company again. She be consider too valuable an artist and too great a box-office attraction to ignore. As Mr. Bing say of Miss Callas yesterday after he hear of her death : `` I be privilege to bring her to the Met and I be proud of that. She be a difficult artist , a many be , but she be one of the great artist of her time. We will not see her like again. '' In fact , Miss Callas , be re-engaged by the Met in 1965 to sing Tosca , and these become her last public opera performances. In subsequent year , the soprano would make announcement from time to time that she be consider sing somewhere , cause a flurry of excitement in the music world. But no performance materialized. In 1971 , she go to the Juilliard School to give a series of 12 master classes. These be jam with auditor , many of them come from out of New York City , and Miss Callas be credit with exceptional success in her teaching. Went on Worldwide tour in '73 In 1973 , she and her close friend , the tenor Giuseppe di Stefano , try their hand at stag opera. They direct a production of Verdi 's `` I Vespri Siciliani '' in Turin , but in the view of the critic , the result be disastrous. That same year , they decide to make a worldwide concert tour. It begin in Hamburg , West Germany , in October , and the singer appear at Carnegie Hall in two program in February 1974. The audience be almost hysterical in it adulation , but the critic lament that there be not much left of Miss Callas 's voice , even if her interpretation remain unexcelled. When the tour end , it represent the soprano 's last singing in public. She do , however , continue to add to her extensive list of recordings. When she marry Mr. Meneghini , 20 year her senior , in 1949 , the Italian building- material tycoon give her security and , it be say at first , affection. She call herself professionally Maria Meneghini Callas , and he become her manager and agent. They be separate in 1959 after she have become romantically involved with Aristotle Onassis , the Greek shipping magnate. The marriage with Mr. Meneghini be annul six year later. The public eagerly follow the relationship between the singer and the entrepreneur , particularly after it be learn that Mr. Onassis have give her control stock in a $ 3 million freighter. They have apartment near each other in Paris. When Mr. Onassis marry Jacqueline Kennedy , attempt be make to have Miss Callas comment on a suppose rebuff. The singer say little about it except that she and Mr. Onassis be still good friends. The singer be also know for the bitterness with which she speak of her family. `` There be no communication between my family and me , '' she say in 1971. `` I know my mother write a book about me , but I never read it. '' She also break with her musical mentor , Mr. Serafin , ostensibly because the conductor choose another soprano for a recording that she have expect to make with him. A celebrate feud between Miss Callas and Renata Tebaldi , who be her contemporary , be keep alive in the press and by the fan of the respective sopranos. They be rival singer at La Scala at one time , and it be report that they avoid each other backstage. Miss Tebaldi refuse to attend Miss Callas 's performance , while Miss Callas go , with some ostentation , to those of the other soprano. Gossip writer hint that she do so in order to make Miss Tebaldi nervous. In 1968 , Miss Callas attend the Met 's opening performance , in which Miss Tebaldi be sing the title role of Cilea 's `` Adriana Lecouvreur. '' Afterward , the two singer meet backstage and this time embrace each other. In recent year , Miss Callas 's name have be steadily link with that of Mr. di Stefano. They have frequently sing on stage and in recording together in the early stage of their careers. Miss Callas make a film base on Euripides ' `` Medea , '' which be release here in 1971. It be write and direct by the late Pier Paolo Pasolini. Leonard Bernstein , the conductor , on be inform of Miss Callas 's death , say yesterday , `` Besides be a cherish friend , she be for me the uniquely great singer of bel canto in the mid-20th century and have for some year be irreplaceable. '' Dario Soria , former head of Angel Records , the label on which Miss Callas 's recording have be issue in this country , and now director of the Metropolitan Opera Guild , have remain a steadfast friend. He say yesterday that he have talk by phone to the singer last summer , and that she sound remote in spirit. In response to a query a to what she be do , she tell him in a flat voice , `` Nothing. '' `` Without be able to perform , '' Mr. Soria say , `` she apparently have nothing leave to live for. '' Mr. Soria also sum up Miss Callas 's career succinctly : `` As a singer she be responsible for the revival of bel canto. As an actress , she make the stage excite theater. As a personality , she have the kind of magic that make news. I think she 'll be remember a one of the great opera singer of all times. '' Soprano Led Bel Canto Revival By HAROLD C. SCHONBERG More than any singer of the period follow World War II , Maria Callas dominate opera , even change the course of the repertory. It be because of her that the revival of 19th century bel canto opera start : and in a way , such famous singer a Joan Sutherland , Beverly Sills , Teresa Berganza and Marilyn Horne be her children. Miss Callas take a completely neglected repertory , the opera of Bellini and Donizetti , and by the magnetism of her voice and dramatic ability show they be still viable. A whole generation of singer follow her lead. Of course she sing other things. She be famous a a Verdi and Puccini singer , and she include in her repertory such seldom-heard opera a Cherubini 's `` Medea '' and Gluck 's `` Alceste. '' She be a prima donna assoluta in the old tradition. By virtue of voice , musicianship , a magnetic stage presence and a flaming temperament , she be in the news wherever she go and whatever she did. She move in the rank of the high international society , she have liaison with billionaire , and she be glamour incarnate. No singer of her time , and very few in history , could so dominate an audience. The last time she sing in Carnegie Hall , in a recital with Giuseppe di Stefano , a voice bellow from the balcony when she make her appearance : `` You be opera ! '' She may , toward the end of her career , have have vocal difficulty , but that make no difference to her hysterical admirers. To them she be the one singer who represent opera a theater -- the artist who live her role and make them come to life. Tall , slim , commanding , exotically beautiful , Miss Callas have a unique combination of electricity and brains. Her voice be in some respect a flawed instrument , undependable in the high register. In the middle range it have a haunting beauty. Her imposing bottom register have a different quality entirely and it be say of her , not always admiringly , that she have three voices. By virtue of sheer determination , she triumph over her vocal limitations. She immerse herself in her role , study every word and every phrase for maximum musical and dramatic effect. Her singing be full of subtle inflection , accentuation , shading , that be foreign territory to most other sopranos. She extend this kind of superior musicianship to her approach to the stage. Every gesture meant something , every movement and facial expression be aim toward an emotional or dramatic climax. Thus in the bel canto opera , which sopranos of the past sang with the limpid innocence of a canary , Miss Callas be able to find hitherto unrealized depth and power. In the large-scale opera , such a `` Aida , '' `` Norma '' or `` La Gioconda , '' she sing with such focus of concentration that it could be almost a terrifying experience. Even when her voice be not under control , the intensity of her conception make one forget her struggle with pitch and high notes. This burn sense of theater , this powerful musicianship , be hers alone. As career go , hers be not long. She make her debut in 1947 , and be virtually sing out 20 year later. But during those 20 year she exert an influence on opera that be unique. She look on opera as theater as well a voice , and she be the one who put it all together .