December 9 , 1978 OBITUARY Golda Meir : Peace and Arab Acceptance Were Goals of Her 5 Years a Premier By ISRAEL SHENKER For five year Golda Meir be Prime Minister of Israel. Her often-stated ambition be to see Israel accept by it Arab neighbor and living in peace. With firmness and determination , she seek but fail to achieve those aims. `` We say 'peace ' and the echo come back from the other side , 'war , ' '' she once lamented. `` We do n't want war even when we win. '' It be her fate to lead the Israeli Government when the force of Egypt and Syria attack in October 1973 in a costly war that Israel almost lose before it could mobilize and fight to an inconclusive end , in which both side would claim tenuous victories. `` We do not rejoice in victory , '' she said. `` We rejoice when a new kind of cotton be grow and when strawberry bloom in Israel. '' Mrs. Meir leave office in 1974. When President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt make the dramatic announcement of his decision to visit Jerusalem in November 1977 , Mrs. Meir -- who be in New York for the opening of the Broadway show `` Golda , '' an account of her life star Anne Bancroft -- hail it a a brilliant move but advise a wait-and-see attitude pending more concrete results. Preferred the 'Tough Old Lady' When President Sadat arrive in Israel , he seem more at ease with her than with any of the other prominent Israelis he saw , and she give him a gift for a newly bear grandchild. He later confide to interviewer that he would have prefer to negotiate with her because he regard her a `` a tough old lady '' who have the will to persevere on the road to peace. Her toughness be legendary while she run the Israeli Cabinet. After she leave , the Labor Party , which she have lead , become more fractious than ever and , beset by charge of corruption , go down to a stunning defeat in the spring of 1977 at the hand of a right- wing coalition lead by Menachem Begin , who become Prime Minister. After that , the Labor Party experience a bewildering slide into something close to irrelevance in the political arena. Mrs. Meir have a gift for make complex issue appear simple and express her view in plain but emotional term : `` Our generation reclaim the land , our child fight the war and our grandchild should enjoy the peace. '' Even when she speak to an audience of thousand , it could sound a though she be speak in her living room. At a small gathering in New York some year ago , Mrs. Meir hear an overdramatized version of an appeal she have make to President John F. Kennedy for arms. `` If I have speak to Kennedy so beautifully , '' she comment , `` I would have get more arms. '' Once when an aide suggest a statement to make to wait reporter , she rejoin , `` You ca n't improve on save nothing. '' Her mother use to advise : `` When you say no , you never regret it. '' Golda Mabovitch be bear on May 3 , 1898 in Kiev , in the Russian Empire. Her first memory be of her father nailing board over the front door during rumor that a pogrom be imminent. `` If there be any explanation necessary for the direction which my life have take , '' she say year later , `` perhaps it be the desire and the determination to save Jewish child from a similar scene and from a similar experience. '' `` I have a pogrom complex -- I have , I plead guilty , '' she go on. Alluding to the six million Jews kill by the Nazis , she add : `` There be many Jews who do n't have complex any more. But we who live through it have a complex of gas chambers. '' In Russia life be not far from death. `` I be always a little too cold outside and a little too empty inside , '' she recalled. Her food be sometimes give to her young sister , Zipke ; their old sister , Sheyna , often faint from hunger. In 1906 , the family emigrate to the United States , where Golda 's father have spend three year in Milwaukee save to prepare the way. When he could find employment he work a a carpenter , and his wife set herself up in a small grocery , the bane of Golda 's existence. Beginning at age 8 , Golda have to run the store each morning while her mother be at the market buying supplies. The child arrive late for school every day , have cry all the way from home. She Ran Away to Her Sister At age 11 she organize her first public meeting and give her first public speech , to raise money for school textbooks. Not many year later her mother press her to give up the idea of high school , spend her day work in the grocery and marry a much old man , a Mr. Goodstein. At age 14 Golda run away to live with Sheyna in Denver , where she meet her future husband , a gentle , erudite sign painter name Morris Myerson , another emigre from Russia. After an argument with Sheyna , Golda , now 16 , move out and be give shelter by two of Sheyna 's friends. She get a job measure skirt lining , and in late year find herself involuntarily glance at hems. Her father write to her that if she value her mother 's life she would come home , so she do , age 18 , to plunge into a confusion of enthusiasm : socialism , teaching , public speaking , Zionism. When there be attack on Jews in the Ukraine and in Poland , she help organize a protest march in Milwaukee. Her home become a center for visitor from Palestine. `` I know that I be not go to be a parlor Zionist , '' she wrote. She press her reluctant husband-to-be to go to Palestine , and when he agree , in 1917 , they be married. They leave in 1921 , on a trip that include a mutiny and near starvation. She have learn much about freedom in America , she love her first adopt country , but she never know a moment of homesickness for it. No Oil and Too Much Sand Much later , in jest , she echo her Israeli compatriot ' complaint against Moses : `` He drag u 40 year through the desert to bring u to the one place in the Middle East where there be no oil. '' The only heavy industry in Palestine be the manufacture of chocolate , she recalled. `` Why do it taste so sandy ? '' she ask , and be tell that sand be the only natural resource. The new immigrant -- she , her husband , her sister Sheyna , with whom she have be reconcile , and Sheyna 's child -- have no one to help them. Many others find the struggle too much and leave , and Mrs. Meir be to say later : `` I have always felt sorry for those people , because , to my mind , the loss have always be theirs. '' Golda and Morris Myerson apply to join Kibbutz Merhavia , whose name mean `` God 's wide space , '' and be reject because a majority of the member suspect that she would not be willing to do physical labor. Furious at this attitude , she persist and be finally accepted. Afterward , she say jokingly that she be accept only because of her phonograph and records. On the kibbutz she work herself to exhaustion pick almond , plant tree , care for chickens. `` The kibbutz make me an expert in grow chicken , '' she said. `` Before that I be afraid to be in a room with even one chicken. '' With her stint on kitchen duty , new amenity be introduced. She begin use glass in place of chipped cup , insist on peel the herring before serve , replace herring with oatmeal at breakfast and distributed cooky twice a week instead of once. For Sabbath eve supper she improvise a tablecloth from a sheet and even put flower on the table. Innovations Finally Won Favor Her innovation be eventually appreciate : The kibbutz choose her a it representative to Histadrut , the General Federation of Labor. But her insistence on refinement also draw criticism. Recalling her old phonograph , she write later : `` I even wonder sometimes whether it might not have be a relief for Merhavia to accept the dowry without the bride. '' When her husband could bear communal life no longer , she agree to leave the kibbutz. They move briefly to Tel Aviv , then to Jerusalem , where Golda Myerson give birth to a son , Menachem , and a daughter , Sarah , endow them with the inalienable right to share the family 's poverty. Mrs. Myerson spend hour each day do the laundry for Menachem 's nursery school to pay for his tuition. `` Was this what it be all about ? '' she ask herself. `` Poverty , drudgery and worry ? '' In 1928 she become secretary of the woman 's labor council of Histadrut , which mean supervise the vocational training of immigrant girls. Her marriage be break up , and accept the job , which require frequent travel , be tantamount to recognize the breakup. She and the child move to a tiny apartment in Tel Aviv , and for year she sleep there on the living-room couch. Her husband die in 1951 ; characteristically , she be away at the time. She make frequent fund-raising trip , and a woman reproach her for not talk sentimentally enough to make woman in the audience cry ; tear be useful in raise money. `` Tears do n't have to be elicit from anyone in the Zionist movement , '' she replied. `` God know there be always enough to cry about. '' Raging At Calm Amid Suffering In 1934 she join the executive committee of Histadrut , then a kind of shadow government for the eventual independent state of Israel. In 1938 , while attend a conference in Evian-les-Bains on refugee a a `` Jewish observer from Palestine , '' she rag inwardly at the complacent manner in which official representative express sympathy for the plight of Germany 's Jews , then explain that their country could not offer refuge. In the Balfour Declaration of 1917 the British Government promise `` the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people. '' The Jewish population in fact nearly quintuple during the British mandate , mostly through immigration , up to May 1939 just before World War II break out. At that time the British , fear an Arab shift toward the Axis power , issue a white paper severely restrict Jewish immigration. David Ben-Gurion , who be to play a vital role in secure Israeli independence , fix the line of Jewish opposition : `` We shall fight Hitler a if there be no white paper and fight the white paper a if there be no Hitler. '' Mrs. Myerson become a member of the War Economic Advisory Council set up by the British authority in Palestine. When the war end and the British keep Jewish survivor of concentration camp in European detention center , she go to work for the clandestine entry into Palestine of Jewish immigrant , and join a hunger strike in sympathy with them. `` There be no Zionism except the rescue of Jews , '' she said. Years after Israel win independence , Mrs. Meir -- she have since Hebraized her name , a do others -- say that she do not know if Ernest Bevin , the British Foreign Secretary , who bitterly oppose Jewish immigration to Palestine , be insane or just anti-Semitic or both. `` Those responsible for British policy can not forgive u for be a nation without their approval , '' she said. `` They can not understand that the problem of the Jews of Europe be not create for the sole purpose of embarrass the British Government. '' One of the Few Not Arrested `` We have many grievance against the Government , '' she insist in 1946. `` But the chief accusation that we have be that the policy of the white paper force u to sit here helpless at a time when we be convince we could have save hundred of thousand , and if only ten of thousand , if only one Jew ! '' When Zionist leader in Palestine be arrest in 1946 , she be one of the few leave free. `` Golda , they do n't take you yet ? '' Mr. Ben-Gurion 's wife , Paula , keep ask in phone call repeat often enough to make their recipient almost wish she have be taken. Mrs. Meir begin run things. She take over Zionist negotiation with the British and meanwhile kept in close touch with leader of the armed Jewish resistance who oppose the British and fought Arab guerrillas. Finally a United Nations Special Committee on Palestine visit the country , recommend partition and the establishment of a Jewish state , and the world organization vote approval , with the United States and the Soviet Union voting with the majority. Upon Arab refusal to accept the decision , Palestine 's Jews realize that war lay ahead and that they need arm and money. Though warn that she should not expect much help , Golda -- few now bother to user her second name -- leave for America and collect $ 50 million. On her return she undertake delicate political negotiation with King Abdullah of Transjordan , grandfather of King Hussein of Jordan. Disguising herself a an Arab woman , she travel to Amman , Abdullah 's capital , to urge him to keep his promise to her not to join other Arab leader in an attack on the Jews. He ask her not to hurry the proclamation of a state. `` We have be wait for 2,000 year , '' she replied. `` Is that hurry ? '' On May 14 , 1948 , she be one of 25 signer of Israel 's independence declaration. `` After I sign , I cry , '' she said. `` When I study American history a a schoolgirl and I read about those who sign the Declaration of Independence , I could n't imagine these be real people do something real. And there I be sit down and sign a declaration of independence. '' By May 15 Israel be under attack from the armed force of Egypt , Syria , Lebanon , Transjordan and Iraq. Bearing what be in effect Israel 's first passport , Mrs. Meir be send to the United States again to raise more money. At home , the new state confound the expectation of it Arab enemy by hold off their attack and establish it authority. Later that year Israel name Mrs. Meir a it first Minister to the Soviet Union , an assignment for which she felt unqualified : Her Russian be practically forget and she know little about diplomacy. She do know a lot about communal living , however , and when she take up her post she run the embassy a a kibbutz , with everyone , include the envoy , take turn at the chores. When she turn up at Moscow 's Central Synagogue thousand of Russian Jews , defy the Government 's hostility , flock to welcome her and express their solidarity with Israel. `` If you have send a broomstick to Moscow , '' she say later , `` and say it represent the State of Israel , it would have receive the same welcome. '' Money to House the Refugees Mrs. Meir leave Moscow and enter the Israeli Parliament in 1949 , serve until 1974. From 1949 to 1956 , year of severe economic difficulty , she be Minister of Labor. The meat ration be 3.5 ounce a day -- `` just so that we do n't forget that there be meat in the world , '' say Mrs. Meir. When a man court a woman he do not give flower ; flower grow wild all over the place. He bring an onion instead. When the Cabinet be try to deal with a series of assault on woman , a minister suggest bar woman from the street after dark. The Minister of Labor protest : `` Men be attack woman , not the other way around. If there be go to be a curfew , let the men be lock up , not the women. '' People often ask Mrs. Meir if she felt handicap at be a woman minister. `` I do n't know , '' she would reply , `` I 've never try to be a man. '' She campaign vigorously for money to house the ten of thousand of immigrant who be live in tent city and overwhelm the young state 's facilities. Levi Eshkol , then Finance Minister , have his priority , and they be not hers. `` You ca n't milk a house , '' he said. `` But you can milk a cow. If you want money you can have it -- but only for cows. '' She threaten to resign , but stay on and get money , though not as much a she want , to provide home for those willing to join the adventure of a Jewish state. `` The period since we win our independence have be the first for many , many century , during which the word 'Jewish refugee ' be no longer hear , '' she say later. `` There be no such thing any more because the Jewish state be prepared to take every Jew , whether he be a skilled worker or not , whether he be old or not , whether he be sick or not. It do n't make a particle of difference. '' In 1956 she become Foreign Minister , succeed Moshe Sharett , and serve under Prime Minister Ben-Gurion. A man of strong idea and powerful will -- it be he who prevail on Golda Myerson to change her name -- he be say to have call her the only man in his Cabinet. Planner of the Suez Operation She , Moshe Dayan and Shimon Peres fly in secret to France in 1956 to lay plan for collaborate in the attack on Egypt , which have nationalize the Suez Canal and close the Strait of Tiran , the link between the Gulf of Aqaba and the Red Sea. When war come Israel take less than 100 hour to capture the Gaza Strip and all of Sinai ; France and Britain , however , after land at the northern end of the Suez Canal Zone and drive southward under the pretext of separate the Egyptian and Israeli army , be force by United States and Soviet pressure to withdraw. Israel , also press by the two superpower , later pull out of Sinai , and the United Nations send a peacekeeping force to open the Strait of Tiran. This force remain until 1967 , when it be withdraw at the request of President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt in a prelude to a new war that last only six days. During subsequent negotiation at the United Nations , the Iraqi Foreign Minister at one point exclaim from the rostrum of the General Assembly : `` Mrs. Meir , go back to Milwaukee -- that 's where you belong ! '' She be an architect of Israel 's policy of extend technical assistance to develop African nation , a policy that improve relation until the Arab oil embargo sweep the Africans into line against Israel. Asked by Billy Graham , the evangelist , for the secret of Israeli success in Africa before the embargo , she reply : `` We go there to teach , not to preach. '' When Mr. Ben-Gurion give up office and then split with Levi Eshkol , Israel 's third Prime Minister , Mrs. Meir side with Mr. Eshkol , become his strong supporter. Though it be fashionable to say that hers be the stiff backbone in the Cabinet , she say : `` I have never believe in inflexibility except when Israel be concerned. '' `` If we be criticize because we do not bow , '' she sad , `` because we can not compromise on the question , 'To be or not to be , ' it be because we have decide that , come what may , we be and we will be. '' As Foreign Minister she work an 18-hour day. After two year her chief of Cabinet suggest she take a vacation. `` Why ? '' she said. `` Do you think I 'm tired ? '' `` No , '' he say , `` but I am. '' She reply : `` So you take a vacation ! '' But in 1965 , after much illness and the exhaustion of year of unremitting labor , she resign from the Cabinet. `` I wo n't go into a political nunnery , '' she assure Mr. Eshkol , refuse an offer to be Deputy Prime Minister on the basis that it be well to be a full- time grandmother than a part-time minister. She move out of the Foreign Minister 's large residence and go back to cleaning , cooking , iron and shopping. Bus driver often would make unscheduled stop to let her off near her home or detour to take her right to the door. Her party soon press her to be it secretary general , and she agreed. In 1967 , when Israel live in the shadow of renew war , Prime Minister Eshkol deliver a radio address to the nation , for which he be criticize because he sound far from inspire and stumble over his words. Mrs. Meir defend him : `` A leader who do n't hesitate before he send his nation to battle be not fit to be a leader. '' To young volunteer who rush to Israel during the six-day war and be prepare to return home , Mrs. Meir say : `` You be ready to die with us. Why do n't you live with u ? '' Israel have win a brilliant and overwhelming victory. As the cease-fire take effect , Mrs. Meir comment , `` The only alternative to war be peace and the only road to peace be negotiations. '' `` There be nothing Israel want so much a peace , '' she added. `` With all the bleakness of the desert , the desert of hate around u be even more bleak. '' No Joy in Being Good Soldiers `` We have be oblige to become good soldier , but not with joy , '' she said. `` We be good farmer with joy. It 's a wonderful thing to go down to a kibbutz deep in the Negev and remember what it be -- sand and sky , maybe a well of brackish water -- and to see it now green and lovely. To be good soldier be to our extreme necessity , but there be no joy in it. '' At the same time she warn : `` There can not be quiet on one side of the border and shell on the other. We will either have peace on both side or trouble on both sides. '' `` I understand the Arabs want to wipe u out , '' she note , `` but do they really expect u to cooperate ? '' Though insist that the Arabs would eventually have to negotiate and recognize Israel 's right to live , she reinforce a reputation for stubbornness , and later complain that `` intransigent '' have become her middle name. `` Hitler take care of six million Jews , '' she said. `` If we lose a war , that 's the end forever -- and we disappear from the earth. If one fail to understand this , then one fail to understand obstinacy. We intend to remain alive. Our neighbor want to see u dead. This be not a question that leave much room for compromise. '' She call Israel 's secret weapon `` no alternative. '' Doves and Hawks but No Pigeons In Israel there be grow debate about how to reach an understanding -- and peace -- with the Arabs. Mrs. Meir note that Israel have dove and hawk , but she have find no one who want to turn himself into a clay pigeon. When foreign power press Israel to return to it pre-1967 boundary , she retort that the war have start along those lines. Critics argue that she fail to understand the Palestinians or even to recognize them a a national entity , and that she be anything but sympathetic to their just desire for recognition and land. `` Do the Arabs need another land ? '' she asked. `` They already have fourteen. We have only one. '' To the complaint that she be intransigent and refuse to seize opportunity for negotiation , she insist that the Arabs refuse to speak to Israel. Speaking to an audience in New York just after the 1967 war , Mrs. Meir say : `` Is there anybody who can honestly bid the Israelis to go home before a real peace ? Is there anyone who want u to begin train our 10-year-olds for the next war ? You say no. I be sure that every fair-minded person in the world will say no , but -- forgive my impertinence -- most important of all the Israelis say no. '' She be a popular , effective speaker. From a news conference at the National Press Club in Washington : Q : Your grandson , Gideon Meir , age 7 , say that you be the best gefilte-fish maker in Israel. What be your recipe ? A : My grandson - I 'm afraid he 's not very objective about me. I 'm not very objective about him , either. Ready to Go Anywhere for Peace On Mr. Eshkol 's death in February 1969 the Labor Party select her a it candidate for Prime Minister. That be not exactly the retirement she have in mind -- '' Being 70 be not a sin , '' she say ; `` It 's not a joy , either '' -- but she accept and win Parliament 's vote of confidence. Pressing for a meeting with the Arabs , she proclaim her readiness to go to any length except national suicide to secure peace. `` If Nasser choose New York for negotiation , it 's all right , '' she said. `` If he want to go to New Jersey , that 's fine too. If he say Geneva , we agree. I 'm even prepared to go to Cairo -- how about that ! -- to sit down at the table. '' `` Arab official will have to overcome the shock of meet u not on the battlefield but at the negotiating table , '' she added. `` Suppose we want to return territory we have take , '' she noted. `` To whom ? We ca n't send it to Nasser by parcel post. '' Upon the death of President Nasser in September 1970 , Israeli official saw a new opportunity for peace under Mr. Sadat , his successor. In 1972 President Nicolae Ceausescu of Rumania tell Mrs. Meir that President Sadat be agreeable to a meeting , and when she urge that it be arrange , Mr. Ceausescu say he would be in touch ; but she relate later that she never hear from him again. Telling the Pope How It Was In January 1973 she do hear from the Vatican , which have never recognize Israel , that Pope Paul VI be ready to receive her. `` Before we go to the audience , '' she recall , `` I say to our people : 'Listen , what 's go on here ? Me , the daughter of Moshe Mabovitch the carpenter , go to meet the Pope of the Catholics ? ' So one of our people say to me , 'Just a moment , Golda , carpentry be a very respectable profession around here. ' '' The Pope have hardly open the conversation before the daughter of Moshe Mabovitch speak her mind. `` I do n't like the opening at all , '' she recalled. `` His Holiness have say he find it hard to understand that the Jewish people , who should be merciful , behave so fiercely in it own country. I ca n't stand it when we be talk to like that , so I say to the Pope : 'Your Holiness , do you know what my early memory be ? A pogrom in Kiev. When we be merciful and when we have no homeland and when we be weak , we be lead to the gas chambers. ' '' Too Apprehensive for Tears She have decide to look the Pope in the eye , and not low her eye under any circumstances. `` There be moment of tension , '' she said. `` I felt that I be say what I be say to the man of the cross , who head the church whose symbol be the cross , under which Jews be kill for generations. '' Mrs. Meir know many bitter moment and difficult meeting , few more galling than her encounter with Chancellor Bruno Kreisky of Austria , whose background be Jewish but who have accede to an Arab request that an Austrian transit camp for Soviet Jewish immigrant to Israel be closed. She could not persuade him to change his mind , and she never forgive him. The great crisis of her year a Prime Minister come with the war in October 1973. Although she felt that Egypt and Syria might be plan an attack , she accept the reassurance of her military leader and hold off mobilize the reserves. `` I shall live with that terrible knowledge for the rest of my life , '' she write in her autobiography. In the first day of the war , with Israeli force overwhelm by superior number and firepower , Mrs. Meir live endless hour of apprehension and exhaustion. `` I could n't even cry when I be alone , '' she write later. Finally , when Egypt and Syria face defeat , the Russians , a they have in 1967 , demand a cease-fire , to which the United Nations agreed. During subsequent negotiation between the Unites States and Israel , Mrs. Meir come to have ambivalent feeling about the role of Henry A. Kissinger , the Secretary of State. To force Israeli compliance with American wish , the United States threaten economic retaliation and the negotiation be break off. By this time , Mrs. Meir have hand over the Government to Yitzhak Rabin , have tell the party leadership : `` It be beyond my strength to continue carry this burden. '' When she leave office , on June 4 , 1974 , she be 76 year old , but she be still not prepared to go into that political nunnery , so she go on speak her mind. During a talk at Princeton a student ask her , in a reference to Yasir Arafat , the Palestinian guerrilla leader : `` What if Arafat offer to recognize Israel ? '' The prospect seem so ludicrous that Mrs. Meir , bowdlerizing , reply : `` There 's a say in Yiddish , 'If my grandmother have have wheel , she would have be a carriage. ' '' When another student ask for detail of the Soviet Union 's presence in the Middle East in men and in missile base , she reply : `` It be too much before and it 's too much now. '' At the end of her life she be still feel guilty about the year during which she have neglect her child and about her failure to devote herself to the kibbutz rather than to public life. `` There be a type of woman who can not remain at home , '' she once wrote. `` In spite of the place her child and family fill in her life , her nature demand something more ; she can not divorce herself from the large social life. She can not let her child narrow her horizon. For such a woman there be no rest . ''