November 16 , 1978 OBITUARY Margaret Mead Is Dead of Cancer at 76 By ALDEN WHITMAN Margaret Mead , the anthropologist , author , lecturer and social critic , die yesterday at New York Hospital after a yearlong battle with cancer. She be 76 year old. Dr. Mead , who be curator emeritus of the department of anthropology at the American Museum of Natural History , have know that she have cancer but remain active at her work until she enter the hospital on Oct.3 , accord to a museum spokesman. President Carter mourn her death , say in a statement that she have `` bring the humane insight of cultural anthropology to a public of millions. '' There be other tribute from Kurt Waldheim , Secretary-General of the United Nations ; from Mayor Koch ; the Smithsonian Institution ; Edward J. Lehman , the executive director of the American Anthropological Association , and Faye Wattleton , president of the Planned Parenthood Federation. `` I 'm in the middle of several different thing , '' Dr. Mead say offhandedly a few year ago and reel off to an inquire friend a dozen project that she be pursue simultaneously. She be not boasting. She be just state a fact of her life that have be true since early childhood. The slight but sturdy Dr. Mead be possess of virtually boundless energy , an unquenchable curiosity , a tenacious memory and a genius for organize her time. She often give the impression of be ubiquitous because she be rarely at rest in any one place for very long and because she could not permit a moment to pass unutilized. In all this she have a zest that even in her 70 's confounded friend and colleague of less verve. The American Museum of Natural History , with which she be associate for most of her professional life , once draw up a list of subject in which she be `` a specialist. '' The list read : `` Education and culture ; relationship between character structure and social form ; personality and culture ; cultural aspect of problem of nutrition ; mental health ; family life ; ecology ; ekistics ; transnational relation ; national character ; cultural change , and cultural building. '' The museum might well have add `` et cetera , '' for Dr. Mead be not only an anthropologist and ethnologist of the first rank but also something of a national oracle on other subject range from atomic politics to feminism. She take on ( and dismiss with disdain ) Dr. Edward Teller , the hydrogen bomb advocate , and she be once describe a `` a general among the foot soldier of modern feminism. '' Insofar a anyone can be a polymath , Dr. Mead be widely regard a one. Headed Science Association One evidence of her formidable power be her election , at the age of 72 , to the presidency of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. She be the second woman to head this group , one of the ranking organization of the country 's scientific community. Her stature a a scientist have be assure for many year , albeit somewhat grudgingly because she be a woman in a male-dominated discipline. For those who saw Dr. Mead in middle age and on , she be a robust , 5-foot-2-inch figure who carry a forked walking stick ( she break her ankle year ago ) . Her head be top with fluffy , slightly curly hair cut in bang , and her foot be shoe in plain leather sandals. Her voice be melodious , and her face , with it rimless glass , be pleasant and open. Although she could be lacerate , she be more often gentle and witty. She believe civilized mankind to be often ill-informed and pigheaded , yet she usually display great compassion for it individual members. From the publication of her first book , `` Coming of Age in Samoa , '' in 1928 , in which she describe the value of adolescent lovemaking in Samoan society , Dr. Mead 's name become associate with sexual theory. A good deal of her subsequent writing contend that sexual repression work against healthy maturation of the young and against successful marriages. 'Eclectic Circuitry' Her anthropological study also cover other topic and be generally highly regarded a make her an expert in the sociocultural life of primitive peoples. Some , though , be reserve about the seem contradictory nature of her material. `` She illustrate the principle of eclectic circuitry , '' one critic said. The number of Dr. Mead 's scientific and popular lecture be stagger -- 110 in one sample 12-month period -- and each be different. Her popular lecture , deliver usually to overflow crowd , be sometimes on rather esoteric subjects. `` Acculturation Among the Iatmul Tribe of New Guinea '' be one of them. ( `` For year I have be able to guarantee audience a good address by use word that be n't in home dictionary , '' she once said. ) Sometimes she get her audience mixed up. Once , for example , she speak learnedly on sex deviation among the Tchambuli to a group of theologians. They take it in good part , a do a men 's luncheon club whose member applaud her talk on cultural stability in the South Seas. Over the year , Dr. Mead lecture , sometimes for no fee , on such subject a air pollution , hunger , mental hygiene , sex , woman 's career , population control , primitive art , the family , nutrition , city planning , military service , tribal custom , alcoholism , child development , architecture , drug and civil liberties. No matter what the topic , she do her homework. After one talk on tribal custom , a questioner ask about consumption of betel nut in the Admiralty Islands. There be a ready and long response , a if betel nut problem be her life work. An Active Advocate Dr. Mead 's fellow anthropologist be often uneasy about her. `` You wonder what she 'll take off on next , '' one say some year ago. `` We know what Dr. Blank will say -- he 's probably already distribute his paper. But we 're never sure about Margaret Mead. '' Not only be Dr. Mead unpredictable ; sometimes she also do not abide by the rule of behavior that most scientist set for themselves. Anthropology , essentially the study of adaptation , should refrain from influence the event it observe and interprets , most scientist believe. But Dr. Mead , accord to her critic be not only a student of adaptation but also an active advocate of many specific change in modern society. The critic , however , almost universally admire her a a person , however much they be distress by her a a scholar-activist. They think she be too scattershot and sometime self-contradictory. `` But then , '' one critic say , `` we do owe a lot to Margaret for put u on the map. '' Some social scientist think that Dr. Mead be lack in introspection on the human relation of her field work in the South Seas. `` The remarkable thing about Margaret be that she 's always be interested in the psychological end of anthropology and be , in fact , one of the lead contributor to the field , '' a critic said. `` But her first love and primary interest be the study of culture , and she never get to the person in the full sense. '' 'Oh , Piffle' To this and other criticism , Dr. Mead 's usual reaction be , `` Oh , piffle. '' It be say with noticeable spunk , ting with disdain. Spunkiness be , indeed , among Margaret Mead 's early traits. Born in Philadelphia on Dec. 16 , 1901 , she be the daughter of Edward and Emily Fogg Mead. Her father , who teach economics at the University of Pennsylvania , have hop for a son and once tell his daughter , `` It 's a pity you be n't a boy ; you 'd have go far. '' She determine to go to college and do , to De Pauw University , from which she go to Barnard College to get her Bachelor of Arts degree in 1923. At Barnard , the young student meet Franz Boas , a magnetic man who be one of the world 's ranking anthropologists. He become her mentor , and she become one of his four graduate student at Columbia , where she take her M.A. in 1924 and her Ph.D. in 1929. `` Franz Boas have to plan -- much a if he be a general , '' Dr. Mead recall , `` with only a handful of troop to save a whole country. '' Dr. Boas think she ought to work among American Indians , his area of interest , but she want to investigate Polynesia. Spunkiness and Guile Her spunkiness win out , assist by a bit of guile. She suggest to Dr. Boas that he be try to manipulate her and suggest to her father that her mentor be try to control his daughter. Dr. Boas give in , and her father give her $ 1,000 for a world trip. By this time , Dr. Mead be marry to Luther S. Cressman , a young seminarian who often joke unhumorously of have to make an appointment to see his wife. They part temporarily when she go to Samoa in 1926. On shipboard , there be a love affair with Reo F. Fortune , a New Zealand anthropologist , to whom she be marry after a brief reconciliation with Dr. Cressman. Meanwhile , she do the field work for and write `` Coming of Age in Samoa. '' From the start , it be enormously popular , especially among young people , some of whom be influence by it to become anthropologists. The scientific question underlie `` Coming of Age in Samoa '' be whether `` the disturbance which vex our adolescent [ be ] due to the nature of adolescence itself or the civilization. '' Her finding suggest that the answer be the civilization. The easygoing way in Samoa minimize conflict and the incidence of neurotic personality due to guilt feelings. Two Daring Chapters The book be descriptive rather than statistical. It also include two chapter that daringly apply her finding to modern society , in which she propose that straitlaced sex attitude might be relax without `` accept promiscuity. '' The book have often be attack in scientific circle a too subjective and lack the data for verifiable behavior. However , her conclusion be base on detailed observation , and if she do not conduct anthropometric test or produce statistical survey she do convey her subject graphically. A typical sentence read , `` Her grandmother be very old ; the muscle in her neck be stringy like uncooked pork. '' Dr. Mead settle down with the people she be studying. She eat their wild boar , wild pigeon and dried fish ; help to care for ill child , and gain the confidence of her informants. At one time she build a wall-less house so she could observe everything around her. She possess a trait unusual in anthropologist of her time , an ability to shed her Western preconceptions. She would sit on the ground for hour without move a she watch tribal peoples. `` She know how to use her eye , how to see , '' say Ken Heyman , a fellow scientist. `` She have an uncanny perception for different cultural styles. '' Books Showed Intuition This finely attuned intuition be evident in her book on the seven culture she study -- Samoan , Manua , Arapesh , Mundugumor , Tchambuli , Iatmul and Balinese. Out of these inquiry come , in addition to `` Coming of Age in Samoa , '' `` Growing Up in New Guinea , '' `` Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies , '' `` Balinese Character '' and `` New Lives for Old. '' Some of her most extensive study be do with the Manua -- she visit them several time -- and they speak her name a `` Makrit Mit. '' Dr. Mead 's association with tribal people be the subject of a notable New Yorker cartoon that depict a tribal chief hand out book to boys about to be initiate into adolescence. `` Rather than go into the detail , '' he be saying. `` I 'm simply go to present each of you with a copy of this excellent book by Margaret Mead. '' The idea behind the cartoon be not far fetch , because the Iatmul people once meet her at their dock sing `` My Darling Clementine '' and then carry her off to their village. Generalizing from her investigation , Dr. Mead say that each culture have it own distinct psychological profile. `` Each society , '' ranquil. Dr. Mead and her husband Dr. Fortune , meet Gregory Bateson , a British anthropologist , in New Guinea. There be a personal crisis among the three a a result of which there be a divorce , and Dr. Mead and Dr. Bateson be married. They have a daughter , Catherine. They be divorce after about fifteen years. `` The Bateson year be probably the richest of her life , `` a friend of Dr. Mead say , note that she and her husband be `` perfect partner in mind and temperament. `` Recalling the union in her memoir , `` Blackberry Winter , `` Dr. Mead be wistful about her marriage and it year in Bali , say : `` I think it be a good thing to have such a model once [ a Mr. Bateson ] ing the union in her memoir , `` Blackberry Winter , `` Dr. Mead be wistful about her marriage and it year in Bali , say : `` I think it be a good thing to have such a model once [ a Mr. Bateson ] even if the model include the kind of extra intensity in which a lifetime be condense into a few short years. `` In another recollection , she seem to fault herself , say `` American woman be good mother , but they make poor wife ; Americans be very poor at be attentive to anybody else. `` Nevertheless , in their Bali year the couple take and annotate 25,000 photographs. This work , which be do in 1936-38 , have a large impact on other anthropologists. Turned Dry : An Anthropologist Looks at America , `` issue in 1942. The book dealt with American character outline against the background of the seven other culture she have studied. It increase the demand for her lecture and give her the chance to speak out on current issues. One of the issue that she tackle be male-female relationship , her thought on which she gather into `` Male and Female : A Study of Sexes in a Changing World , `` publish in 1949. `` A vast. turbulent book , `` Rebecca West say of it. Among it observation be , `` Differences in sex a they be know today be base on the bring up by the mother -- she be always push the female toward similarity and the male toward difference. `` In more recent year , Dr. Mead become an outspoken leader of the feminist movement. Indeed , she felt it her duty to improve people 's understanding of themselves and especially woman 's understanding of themselves. She like to talk , often with scorch humor , about what she saw a the folly of conventional way of loving , work , birthing , housing and aging. This sense of mission appear to many to account for Dr. Mead 's restless zeal. `` She want to be a mother to the world , `` a friend said. Taught at Columbia In addition to her post at the American Museum of Natural History , she be also adjunct professor of anthropology at Columbia and teach tho the world , `` a friend said. Taught at Columbia In addition to her post at the American Museum of Natural History , she be also adjunct professor of anthropology at Columbia and teach the subject at Fordham. In addition to her daughter , Mary Catherine Bateson Kassarjian , dean of social science at Raza Shah Civar University in Iran , Dr. Mead be survive by a granddaughter , Sevanne , and a sister , Elizabeth Mead Steig of Cambridge , Mass. Funeral service will be private and burial will be in Buckingham , Pa. A memorial service will be hold at 2 P.M. tomorrow in St. Paul 's Chapel , Columbia University .