August 7 , 1978 OBITUARY Pope Paul VI Is Dead of a Heart Attack at 80 ; Guided the Church Through Era of Change By KENNETH A. BRIGGS In contrast to Pope John XXIII , his predecessor , Paul VI be not naturally gregarious and innovative. He be the consummate bureaucrat in his Vatican career and not give to strike out in new directions. If there have be no Second Vatican Council , begin under John XXIII and complete during his own reign , it be unlikely that Paul VI would have propose such an updating of the church. But the modernizing be already well under way when he begin his reign. Paul 's contribution be a product of his superior intellect , apply in the delicate application of so many Vatican II reforms. It be felt also in his unassuming presence , in which many world leader find a poignant , peaceful respite. Enormous Spiritual Quality To those who meet him across ideological and religious boundary , Paul VI be first and foremost a man of surpass spiritual quality. He be a progressive exponent of human right , a position that contrast with his conservatism on church doctrine. He appeal for commitment to conventional Catholic principle as ardently a he champion the cause of the poor , the hungry and the oppressed. To those who follow the proceeding of the church , he be much more. He perform the arduous and often thankless role a caretaker over a church that be in the midst of a tumultuous change. In term of particular action , Pope Paul may be best remember for his 1967 encyclical that underscore the church 's opposition to artifical mean of birth control. It cause a storm of protest , particularly in the United States , and be often cite a a major reason for the large-scale decline in mass attendance that follow in America. For the Pope it be a matter of unshakable faith in historical Catholic reason rather than a question that should be rethink accord to modern psychological , demographic or theological factors. He listen to the case for loosen the ban , bring forcefully by those appoint to study the problem , then make his decision. Question of Women a Priests The same pattern accompany his decision in 1977 to approve a statement by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith , which uphold the church 's policy of refuse to ordain woman to the priesthood. Since a priest must bear the image of a man because Christ be a man , he say , female priest be unthinkable. Though these decision often leave progressive in the church disgruntle , his plea for the downtrodden and his capacity for self-sacrifice win him a spiritual following that include all element of the church. His humility be epitomize when he offer himself in exchange for hostage hold captive in Mogadishu , Somalia. In a political world rife with cynicism , his offer bore the stamp of sincerity. He faithfully put in effect many of the change that Vatican II call for. He oversee the rendering of the mass into the vernacular from Latin , undertake a revision of all seven sacramental rite and preside over a revamping of church government that introduce a variety of consultative council from the parish level to the newly-formed Synod of Bishops , which have meet in recent years. He also bring into be guideline for a radical new relationship between Catholics and Jews that have provide a healthy atmosphere between them. Critics of his policy assert that he do not pursue many of the reform with sufficient energy and that , because he be conservative by nature , the procedure be conduct without change the basic power alignment at the various level of the church. In particular , the critic assert that the Curia , the Vatican 's central government , have not relinquish it strong control over church affair despite the establishment of such complementary group a the regular Synod of Bishops. Work Still to Be Done The progressive conclude that there be much unfinished business in the updating of the church because of Pope Paul 's lack of enthusiasm for further reform. As one who have rise from modest origin to the high ecclesiastical authority , he revere the church and seek to protect it against the temptation of a secular age. He do not trust the sexual liberality of the present , or the tendency toward doctrinal relativism. The loss to the church in number and influence cause him much grief. His message during his last year be often a desperate cry to those in the church to try harder. He extol those who appear most loyal by traditional standard and lament those who , like the thousand of priest who marry or resign during his tenure , fail to conform. Once , extremely upset , he compare such priest to Judas. But because he be understood most of all a a man of compassion , even by his opponent , the target of his criticism saw his rebuke a sorrow rather than anger. He show the same characteristic in his reach out to the non-Catholic world. He travel more than any Pope in history , include memorable journey to the United States , where he address the United Nations and a throng in Yankee Stadium and to India and to Africa. He take these opportunity to advance peace and justice , rather than press any theological claims. An International-Minded Figure He repeatedly appeal for peace in Vietnam and support various drive for civil and human rights. This aspect of his service be often take for granted. But he set precedent in the cause of human betterment and justice that mark him a the most international-minded of Popes. His successor would undoubtedly be expect to follow this example. He be a firm , though often reluctant , ecumenist. He embrace the Patriarch and pray for reunion with the Eastern Orthodox. He also indicate strong desire to reach concord with the Anglican communion. But his longing be temper by a determination to retain Catholicism in an uncompromised state. He warn the Anglicans , for example , that the decision by some among them to ordain woman would pose an obstacle to church unity. In do so , however , he maintain cordial relation with them , even a he do with those outside the church who he know would not understand his message or be receptive to Catholicism .