July 11 , 1979 OBITUARY Arthur Fiedler , 84 , Conductor Of Boston Pops 50 Years , Dies By ALLEN HUGHES Arthur Fiedler , conductor of the Boston Pops Orchestra for 50 year and one of the world 's best- known musical figure , die yesterday morning at his home in Brookline Mass. He be 84 year old. The Pops , under Harry Ellis Dickson , it assistant conductor for 25 year , note Mr. Fiedler 's death last night by begin it concert in Boston 's Symphony Hall with his signature piece , John Phillip Sousa 's `` Stars and Stripes Forever , '' play pianissimo. After the first few bar , Mr. Dickson walk away from the podium , leave the orchestra to play on leaderless. In the audience , stand throughout the piece , a few person be see wipe tear away. At the point in the song when the American flag be unfurl on stage , numerous person break into tear , but the audience be mostly solemn. At the end of the march , the audience break into immediate and spontaneous applause for about half a minute , follow by half a minute of silence. They sit down and the regular program resumed. For more than half a century , Arthur Fiedler and the Boston Pops Orchestra be join in a musical union that , through concert , recording , radio broadcast and television program , bring untold musical pleasure to million of Americans. 400,000 at Bicentennial Concert If one event could be say to sum up the grandfatherly , white-haired conductor 's extraordinary popular appeal , it may have be the Bicentennial concert that he lead on the Fourth of July in 1976 , on Boston 's Esplanade. An estimated 400,000 cheer Fiedler admirer cram themselves into the outdoor area for a free program of patriotic tune , in what be probably the large gathering for a musical event in the nation 's history. Mr. Fiedler , who project a jolly , unsnobbish image , have his finger on the pulse of Mr. and Mrs. Middle America. He seem always to know exactly how much easy-to-listen-to classical music they could and would take when it be mixed with generous portion of show tune and other popular music do in lush symphonic arrangements. Each spring at the end of the Boston Symphony Orchestra 's regular season , it staid Symphony Hall be give a cafelike aspect , and Mr. Fiedler filer it with tuneful music that be nearly always upbeat and often frothy. Because the Boston Pops on it home ground -- though not always on tour -- be the Boston Symphony minus it major principal player , Mr. Fiedler have first-rate musician to work with , and for the most part , they seem to enjoy work with him. The Boston Pops tradition be already 45 year old when he take over the podium in 1930 , but the stamp he put on it be so strong that it have be difficult to think Boston Pops without think Fiedler. His recording with the Pops for RCA and Polydor be estimate to have sell 50 million disk , and his recent tour outsell those of the regular Boston Symphony. Despite his identification for nearly half a century with light music , Mr. Fiedler be neither exclusively nor originally attach to it. He study violin -- '' It be just a chore , '' he say -- a a child and join the Boston Symphony a a violinist when he be 20 year old. He switch to the viola because , a he explain in late year , he find it more interesting. He be a regular Symphony player until he take over the Pops. Meanwhile , however , he have organize the Arthur Fiedler Sinfonietta , in 1924 , and with it have demonstrate his conducting ability. For decade , he appear a guest conductor of orchestra all over the country , and when they would let him do so , which be not often , he plan standard symphonic program for these engagements. 'Something Is Driving Me' His life be a whirlwind of activity , which he explain in 1972 in a New York Times interview with Stephen Rubin by say , `` Something be drive me. . . . I just ca n't sit and twiddle my thumbs. '' Mr. Fiedler 's activity , success and natural penchant for showmanship and publicity do not endear him to most of the other conductor of the Boston Symphony. And , except for Charles Munch , he have little favorable to say about them. Serge Koussevitzky , music director from 1924 to 1949 , be Mr. Fiedler 's particular bete noire. He be aware that many critic and member of the classical-music public share the other conductor ' disdain for what he be doing. He call them `` culture vulture '' and `` snob , '' and return their contempt. Mr. Fiedler be bear to Emanuel and Johanna Fiedler in the Back Bay section of Boston on Dec. 17 , 1894. The Fiedler family have be musical for generation , and his father , who be bear in Poland , have be take to Boston by Wilhelm Gericke in 1885 to play in the first-violin section of the Boston Symphony. Young Arthur attend the Prince and Latin Schools until 1910 , when his father move the family first to Vienna and then to Berlin. From 1911 to 1915 , Arthur study at the Royal Academy of Music , where his violin teacher be Willy Hess , who have be a concertmaster of the Boston Symphony. The young man also study piano and conducting , and make his podium debut at the age of 17 conduct three of Mozart 's German Dances and Mendelssohn's Piano Concerto in G minor. By the time he be 20 he have return to Boston and become a member of the second-violin section of the Symphony. During his tenure a an orchestra member , he occasionally switch from violin or viola to play celesta , piano or organ. When the conductorship of the Pops be open in 1924 , Mr. Fiedler apply for the job but be turn down. It be then that he organize the Fiedler Sinfonietta , compose of Symphony player , and begin to prove he have conduct talents. In 1929 , he organize the outdoor Esplanade Concerts in Boston , and when the Pops job open up again in 1930 he be offer it. Apart from music , Mr. Fiedler be know best a an avid amateur fireman , and in 1970 he note that he have be make an honorary fireman in 270 city : `` I 've never leave a concert to go to a fire , but I have leave fire to go to a concert. '' On his 75th birthday , his family buy him a 1938 pumper from the Marlboro , N.H. , Fire Department. Mr. Fiedler collapse at his desk at 7 A.M. while go over musical score and be find shortly afterward by his wife , Ellen , accord to Peter Gelb , a spokesman for the orchestra. Mr. Gelb quote Mr. Fiedler 's physician , Dr. Samuel Proger , a say that the conductor have die apparently of a cardiac arrest. Mr. Fiedler be hospitalize last winter for treatment of a brain disorder that have leave him paralyzed and unable to speak , but he recover and go on to lead the orchestra in a triumphant 50th anniversary concert in May. A few day later , he collapse after a concert and be hospitalize with what be diagnose a a mild heart attack , his fifth. Mr. Fiedler have be recover at home and be prepare to lead the orchestra again when he be fatally stricken. Officials of the Pops have be consider candidate to replace Mr. Fiedler for several year , but no formal search have be conducted. Yesterday , the official say that they have no immediate plan to replace Mr. Fiedler and that Mr. Dickson would take charge until a choice be made. After have what he describe a `` a very charming bachelorhood for about 50 year , '' Mr. Fiedler marry Ellen Bottomley , a Boston socialite , in 1942. They have three child , Johanna , Deborah and Peter. Johanna Fiedler be a member of the Metropolitan Opera 's press department. A private funeral , for member of the family , will be hold tomorrow. On Sunday , there will be a memorial at the Hatch Shell on the bank of the Charles , a copy of the Bicentennial concert , organize by David Mugar , a Boston businessman and Pops benefactor , and the Boston Symphony. Exponent of Populist Music By JOHN ROCKWELL The easy and perhaps best way to appreciate Arthur Fiedler 's accomplishment be to take him on exactly the term he wish himself to be take -- a a genial , extroverted and vigorous exponent of populism in the realm of classical music. His program format be simple and invariable- -a few light-classical staple with one long , more serious work -- often a concerto with a promising young local soloist -- and end with pop or novelty tune arrange for orchestra. Mr. Fiedler 's style with all this music be technically secure , with tempos generally brisk and rubato fairly rigid. It be direct , efficient , no-nonsense conducting , and it often serve to purge some of his more bathetic standard of their latent sentimentality. Could Be Acerbic What annoy some more serious classical-music devotee -- apart from Mr. Fiedler 's personality , which could be more acerbic and combative than the public image imply -- be the implicit didacticism of his method. Some people feel that to ease neophyte into classical music with light classic amount to a bastardization. Mr. Fiedler 's defender would suggest that there be good popularizer and bad popularizer , and that he be a good one. The directness of his style correspond to the contemporary interpretive fashion in classical music in general. And if his format be a formula , it be also a sign that he know his own limit and taste very well. In the Rafters for 30 Cents Mr. Fiedler 's proselytization have tangible results. For year , he lead a summer pop series with the San Francisco Symphony in the old Municipal Auditorium , and teen-agers could sit way up in the cavernous rafter for 30 cent a ticket. Many of u be introduce to much of the orchestral repertory in live performance that way , and it be not a bad introduction. In his late year , Mr. Fiedler 's programming begin to look dated. The late-19th-century warhorse at the center of his repertory fell out of fashion , and popular music move into genre that seem increasingly resistant to orchestral arrangement. Still , his concert continue to give pleasure until the end. As much a anything else , Mr. Fiedler be a grand personality of the old school , and it be a good measure of his accomplishment that the Boston Pops will surely find it next to impossible to replace him .