June 12 , 1979 OBITUARY 'Duke , ' an American Hero By RICHARD F. SHEPARD In more than 200 film make over 50 year , John Wayne saddle up to become the great figure of one of America 's great native art form , the western. The movie he star in rode the range from out-of-the-money sagebrush quicky to such classic a `` Stagecoach '' and `` Red River. '' He win an Oscar a best actor for another western , `` True Grit , '' in 1969. Yet some of the best film he make told story far from the wild of the West , such a `` The Quiet Man '' and `` The Long Voyage Home. '' In the last decade of his career , Mr. Wayne become something of an American folk figure , hero to some , villain to others , for his outspoken views. He be politically a conservative and , although he scorn politics a a way of life for himself , he enthusiastically support Richard M. Nixon , Barry Goldwater , Spiro T. Agnew , Ronald Reagan and others who , he felt , fight for his concept of Americanism and anti- Communism. But it be for million of moviegoer who saw him only on the big screen that John Wayne really existed. He have not create the western with it clear-cut conflict between good and bad , right and wrong , but it be impossible to mention the word `` western '' without thinking of `` the Duke , '' a he be called. By the early 1960 's , 161 of his film have gross $ 350 million , and he have be pay as much a $ 666,000 to make a movie -- although in his early day on screen , his salary ran to no more than two or three figure a week. It be rarely a simple matter to find a unanimous opinion on Mr. Wayne , whether it have to do with his act or his politics. Film critic be lavish in praise of him in some role and shrug wearily a they candle his less notable effort ; one critic , apparently overexpose to western , anger him by comment , `` It never Waynes , but it pours. '' Mr. Wayne be co-director and star of `` The Green Berets , '' a 1968 film that support the United States action in Vietnam. The movie be assail by many major critic on all ground , political and esthetic , but the public apparently do not mind ; in only six month , it have earn $ 1 million above it production cost of $ 7 million. Won Growing Respect As the year pass , Mr. Wayne be recognize a some sort of American natural resource , and his various critic , political and film , look on him with more respect. Abbie Hoffman , the radical of the 1960 's , pay tribute to Mr. Wayne 's singularity. Reviewing `` The Cowboys , '' make in 1972 , Vincent Canby , film critic of The New York Times , who do not particularly care for it , write , `` Wayne be , of course , marvelously indestructible , and he have become an almost perfect father figure. '' But year before he become anything close to a father figure , Mr. Wayne have become a symbolic male figure , a man of impregnable virility and the embodiment of simplistic , laconic virtue , package in a well-built , 6-foot-4-inch , 225-pound frame. He have a handsome and hearty face , with crinkle around eye that be too lidded to express much emotion but give the impression of a man of action , an outdoor man who chafe at a settled life. He be laconic on screen. And when he shamble into view , one could sense the arrival of coiled vigor await only provocation to be sprung. His demeanor and his role be those of a man who do not look for trouble but be relentless in tackle it when it affront him. This screen presence emerge particularly under the ministration of John Ford and Howard Hawks , the directors. Overcame Great Odds Appearances be not altogether deceiving. Mr. Wayne love adventure and the outdoors. He do believe that thing be either right or wrong , and he come back against great odds. In 1964 , a malignant tumor be remove from his chest and leave lung , and within several month he be on location make another movie. More recently , he find himself the target of much hate mail from the right wing , whose political idol he have be , after he support President Carter 's espousal of the Panama Canal treaties. He do not mind. Although his basic view have not moderate , his tolerance , it seem , had. He have even show up at a function to congratulate Jane Fonda , who be to the left what he be to the right , on win a screen award. Mr. Wayne make his last public appearance at the Academy Awards ceremony in April , where he draw an emotional standing ovation when he stride out on stage to present the Oscar for best picture. He be recently present with a special Congressional medal of the kind give to such national figure a the Wright Brothers. Between his first star role in `` The Big Trail '' in 1930 , and his last one , a the most celebrated gunslinger in the West who find he be die of cancer in `` The Shootist , '' in 1976 , Mr. Wayne shoot his way through generation of film fan with little change in style or personality. He have consciously adapt his posture for that first movie and retain it. He be sometimes inseparable from it in the flesh. Watched Movies Being Made `` When I start , I know I be no actor and I go to work on this Wayne thing , '' he once recalled. `` It be a deliberate a projection a you 'll ever see. I figure I need a gimmick , so I dream up the drawl , the squint and a way of move meant to suggest that I be n't look for trouble but would just as soon throw a bottle at your head a not. I practice in front of a mirror. '' His entrance into film be as fortuitous a any make by a young fellow who grow up near the Hollywood badlands. But the Wayne saga actually start much farther east , in the small town of Winterset , Iowa , where he be bear May 26 , 1907 , and be name Marion Michael Morrison. His father , Clyde L. Morrison , have a drugstore , but when Marion be 6 year old , his father , because of ill health , move the family to Southern California and become a homesteader with an 80-acre farm. Not long after , the family settle in Glendale , where Mr. Morrison again go open a pharmacy. His store be in the same building a a theater , and young Marion , who rise at 4 A.M. to deliver newspaper and then , after school and football practice , deliver order from the store , go to the movie four or five time a week , free. Even earlier , when he be 7 , he have learn about horse and play cowboy. In Glendale , he saw movie be make at the Triangle Studios , where they often shoot outdoor scenes. The link between horse and camera be yet to be forge , but the influence be there from the beginning. Along the way he have acquire the nickname `` Duke. '' It come from an Airedale terrier he have have , he use to say a he debunk press release that try to explain the moniker a some sort of rubbed-off nobility. Came to Ford 's Attention He work a truck driver , fruit picker , soda jerk and ice hauler and be an honor student and a member of an outstanding football team at high school. His athletic talent bring him a football scholarship at the University of Southern California , but in his second year he break an ankle and drop out. While he be still at school , he get a job , a other football player do , a a scenery mover at Fox Films. John Ford be attract to the youth 's hulking physique and make him a `` fourth-assistant prop boy. '' When Mr. Ford be make a submarine film on location in the channel off Catalina Island , the regular stuntmen refuse to go into the water because of rough seas. Mr. Ford ask the prop boy if he would. He do , immediately , and become part of the Ford team. In an early film , Republic Pictures give him a screen credit a Michael Burn and , in another , a Duke Morrison. When Raoul Walsh cast him a the star of `` The Big Trail , '' his expensive , $ 2 million western , the director think that Marion be too sissified a name for a western hero , and `` John Wayne '' be born. Rode in 40 Westerns The movie be a flop. It have be shoot a a talk picture on 72-millimeter film , a `` superwestern '' design for large screen that require projection equipment that few movie house be equip with. After two nonwesterns , Mr. Wayne retreat into short-order horse operas. Between 1933 and 1939 , he make more than 40 western , all Grade B or C undertaking , intersperse with several that take him off the range but not into any particular recognition. Then , like a good guy rid in to relieve the oppressed , his old benefactor , Mr. Ford , come along to cast Mr. Wayne a the Ringo Kid in the Oscar-winning `` Stagecoach , '' the 1939 movie that take western from the Saturday afternoon for-kids-only category and attract the attention of more intellectual film critics. It be a turning point also for Mr. Wayne. His next major role find him in a milieu far from the cactus sets. He play a simple Swedish lad in the crew of a freighter in `` The Long Voyage Home , '' Mr. Ford 's 1940 film base on the sea play of Eugene O'Neill. Mr. Wayne 's work from that point read like a bill of lading of popular Hollywood wares. He star with Marlene Dietrich in three film : `` Seven Sinners '' ( 1940 ) , `` Pittsburgh '' ( 1943 ) and `` The Spoilers '' ( 1942 ) . Others include Cecil B. De Mille 's `` Reap the Wild Wind '' ( 1942 ) , as well a a slew of World War II movie that embrace Mr. Ford 's `` They Were Expendable '' in 1945. Later come `` Fort Apache '' and `` Red River , '' in 1948 , and `` Three Godfathers '' and `` She Wore a Yellow Ribbon , '' both in 1949. In 1952 , Mr. Wayne show off to best effect a the young Irish-American return to Ireland in Mr. Ford 's `` The Quiet Man. '' It be a much-acclaimed film and be still a frequent feature on television. Invested in 'The Alamo' By the late 1940 's , Mr. Wayne have already be transform from a dash young adventurer to an old one , no less dashing , but in a somewhat more restrained tempo. In `` Red River , '' direct by Mr. Hawks , Mr. Wayne portray a ruthless cattle baron , not altogether a good guy , but one with some depth to him. In this instance , Montgomery Clift , the co-star , represent the force for good. Mr. Wayne invest $ 1.2 million in 1960 to make `` The Alamo , '' about the fight between the Americans -- the good guy -- and the Mexicans -- the bad guys. He play Davy Crockett. The picture be very dear to his heart because , he say , `` We want to re-create a moment in history that will show this generation of Americans what their country still stand for. . .what some of their forebear go through to win what they have to have or die -- liberty and freedom. '' He be bitterly disappointed when the film failed. However , he quickly go on to other work : `` The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance , '' `` Hatari '' and `` The Longest Day , '' all in 1962 ; `` How the West Was Won '' in 1963 , and `` El Dorado '' in 1967 , another film direct by Mr. Hawks. In 1969 , Mr. Wayne be almost universally hail when he star in `` True Grit , '' direct by Henry Hathaway. Mr. Wayne play a disreputable , one-eyed , drunken , fat old man who be a Federal Marshal call Rooster Cogburn. In 1970 , the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences award him an Oscar for his portrayal. The success of `` True Grit '' lead to `` Rooster Cogburn , '' in 1975 , in which he co-star with Katherine Hepburn in her first western. Mr. Wayne star in his first television special , `` Swing Out , Sweet Land , '' a paean of patriotism , in 1970 , and later become well-known for various television appearances. He never make a television series and have deep reservation about the medium 's approach to the western. `` Television have a tendency to reach a little , '' he observe , refer to television western ' propensity for psychological insights. `` In their western , they be get away from the simplicity and the fact that those men be fight the element and the rawness of nature and do n't have time for this couch-work. '' His anti-Communist sentiment lead Mr. Wayne to help find the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals in 1944 , and he be it president for two terms. The organization , which eventually disband , be accuse of have give the name of suspected Communists in the film industry to the House Committee on Un-American Activities , although Mr. Wayne say later that he have never be party to any such thing. Once , interview about civil right , he say : `` I believe in white supremacy until the black be educate to the point of responsibility. I do n't believe in give authority and position of leadership and judgment to irresponsible people. '' He say that when he be in school , he be a `` socialist , '' but not for long. He say that he be a rebel , but not one like the youngster of the late 60's. `` Mine be a rebellion against the monotony of life , '' he said. `` The rebellion in these kid -- particularly the S.D.S.'ers and those group -- seem to be a kind of dissension by rote. '' In his late year , Mr. Wayne , who have invest in oil and also in a shrimp business in Panama , among other thing , become more financially conservative than he have been. He have not keep a very tight hand on his money earlier , and at one point realize he be not as well off a he have thought. However , he be not impoverished. He live with his third wife , Pilar Palette Wayne , who be bear in Peru , in an 11-room , seven-bathroom , $ 175,000 house in Newport Beach , Calif. , where he have a 135-foot yacht. He own cattle ranch in Stanfield and Springerville , Ariz. Mr. Wayne 's first two marriage , to Josephine Saenz and Esperanzo Bauer , also Latin Americans , end in divorces. He have seven child from his marriage , and more than 15 grandchild .