May 17 , 1979 OBITUARY A. Philip Randolph Is Dead ; Pioneer in Rights and Labor By The Associated Press A. Philip Randolph , the black labor leader who help find the modern civil right movement , die yesterday at his home in Manhattan. He be 90 year old and have be suffer from a heart condition and high blood pressure for several years. According to his longtime housekeeper , Fannie Corner , who be with him at the time of his death , Mr. Randolph die in bed at about 3 P.M. in the sparsely furnished fifth-floor apartment at 280 Ninth Avenue , at 27th Street , where he have live for several years. The only sign of luxury in the apartment be two black-and-white television set , a reflection , friend say , of Mr. Randolph 's devotion to baseball. As news of Mr. Randolph 's death spread through the civil right community , tributes begin pour in from many who have draw inspiration from the man who begin to stir the conscience of the nation more than half a century ago. One of the first tribute come from Mr. Randolph 's protege , Bayard Rustin. Standing in Mr. Randolph 's library , where plaque , diploma and other honor be stack against the wall , Mr. Rustin , who head the A. Philip Randolph Institute , declare : `` No individual do more to help the poor , the dispossess and the work class in the United States and around the world than A. Philip Randolph. `` With the exception of W. E. B. Du Bois , he be probably the great civil right leader of this century until Martin Luther King. '' Mr. Randolph have no know living relative , accord to Mr. Rustin , who say plan be be make for cremation to be follow by a memorial from 7 to 9 P.M. Saturday at the headquarters of the Recruitment and Training Program at 162 Fifth Avenue. A Veteran of Confrontations By PAUL DELANEY `` Gentlemen , the Pullman Company be ready to sign. '' That statement by E. F. Carry , Pullman 's president , end a long and bitter struggle to unionize the sleeping-coach company , a battle that propel a new black leader onto the national scene. It be A. Philip Randolph who lead the small , all-black International Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters to victory over the powerful corporation , and it turn out to be a significant gain not only for the railroad porter , maid and cook of the union but also for America 's black community. And Mr. Carry 's statement , make on Aug. 25 , 1937 , be a high point in Mr. Randolph 's long career a a labor and civil right leader. Mr. Randolph be a veteran of confrontation , a graduate of Harlem soapbox oratory who rise from a radical socialist and pacifist background to become a labor leader at a time when labor union openly espouse antiblack policy and a civil right movement be virtually unheard of. There be many who think that in the twilight of his career , his body pain by illness , Mr. Randolph must have felt frustrate to see what little progress his long fight to change organize labor have produced. But he never publicly say so. And he must have smile quietly to himself in later life a he be call conservative by some young , more militant black who come on the scene with different tactic and belief -- violence and separatism -- that he could not accept and who chastise him without know his radical past -- that of a man who urge black not to fight in World War I , who criticize W. E. B. Du Bois for take the opposite position and whom President Woodrow Wilson call the most dangerous man in America. Maintained Composure But the tall , dignify Mr. Randolph always maintain his composure somehow , with no overt hostility to anyone. His frustration do cause him to make a fiery speech in San Francisco at the 1959 convention of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations. On the podium later , an angry George Meany turn to the calm Mr. Randolph and ask , `` Who the hell appoint you a guardian of all the Negroes in America ? '' It be his characteristic quiet dignity that enable Mr. Randolph to lead confrontation with three Presidents , threaten massive march on Washington and civil disobedience if those Presidents , who be all extremely popular among black , do not take action on behalf of black people. The first of those challenge come in 1941. Black leader be seriously concern about be bar from defense plant at the beginning of World War II. They have little success in move the defense industry or the Federal Government with speech , conference , meeting and verbal protests. Eventually , Mr. Randolph felt that only President Franklin D. Roosevelt could force the necessary change through an executive order and that only a massive march by black could make the President act. Date for March Set Thus , a march on Washington be schedule for July 1 , 1941. The announcement horrify official Washington ; the thought of thousand of black march in what be still a Southern city cause near panic. Mr. Roosevelt set about to prevent the march. The President call on white labor leader to try to talk Mr. Randolph and other black leader out of marching. He enlist Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia of New York , a friend of Mr. Randolph. Even the President 's wife , Eleanor , be ask to help. But the effort do not work. The black leadership insist on a meeting with the President himself. Besides Mr. Randolph , the leader of the plan march include Walter White of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ; Lester Granger of the National Urban League ; Frank Crosswaith of the Negro Labor Committee ; J. Finley Wilson of the Improved Benevolent Order of Elks of the World , and the Rev. Adam Clayton Powell Jr. of the Abyssinian Baptist Church of New York. When the effort of Mrs. Roosevelt and others fail to get the black to call off the march , President Roosevelt agree to a meeting , which be hold on June 18. In that meeting , Mr. Randolph tell Mr. Roosevelt that at least 100,000 black be expect to march. The President at first turn on his charm. He notice Mr. Randolph 's pronunciation of the broad `` a '' and inquire , `` Phil , when do you graduate from Harvard ? '' `` I never go to Harvard , Mr. President , '' Mr. Randolph answered. Executive Order Issued When the President fail to dissuade the black leader , he agree to their demands. On June 25 , 1941 , six day before the march , he sign Executive Order 8802 and name a Fair Employment Practices Committee to enforce it. Mr. Randolph call off the march but be denounce for do so by his more militant follower in the coalition , who accuse him of sell out. One of those object vigorously be Bayard Rustin , later a faithful follower. Although the executive order be not observed uniformly , thousand of defense job be open to black , and the order set a precedent that some state government followed. After the war , black leader turn their attention to segregation in the armed force , an issue that they have decide not to press in their confrontation with President Roosevelt. With the nation face mandatory conscription in peacetime , Mr. Randolph and the League for Nonviolent Civil Disobedience Against Military Segregation inform President Harry S. Truman that they want him to ban military segregation. On March 22 , 1948 , the President meet at the White House with black leader , include Mr. Randolph , Mr. White , Mr. Granger , Mary McLeod Bethune , director of the National Council of Negro Women , and Charles Houston , N.A.A.C.P. legal counsel. The meeting produce nothing. Civil Disobedience Campaign This send Mr. Randolph on a civil disobedience campaign against the draft for segregate armed forces. He pursue his task with the same fervor a his opposition to World War I , when he have urge black not to sign up for the draft. On July 26 , 1948 , President Truman sign Executive Order 9981 , a vaguely worded document that never mention segregation but indeed ban it in the armed forces. Mr. Randolph call off his civil disobedience campaign , again prompt a bitter complaint from Bayard Rustin and other radical pacifists. The final confrontation with a President be in 1963 , when the ail Mr. Randolph , who by then be more a symbol than an active participant in the fast-growing civil right movement , help organize the big demonstration ever by black , the March on Washington. His aide , Mr. Rustin , be chief strategist for the coalition that sponsor the march of nearly a quarter-million people. Once again , a President , this time John F. Kennedy , attempt to dissuade the black , but to no avail. The main goal of the march be to push for passage of a civil right bill. A bill be finally pass the next year , but not before the assassination of President Kennedy and the almost evangelical commitment of President Lyndon B. Johnson. Son of a Minister A. Philip Randolph be bear on April 15 , 1889 , in Crescent City , Fla. , a hamlet outside of Jacksonville. It be one of three community his father serve a minister of the African Methodist Episcopal Church. Two year later the family move to Jacksonville. Philip and his old brother , James William Jr. , grow up in a relatively intellectual atmosphere , expose not only to Shakespeare , Scott and Dickens but also to such black hero a L'Ouverture , Attucks , Denmark Vesey , Nat Turner and Douglass. Both boys attend the Cookman Institute in Jacksonville , a Methodist missionary school. After graduation in 1907 , Philip Randolph work at various job before head to Harlem with a friend in 1911. He take a job a a hall porter at $ 4 a month and later recall write on a wall : `` Philip Randolph sweep here. '' Working at menial job , he also enrol in night course in English literature and sociology at City College. From the first sprang his lifelong interest in Shakespeare ; from the second , his commitment to socialism. Set Up Employment Agency During those year he meet Chandler Owen , a law student at Columbia University. The two men found an employment agency in Harlem call the Brotherhood of Labor and make their first effort to unionize black workers. In the same building be a beauty parlor manage by Lucille Green , a graduate of Howard University and a former schoolteacher. The dynamic and witty Miss Green and the solemn Mr. Randolph be draw to each other immediately -- they call each other Buddy -- and in 1913 they be married. `` For our honeymoon , '' Mrs. Randolph recall year later , `` we take an open streetcar to South Ferry and back. '' In those year the South be wipe out all trace of Reconstruction , use violence , the white primary and the poll tax against black to complete their disenfranchisement. Poverty and ignorance rule in back-country shanty and big-city slum , and the number of lynching and beating of black increase yearly. President Wilson 's Administration be reduce the number of Federal job allot by custom to black , and be impose segregation in government building in Washington. An extensive migration begin from the South. There be pervasive discrimination , and race riot be frequent in the North. Assailed Wilson Mr. Randolph and Mr. Owen have found a magazine , The Messenger , in 1915 , with Mr. Randolph a editor. They lash out at President Wilson. A gifted orator , Mr. Randolph also take his message to the street , his resonant baritone boom from soapbox from Harlem to black hamlet across the nation. Once during the street-corner rally , Mr. Randolph be arrest by the Justice Department on charge of treason for urge black not to fight in World War I. The charge be later dropped. The Pullman porter , listen from the crowd to the tall , forceful speaker , tap him to organize the union. Since he be not an employee of the company , he could not be fire or harrassed. The year that follow be make particularly arduous by the rocklike resistance of the Pullman Company and even the labor movement , which be then virtually all white. But in the signing of the first contract with Pullman in 1937 , black make the first inroads into the trade union movement. The impact be especially important in the black community : It be greatly encouraging that a small black union have break the resistance of a corporate giant. The Chief , a the porter call Mr. Randolph , have succeed against overwhelm odds. In return they give him unwavering loyalty. Instrument of Protest Mr. Randolph , along with Mr. Owen , have shape The Messenger into an effective instrument of protest. After the porter be organize , the magazine be rename Black Worker and center on make the union recognize in the labor movement and on end discrimination. Mr. Randolph , in convention after convention of the American Federation of Labor , speak out persistently against racial injustice -- and futilely. White unionist seem to think him a nuisance. When one of his few white ally in the movement , John L. Lewis , president of the United Mine Workers Union , walk out of the A.F.L. and form the Congress of Industrial Organizations , Mr. Randolph go with him. After the two labor organization merge in 1955 , Mr. Randolph become the only black representative on the A.F.L.-C.I.O. executive council. But in a further effort to end employment discrimination , he form the Negro American Labor Council in 1960. Two year later , the A.F.L.-C.I.O. executive council censure him a be `` largely responsible '' for drive a wedge between black and the unions. Mr. Randolph be undaunted. In an 80th birthday interview , he say : `` My philosophy be the result of our concept of effective liberation of the work people. We never separate the liberation of the white work man from the liberation of the black working man. . . . The unity of these force would bring about the power to rally to achieve basic social change. '' Increasing Demonstrations In the 1950 's a new generation of black leader organize a rise tide of demonstration , North and South. At first they follow Mr. Randolph 's precept of pacifism and nonviolence , and he frequently act a a counselor on tactic and a a mediator of quarrels. The next decade saw the growth of black militant nationalism. Young activist challenge the concept of nonviolence , as well a the integrationist ideal of such moderate leader a Mr. Randolph. He criticize the neo-black nationalist trend , a he have Marcus Garvey 's `` back to Africa '' movement five decade before. Some nationalist brand him `` Uncle Tom , '' but he answer : `` There must be a continuous quest for identification by the Negro , [ but ] I believe that can be overcome. And I believe the cult of blackness have be overdone. I would n't say it have be successful in put these force together. '' Institute Established In 1963 , Mr. Randolph announce the establishment of the A. Philip Randolph Institute with a grant of $ 25,000 from the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and $ 30,000 from other sources. Under the leadership of Bayard Rustin , the institute be give the task of enlist community leader in a broad study of condition that create perpetual poverty. In 1968 , Mr. Randolph step down a president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters and become it first president emeritus. By then the union , with the decline of rail travel , have only the memory of past glory. And a good job open for black , the Pullman porter lose the status they have once enjoy in the black community. Eventually his union disappear in a merger into the Brotherhood of Railway and Airline Clerks. Also in 1968 , Mr. Randolph move from the Harlem apartment where he have live so long to a downtown cooperative apartment own by the International Ladies Garment Workers Union. He busy himself write an autobiography and a history of his own union , although his health force him to curtail his activities. In the last few year , Mr. Randolph live very quietly in his Chelsea home , make very few public appearances. Over the year , a porter 's union salary , which never exceed $ 13,00 annually , have be his main support , with additional money earn from speech and writings. In the early year , when the union be struggle , he often have to rely on his wife 's earnings. Mrs. Randolph die in 1963 , shortly before the March on Washington , with Mr. Randolph in the lead column. He have want her to see it. For others , the memory of that event , on Aug. 28 , 1963 , become one of Mr. Randolph 's great legacies. Speech at Memorial To the 250,000 people at the Lincoln Memorial , and to million of others watch on television and listen on radio , the speech of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. be the most memorable of the day. But when the erect , austere , dignify Mr. Randolph go to the podium , he speak from experience and emotion that the young man could little know. `` We be not a pressure group ; we be not an organization or a group of organization ; we be not a mob , '' he declare in a booming but control voice. `` We be the advance guard of a massive moral revolution for job and freedom. This revolution reverberate throughout the land , touch every village where black men be segregate , oppress and exploit . ''