August 27 , 1979 OBITUARY Stan Kenton , Band Leader , Dies ; Was Center of Jazz Controversies By JOHN S. WILSON Stan Kenton , the band leader , die Saturday night in a Hollywood hospital. He be 67 year old. Mr. Kenton enter Midway Hospital on Aug. 17 after a stroke. His manager , Audrey Coke , say Mr. Kenton have never fully recover from a skull fracture he suffer in a fall two year ago. Mr. Kenton be the last major jazzband leader to emerge from the Big Band era of 1935-45 , and his be one of only a handful of band that survive when that era come to an end. It be also the most controversial of all the big jazz bands. The scream `` wall of brass '' that be a characteristic of a Kenton performance a the richly somber trombone and the heavy , staccato saxophone be alternately hail a `` progressive '' exploration of an alliance between jazz and classical music and deplore a sheer noise. Arthur Fiedler , the late conductor of the Boston Pops , call Mr. Kenton the most important link between jazz and the classics. But Albert J. McCarthy , an English critic , declare that Mr. Kenton 's music scream `` because it can make it point no other way. '' `` Kids be go haywire over the sheer noise of this band , '' Barry Ulanov write in Metronome magazine in 1948. `` There be a danger of an entire generation grow up with the idea that jazz and the atom bomb be essentially the same natural phenomenon. '' Mr. Kenton take it all in stride. 'In an Ecstasy All Their Own ' `` Some of the wise boy who say my music be loud , blatant and that 's all , '' he say , `` should see the face of the kid who have drive a hundred mile through the snow to see the band. . .to stand in front of the bandstand in an ecstasy all their own. '' Mr. Kenton , a pianist who sometimes play solo with his orchestra , be a lanky 6 foot 4 inch , and have a flamboyant manner that do not diminish the musical turmoil he created. He conduct with great arm-waving vigor , end every selection with upstretched arm and an ecstatic expression. He have an unwavering belief in his own work , and be a tireless salesman for it , give it such descriptive title a `` artistry in rhythm , '' `` progressive jazz '' and `` innovation in modern music. '' `` If you ask any 10 people on the street if they have ever hear of Stan Kenton , '' he once say , `` only a couple of them will say , 'Yes. ' We have to try to get the other 8. And the only way I can see to do it be to make myself a personality and take my band along. '' Mr. Kenton 's `` experimental work , '' a he refer to many of the piece in his repertory , be not write simply to be different , accord to Pete Rugolo , who be Mr. Kenton 's chief arranger in the late 40 's and early 50's. In the year after World War II , Mr. Kenton 's be one of the first big jazz band , along with Dizzy Gillespie 's , to use Afro-Cuban rhythmic coloration in their music. One of his composition then be call `` Machito '' in honor of the popular Afro-Cuban band leader , while his arrangement of `` The Peanut Vendor , '' build on Afro-Cuban rhythm , remain a favorite of his follower throughout his career. Controversy Over Advancement Yet , some of his attempt to `` advance '' jazz seem , to the ear of some listener , to have actually lose touch with the form. Gunther Schuller , who have one foot on each side of the jazz- classical divide , find in `` City of Glass , '' a composition by a Kenton protege , Robert Graettinger , `` almost no jazz material , certainly not from any conventional point of view , but it come to be confuse with jazz by many people simply because it be perform and record by Stan Kenton and his orchestra. '' At a time when most jazz musician become establish in their early 20 's , Mr. Kenton be relatively old -- almost 30 -- when he form his band. Born in Wichita , Kan. , on Feb. 19 , 1912 , he grow up in Los Angeles and be play with local band or in speakeasy and saloon as soon a he graduate from high school. After seven year , during which he play for a while with band lead by Everett Hoagland and Gus Arnheim , he take two year off to study music. This shift his interest from play to write and arranging. He begin write experimental arrangement , base on his study , use staccato saxophone ensemble and heavy rhythm accent in the Jimmie Lunceford manner. With these arrangement , he form a band that make it debut on Memorial Day , 1941 , at the Rendezvous Ballroom in Balboa Beach , Calif. The band be an instant success on the West Coast , but when it come East in 1942 to make it first New York appearance at the Roseland Ballroom , the dancer complain that the band be too loud and that it tempo be not danceable ; the critic be cool. Late in 1943 , start what prove to be a 25-year association with the newly form Capitol Records , Mr. Kenton make two record -- '' Artistry in Rhythm , '' his theme , and `` Eager Beaver '' -- that shoot the band to the top rank of wartime popularity. The following year , Anita O'Day , who have be sing with Gene Krupa , joint the band and be follow the next year by June Christy , who remain for four year and be replace by Chris Connor. All three singer help Mr. Kenton reach a top audience that might have be put off by his undiluted jazz pieces. Mr. Rugolo become Mr. Kenton 's chief arranger in 1945 , take some of the write burden off him and contribute arrangement that be so much like Mr. Kenton 's that , a in the case of Duke Ellington and Billy Strayhorn , it be often difficult to tell who the composer actually was. In the late 40 's , Mr. Kenton , suffer from period of exhaustion , break up his band several times. Once , after go through analysis and find it `` such a thrilling , reward thing , '' he decide to go to premed school in preparation for become a psychiatrist. He register at a school , change his mind , and reorganize his band. On another occasion , he announce his retirement from music because , `` I think I 'd see everything and say everything I 'd plan to say in music. '' `` That last about three month , '' he say , `` and I almost go nuts. '' From 1950 on , Mr. Kenton form a band each year , tour most of the year and then disband , only to form another band within a few month for the next annual tour. From the mid-50 's on , his penchant for experimental work diminish , although he continue to get fresh and often provocative material from such arranger a Bill Holman , Johnny Richards , Bill Russo and Hank Levy. In 1959 , his attention turn to music education. He form the Stan Kenton Clinic , summer course offer under the auspex of the National Stage Band Camps. In 1965 , he be involve in an attempt to organize a resident jazz orchestra in Los Angeles , the Los Angeles Neophonic Orchestra , which begin to build a repertory in his symphonic-jazz style Mr. Kenton conduct during it first season , but when he be not personally involve , the interest begin to wane and the project be abandon after the 1968 season. Mr. Kenton establish his own record company , Creative World Records , in 1970 , when he become unhappy about the distribution his disk have receive from Capitol Records. He be particularly disturb that Capitol have allow his recording to go out of print when fan continue to flock to his appearance throughout the country and begin reissue them on his Creative World label , sell them by mail along with record by a few other group in which he become interested. In recent year , Mr. Kenton be on the road with his band so steadily , play one-night stand for the most part , that he do not maintain a home. When there be a pause in his journeying , and he go `` home '' to Los Angeles , he check into a hotel. His son , Lance Kenton , 21 year old , be accuse last year of help to put a rattlesnake in the mailbox of Paul Morantz , a lawyer who have handle a successful civil suit against Synanon , the controversial drug rehabilitation organization. Mr. Morantz recover from the reptile 's bite. Lance Kenton , Charles Dederich , the head of the group , and another member be charge with conspiracy to commit murder. Preliminary hearing in the case have be under way in Los Angeles for two weeks. The young Kenton , who be free on bond , be a member of the Imperial Marines , Synanon 's internal security force. Stan Kenton have three marriage , include to Ann Richards , who sing with his band. All end in divorces. He have three child -- Leslie , a daughter , from his first marriage ; and Dana , a daughter , and Lance from his second -- and three grandchildren. A spokesman for the family say the funeral would be private and the body would be cremate .