April 1 , 1980 OBITUARY Jesse Owens Dies of Cancer at 66 ; Hero of the 1936 Berlin Olympics By FRANK LITSKY Jesse Owens , whose four gold medal at the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin make him perhaps the great and most famous athlete in track and field history , die of lung cancer yesterday in Tucson , Ariz. He be 66 year old. In Berlin , Mr. Owens , who be black , score a triumph that would come to be regard a not only athletic but also political. Adolf Hitler have intend the Berlin Games to be a showcase for the Nazi doctrine of Aryan supremacy. A member of what the Nazis mockingly call America 's `` black auxiliary , '' Mr. Owens achieve a feat unmatched in modern time in Olympic track competition. The year before , with a wrench back so painful that he could not dress or undress without help , he break five world record and equal a sixth , all within 45 minutes. But the Jesse Owens best remember by many Americans be a public speaker with the ringing , inspirational delivery of an evangelist. Later in his life , he travel 200,000 mile a year make two or three speech a week , mostly to sale meeting and convention , and primarily to white audiences. With his own public relation and marketing concern , he earn more than $ 100,000 a year. Mr. Owens , a pack-a-day cigarette smoker for 35 year , have be hospitalize on and off since last Dec. 12. Doctors say the cancer be inoperable , and since January he have receive radiation and chemotherapy treatment at hospital in Phoenix and Tucson. He re-enter the University of Arizona Health Sciences Center in Tucson a week ago. He lapse into a coma Saturday night and die at 3:40 A.M. , Tucson time , yesterday without have regain consciousness. His wife , Ruth , and other family member be at his bedside. No Response to Drugs Dr. Stephen E. Jones of the university hospital , who head the medical team treat Mr. Owens , say his patient have remain `` remarkably optimistic and hopeful that he be go to survive. '' However , Dr. Jones say , there be no positive response to experimental drug try on Mr. Owens. The White House issue a statement yesterday in which President Carter say , `` Perhaps no athlete well symbolize the human struggle against tyranny , poverty and racial bigotry. '' In Vienna , Simon Wiesenthal , who have spend year track former Nazis , propose that an avenue lead to the Olympic Stadium , now in West Berlin , be rename for Mr. Owens. Mr. Wiesenthal say that when he make similar suggestion in the past , he be tell that street could not be name for live persons. In Phoenix , which have become his hometown , Mr. Owens 's body will lie in state tomorrow in the Capitol Rotunda. His burial will be in Chicago , but detail be still pending late yesterday. Father Was a Sharecropper James Cleveland Owens be bear Sept. 12 , 1913 , in Danville , Ala. , the son of a sharecropper and the grandson of slaves. The youngster pick cotton until he and his family move to Cleveland when he be 9. There a schoolteacher ask the youth his name. `` J.C. '' he replied. She think he have say `` Jesse , '' and he have a new name. He run his first race at age 13. He become a nationally know sprinter at East Technical High School in Cleveland , slim and lithe at 163 pounds. He run with fluid grace. There be no start block then ; sprinter merely dug hole at the start line in track of cinder or dirt. After high school , he go to Ohio State University , pay his way a a $ 100-a-month night elevator operator because he have no athletic scholarship. As a sophomore , in his first Big Ten championships , he achieve a harvest of record even great than the Olympic glory he would attain a year later. A week before the Big Ten meet , which be hold in Ann Arbor , Mich. , Mr. Owens and a fraternity brother be wrestle playfully when they tumble down a flight of stairs. Mr. Owens 's back hurt so much that he could not work out all week. Coach Larry Snyder and teammate have to help him in and out of the car that drive him to the track for the meet. There , in a vain attempt to lessen the back pain , he sit for half an hour in a hot tub. He do not warm up or even stretch. At the last minute , he reject suggestion that he withdraw from the meet and say he would try , event by event. He try , and the result be in the record book. On May 25 , 1935 , from 3:15 to 4 P.M. , Jesse Owens successively equal the world record for the 100-yard dash ( 9.4 second ) , break the world record for the broad jump , now call the long jump , with his only attempt ( 26 foot 8 1/4 inch , which remain the record for 25 year ) , break the world record for the 220-yard dash ( 20.3 second , which also better the record for 200 meter ) and break the world record for the 220-yard low hurdle ( 22.6 second , which also better the record for the 200-meter low hurdle ) . Kenneth L. ( Tug ) Wilson , the Big Ten commissioner , watch in awe and say : `` He be a float wonder , just like he have wings. '' The next year , with the Italians occupy Ethiopia , the Japanese in Manchuria , the Germans move into the Rhineland and a civil war start in Spain , the Olympic Games be hold in Berlin. Despite plea that the United States boycott the Olympics to protest Nazi racial policy , American official vote to participate. 10 Blacks on Team The United States Olympic track team , of 66 athlete , include 10 blacks. The Nazis deride the Americans for rely on what the Nazis call an inferior race , but of the 11 individual gold medal in track won by the American men , six be win by blacks. The hero be Mr. Owens. He win the 100-meter dash in 10.3 second , the 200-meter dash in 20.7 second and the broad jump at 26 foot 5 1/2 inch , and he lead off for the United States team that win the 400-meter relay in 39.8 seconds. His individual performance break two Olympic record and , except for an excessive following wind , would have break the third. The relay team break the world record. His 100-meter and 200-meter time would have win Olympic medal through 1964 , his broad- jump performance through 1968. Actually , Mr. Owens have not be schedule to run in the relay. Marty Glickman and Sam Stoller be , but American Olympic official , lead by Avery Brundage , want to avoid offend the Nazis. They replace Mr. Glickman and Mr. Stoller , both Jews , with Mr. Owens and Ralph Metcalfe , both blacks. Hitler do not congratulate any of the American black winner , a subject to which Mr , . Owens address himself for the rest of his life. `` It be all right with me , '' he say year later , `` I do n't go to Berlin to shake hand with him , anyway. All I know be that I 'm here now , and Hitler isn't. `` When I come back , after all those story about Hitler and his snub , I come back to my native country , and I could n't ride in the front of the bus. I have to go to the back door. I could n't live where I wanted. Now what 's the difference ? '' Having return from Berlin , he receive no telephone call from President Franklin D. Roosevelt , be not ask to visit the White House. Official recognition from his own country do not come until 1976 , when President Gerald R. Ford present him the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Three year later , President Carter give him the Living Legends Award. Nor be there any lucrative contract for an Olympic hero after the 1936 Games. Mr. Owens become a playground janitor because he could not find a good job. He end his career a an amateur runner and accept money to race against car , truck , motorcycle , horse and dogs. He tour with the Harlem Globetrotters basketball team. `` Sure , it bother me , '' he say later. `` But at least it be an honest living. I have to eat. '' In time , the four gold medal change his life. `` They have keep me alive over the year , '' he once said. `` Time have stand still for me. That golden moment die hard. '' He become a disk jockey , then run his public relation and marketing concern , first in Chicago and then in Phoenix. Celebrated a a Speaker He also become celebrate a a speaker , use about five basic speech with interchangeable parts. Each speech praise the virtue of patriotism , clean living and fair play. His delivery be old-fashioned spellbinding , a far cry from the day when he stuttered. Even in casual conversation , he speak in sweeping tones. `` When he enter a room , '' write Jon Hendershott in Track and Field News , `` he do n't so much take it over a envelop it. '' William Oscar Johnson , write in Sports Illustrated , describe him a `` a kind of all-round super combination of 19th-century spellbinder and 20th-century plastic p.r. man , full-time banquet guest , eternal glad-hander , evangelistic small-talker. . .what you might call a professional good example. '' Not everyone agreed. During the 1968 Olympics in Mexico City , when Mr. Owens attempt to mediate with militant American black athlete on behalf of the United States Olympic Committee , critic call him `` Uncle Tom. '' He write a 1970 book , `` Blackthink , '' decry racial militancy , and a 1972 book , `` I Have Changed , '' say the idea in his first book be wrong. In his late year , Mr. Owens walk two mile every morning and swam and lift weight at the Phoenix Y.M.C.A. He weigh 180 pounds. `` I do n't jog , '' he say , `` because I ca n't run flat-footed. And at 60 year old you 're crazy to be out there running. '' An Owens Sampler On American black athlete who question the value of their gold medal : Any black who strive to achieve in this country should think in term of not only himself but also how he can reach down and grab another black child and pull him to the top of the mountain where he is. This be what a gold medal do to you. On dignity : Regardless of his color , a man who become a recognize athlete have to learn to walk 10 foot tall. But he must have his dignity off the athletic field. On material reward : Material reward be not all there is. How many meal can a man eat ? How many car can he drive ? In how many bed can he sleep ? All of life 's wonder be not reflect in material wealth. On the value of sport : We all have dreams. But in order to make dream into reality , it take an awful lot of determination , dedication , self-discipline and effort. These thing apply to everyday life. You learn not only the sport but thing like respect of others , ethic in life , how you be go to live , how you treat your fellow man , how you live with your fellow man. On the moment before Olympic competition : You think about the number of year you have work to the point where you be able to stand on that day to represent your nation. It 's a nervous , a terrible feeling. You feel , a you stand there , a if your leg ca n't carry the weight of your body. Your stomach be n't there , and your mouth be dry , and your hand be wet with perspiration. And you begin to think in term of all those year that you have worked. In my particular case , the 100 meter , a you look down the field 109 yard 2 foot away , and recognize that after eight year of hard work that this be the point that I have reach and that all be go to be over in 10 seconds. Those be great moment in the life of individual .