April 30 , 1980 OBITUARY Alfred Hitchcock Dies ; A Master of Suspense By PETER B. FLINT Alfred Hitchcock , whose mastery of suspense and of direct technique make him one of the most popular and celebrate of film maker , die yesterday at the age of 80 at his home in Los Angeles. Mr. Hitchcock , ail with arthritis and kidney failure , have be in decline health for a year. In a characteristically incisive remark , Mr. Hitchcock once sum up his approach to moviemaking : `` Some film be slice of life , mine be slice of cake. '' The director of score of psychological thriller for more than half a century be the master manipulator of menace and the macabre , and the lead specialist in suspense and shock. His best movie be meticulously orchestrate nightmare of peril and pursuit relieve by unexpected comic irony , absurdity and anomalies. Films make by the portly , cherubic director invariably progress from deceptively commonplace trifle of life to shatter revelation , and with elegant style and structure , he pervade mundane event and scene with a haunt mood of mount anxiety. In delicately balance the commonplace and the bizarre , he be the most noted juggler of emotion in the long major directorial career in film history. His distinctive style be vigorously visual , always stress imagery over dialogue and often use silence to increase apprehension. Among his most stunning montage be a harrowing attack by a bullet-firing crop-dusting plane on Cary Grant at a deserted crossroad amid barren cornfield in `` North by Northwest , '' a brutal shower-slaying in `` Psycho '' and an avian assault on a sleepy village in `` The Birds. '' Hitch , a he be call by his friend and colleague , doubtlessly frighten more audience than any other director in movie history , and he be one of the few film maker who be a household name for many decades. A trademark be the fleeting , nonspeaking appearance he make in his films. As the lead British director of the 30 's , he set the standard for international intrigue and espionage with such classic thriller a `` The 39 Steps '' and `` The Lady Vanishes. '' Increasingly Pessimistic After move to Hollywood in 1939 , he make such taut melodrama a `` Rebecca , '' `` Foreign Correspondent , '' `` Suspicion , '' `` Shadow of a Doubt , '' `` Lifeboat , '' `` Spellbound , '' `` Notorious , '' `` Strangers on a Train , '' `` Rear Window '' and `` Vertigo. '' His late shocker mirror his increasingly pessimistic view of most people and mount evil in the world. Reflecting his motif of a world in disorder , Mr. Hitchcock place endangered protagonist in setting epitomize order -- citadel of civilization , the Statue of Liberty , United Nations headquarters , Mount Rushmore and Britain 's Parliament. Reviewers acclaim his virtuosity in create a rhythm of anticipation with understated , sinister overtone , innovative pictorial nuance and montage , brilliant use of parallel editing of simultaneous action , menacingly oblique camera angle and reveal cross-cutting of objective shot with subjective view of a scene from an actor 's perspective. Detractors accuse Mr. Hitchcock of rely on slick trick , illogical story line and wild coincidence , but he usually do not allow viewer time to ponder implausibility because of the whiplike speed of his films. Spinning his sophisticated yarn to create maximum tension , Mr. Hitchcock be not concern with plausibility , which he regard a no more important than the `` MacGuffin , '' the term he use for the device about which his suspense revolve , whether it be the secret or document or whatever the villain be seek or try to protect. Sought Exotic Settings A favorite Hitchcock theme center on `` the wrong man '' who be unjustly accuse of a crime and hunt by both the villain and the police because of mistaken identity or incriminate information he inadvertently acquired. The storyteller seek consistently to freshen the concept with novel variation and plot twist and to avoid cliche in a careerlong effort to refine his style and enrich his films. His film be spice with unusual peripheral character and often shoot on location in exotic settings. His heroine be usually `` cool '' classic beauty who `` do n't drip sex , '' he said. `` You discover sex in them. '' At it best , the Hitchcock touch reveal a cornucopia of conjurer 's trick , dextrously juxtapose tension and relaxation , relieve horror with humor. `` After a certain amount of suspense , '' he tell an interviewer , `` the audience must find relief in laughter. '' He deplore James Bond-type gimmick and play on childhood anxiety -- fear of height , enclose place and open space -- and his plot deal with suspicion , guilt , complicity , delusion , vulnerability , irrationality , violence and sexual obsession. He manipulate moviegoer so adroitly that at time they felt implicate in the most despicable act , include those of a homicidal maniac. In Mr. Hitchcock 's world , people may or may not be what they appear to be , but the audience see and know more than the protagonists. He invariably alert viewer to imminent danger such a a ticking time bomb , withhold the knowledge from imperiled character , and identify the villain early on , eschew the `` whodunit '' a `` a sort of intellectual puzzle '' that be void of emotion. '' Technical Challenges The director be intrigue by technical challenge , in make thing work. He have a profound knowledge of all aspect of moviemaking , and write the production section for the Encyclopedia Britannica. He make expert use of object , placing , for example , a light in a glass of possibly poison milk in `` Suspicion '' to rivet attention on it. Before filming , he draw precise sketch of every scene , meticulously list each camera angle. Working with his screenwriter for month , he freely adapt material , write up to 100-page shot schedule without dialogue. He almost never look through the camera 's viewfinder and scrupulously avoid improvise on the set. His film have such consistent mass appeal that reviewer be sometimes condescend to them. But in the '50s , a group of young French film maker and critic associate with Cahiers du Cinema newly extol his achievements. Francois Truffaut , a lead director of France 's New Wave , praise him a `` the most complete film maker '' of all American director and `` an all-round specialist , who excel at every image , each shot and every scene. '' Lauding Mr. Hitchcock a a lead `` artist of anxiety '' with a `` purely visual '' style , Mr. Truffaut comment that `` Hitchcock be almost unique in be able to film directly , that be , without resort to explanatory dialogue , such intimate emotion a suspicion , jealousy , desire and envy. '' Detractors acknowledge his technical expertise in entertaining , but fault his film for lack substance and significance , for moral opportunism and for be cynical , superficial and glib in their view of human nature. Admirers vehemently disagree , term him a compulsive storyteller who show human nature a it be and not a it should be , and describe the psychological probing of much of his late work a profound in it foresight of an irrational and disordered world. Resembling a pixieish gargoyle , the rotund director have a pudgy , basset-hound face with heavy jowl and pout lips. He be a witty raconteur who give sly , sardonic and eminently quotable interview pepper with put-on and whimsical idea for new movies. He become somewhat of a national institution in shape a public image a a genially ghoulish cynic note for barbed pronouncement about life and commercial in two popular weekly television series , `` Alfred Hitchcock Presents '' and the `` Alfred Hitchcock Hour , '' which he supervise and be host of in the late 50 's and early 60's. Behind his somewhat fictional self-projected image be a highly skilled and dedicate artist who withstand exhaustive study by debunkers. Regarded a one of the shrewd businessmen in Hollywood , he become a multimillionaire. He also gain more complete control over every aspect of his production , screenplay , casting , photography , edit , soundtrack and publicity , than any Hollywood director. Mr. Hitchcock , who also produce many of his late film , be shower with laurels. He win the 1967 Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences , and `` Rebecca , '' his first American movie , win an Oscar a the best film of 1940. He be nominate for directorial Oscars five time , for `` Rebecca , '' `` Lifeboat , '' in 1944 , `` Spellbound '' in 1945 , `` Rear Window '' in 1954 and `` Psycho '' in 1960. Alfred Joseph Hitchcock be bear in London on Aug. 13 , 1899 , to a poultry dealer , greengrocer and fruit importer and the former Emma Whelan. He graduate from St. Ignatius College , a Jesuit school in London , where he study engineering , and take art course at the University of London. In childhood incident , he develop a lifelong fear of the police and punishment , major influence on his movies. At about the age of 5 , he be send by his father with a note to a local police chief , who lock him in a cell for five minutes. In release him , the officer say , `` That 's what we do to naughty boys. '' Mr. Hitchcock later say he could never forget `` the sound and the solidity of that closing cell door and the bolt. '' Mr. Hitchcock attribute his fear of punishment to ritual beating of the hand with a hard rubber strop , administer for infraction at St. Ignatius , that he recall `` be like go to the gallows. '' Became a Draftsman He work briefly a a technical calculator for a cable company , but soon abandon technology for art , become an advertising layout draftsman for a London department store. In his teen , he be determine to break into film making , and by brashness and ability he win a job in 1920 writing and illustrate title card for silent pictures. He rise quickly , to script writer , art director and assistant director. By 1925 , Mr. Hitchcock have become a director , make a melodrama call `` The Pleasure Garden '' on a shoestring budget in Munich , West Germany. He begin shape his genre with `` The Lodger , '' about Jack the Ripper. Early influence , he say , be German Expressionistic and American films. In 1926 , he marry Alma Reville , his assistant , who collaborate on many of his movie a a writer , adviser and general assistant. Their daughter , Patricia , act in a number of his movie and television thrillers. The pictorial and technical innovation of Mr. Hitchcock 's early melodrama garner him increase praise. In 1929 , he direct `` Blackmail , '' Britain 's first widely successful talk feature. In the 30 's , he win international acclaim for his pacesetting spy thriller , include `` The Man Who Knew Too Much '' ; `` The 39 Steps '' ; `` Secret Agent '' ; `` Sabotage , '' call `` The Woman Alone '' in the United States , and `` The Lady Vanishes. '' Lured to Hollywood David O. Selznick lure Mr. Hitchcock to Hollywood , with it incomparable technical facility , and he stay , become an American citizen. His first American production , the adaptation of Daphne du Maurier 's Gothic novel `` Rebecca , '' with Laurence Olivier and Joan Fontaine , begin a long string of successes. In the film maker 's early year in Hollywood , he create a stir when he quip that `` all actor be child '' and `` should be treat like cattle. '' He later show particular disdain for Method school actors. But he never raise his voice on a set and never argue with a performer in front of the crew. A number of star later describe him a a vividly persuasive man who know exactly what he want in a picture -- and get it. Despite his recent illness , the director be reportedly at work at Universal Studios on a new film , a spy story to be call `` The Short Night. '' With him at his death be his wife , Alma ; his daughter , Patricia , and his three grandchildren. In the last year of his life , Mr. Hitchcock , although a United States citizen , be knight by Queen Elizabeth II of his native Britain. In contrast with the disordered Hitchcockian cinema world , the moviemaker 's personal life be routinized , stable and serene. Unless he be shoot a film or out promote one , he rarely venture away from his home or office , accord to Richard Schickel , who interview him for a public-television series , `` The Men Who Made the Movies , '' in 1975. The director have a measure , courtly manner and wore dark suit , white shirt and conservative narrow ties. He be a gourmet and wine connoisseur , and , with a 5-foot-8-inch frame , his weight once soar to 290 pound , though he try to keep it down by diet to about 220 pounds. He avoid exercise and fiction , and voraciously read contemporary biography , travel book and true- crime accounts. He increase his fame and fortune by lend his name to , and supervise for decade , popular suspense anthology and magazine with tale by many writers. Mr. Hitchcock be a noted practical joker whose favorite prank be tell a tantalize story in a loud voice to a companion in an elevator , perfectly time his exit just before the punch line and then bow politely to the intrigue but frustrated passenger .