September 17 , 1980 OBITUARY Jean Piaget Dies in Geneva at 84 By ALDEN WHITMAN Jean Piaget , the Swiss psychologist whose study of child development have often be compare to Freud 's work in it vast influence on the science of human intelligence , die in Geneva today. He be 84 year old. Dr. Piaget be hospitalize 10 day ago at Geneva Cantonal Hospital. He be survive by three children. The cause of death be not disclosed. The question to which Jean Piaget address himself be deceptively obvious and simple : How do a child learn ? His answer , often phrase in obtuse language , be in brief that a child learns by discrete stage relate to age and that he be a significant agent in the process. His stress on the interaction of biological function and the structure of the environment , elaborate in more than 60 year of research , be , in the opinion of many psychologist and education specialist , a liberating and as revolutionary a Sigmund Freud 's early insight into the stage development of human emotional life. Many hail him a one of the century 's most creative scientific thinkers. And indeed Dr. Piaget 's theory exercise a profound effect on think about child in Europe and America. They have basically alter man 's perception of the mechanism and functioning of his intelligence. Educators seize upon his work. In contrast to the traditional view of how we acquire knowledge -- that heredity play a dominant role or that environmental factor be control -- Dr. Piaget propose that each child , start from birth , construct and reconstruct his very own model of reality , of the world about him , in a regular sequence. He do this through a multitude of direct experience with person and object , in the course of which cognitive growth take place not merely by amass new facts. The child 's transformation of these experience into conception be constantly revise through his own self- discovery , which tend to eliminate error in previous conceptions. A simple example of this phenomenon be cite recently by Dr. David Elkind of Tufts University , a Piaget specialist. He write : `` The child of 3 or 4 already have an elementary concept of quantity : confront with two identical glass of orangeade fill to the same level , he would say that both have the 'same to drink. ' But if the orangeade from one glass be pour into a tall , narrow beaker while he look on , the child would say , Piaget find , that the tall glass have 'more to drink ' than the short one. `` Not until about 6 or 7 do most child understand that change the shape of a quantity do not change the amount. The young child have a concept of quantity , but it be clearly a different concept from the one hold by old child and adult : he think the amount of liquid can be gauge by it level without take it width into account. Older child and adult , however , assess liquid quantity by take both height and width into consideration. Mental Growth by Integration `` This be mental growth by integration , wherein a new , higher-level idea ( amount be determine by height and width ) be form by the integration of two lower-level idea ( amount be determine by height or width ) . It suggest that mental growth be an expand upward spiral in which the same problem be attack at successive level but be resolve more completely and more successfully at each high level. '' In addition , Dr. Piaget explain that mental growth take place by integration of diverse concept and replacement or primitive notion of nature by more mature idea with age. Thus , very young child tend to believe that the sun and the moon follow them around , a notion that be replace in later years. Four Stages of Growth Four major stage of mental growth be delineate by Dr. Piaget , base on the cognitive task accomplish in each. In the sensory-motor period -- the initial two year of life -- the child be chiefly concern with the mastery of object , block , large toy , rock , household object and the like. From 2 to 6 , his main concern be with symbol such a those in language , fantasy , dream and play. For about the next five or six year , or until age 12 , the child learn to master number , relation and class and how to reason about them. Finally , in the three year to age 15 , he be occupy with the mastering of purely logical thought , and he can think about his own thinking and that of others. The continuum , in Dr. Piaget 's presentation , be quite complex , yet each stage have it telltale characteristics. A number of hardy theory be challenge by Dr. Piaget 's work : that a child be a little adult ; that idea be inborn ; that learn take place by environmental conditioning or reinforcement ; that the young child be capable of absorb fact a they be understood by adult ; and that he copy the world about him. In place of these notion , Dr. Piaget seek to substitute what he call genetic epistemology. In this concept , the timetable that appear to underlie the development of intellectual skill indicate that the capacity for logical thought be cod , along with sex , eye color and the shape of the nose , in the genes. Rational tendency , however , do not mature simply because they be innate ; rather , they grow with use. The application of this theory in education stress the importance of what be call the `` discovery method '' of teaching , in which a child get an opportunity to apply his develop ability and test their limitations. The teacher be a guide , not a force-feeder of ready-made truths. `` The goal of education be not to increase the amount of knowledge but to create the possibility for a child to invent and discover , to create men who be capable of do new thing , '' Dr. Piaget explained. Dr. Piaget 's early discovery with child gain him worldwide acclaim in the 20 and 30 's , but after that his work be consider too remote from the dominant trend in American behavioral science. Then in the late 50 's and early 60 's he be rediscovered. In the last few year most of his basic work have be translate and several explication for the general reader have be published. The most accessible of Dr. Piaget 's own work be `` Six Psychological Studies '' and `` The Psychology of the Child ; '' book about him include `` Understanding Piaget , '' `` The Essential Piaget '' and `` An Outline of Piaget 's Developmental Psychology for Students and Teachers. '' Along with an enthusiasm for Dr. Piaget in some American academic and educational circle there have be criticism. Traditionalists object to the radical way he conceive of the child 's task of acquire knowledge. And many sympathetic with Dr. Piaget 's overall interpretation feel alternative interpretation can be put forth for many of the phenomenon he uncovered. Other critic also argue that his theory offer little help in clarify the motivation and accomplishment of individual children. Many critic , however , agree with Robert Coles of Harvard that Dr. Piaget have focus psychologist ' attention on `` man the develop thinker rather than on man the universal neurotic. '' Tall , portly and rumpled-looking in his bulky suit , Dr. Piaget resemble a magnified Einstein , an impression that be accent by his bushy white hair. Out of door he cover part of this unruly mane with a navy blue beret. To many who meet him , accord to Professor Elkind , Dr. Piaget give off `` an aura of intellectual presence not unlike the aura of a dramatic presence emanate by a great actor. '' Smoking a meerschaum and chat with friend -- and especially with child -- he seem benign and gracious , but member of his staff in Geneva know that he could also be aloof and remote. Followed a Strict Schedule For year he follow a strict schedule. Up at 4 A.M. , he write at least four publishable page in a small , even hand. Later , he teach class or attend meetings. After lunch he walk and ponder whatever problem face him. `` I always like to think on a problem before read about it , '' he said. And in the evening he read. In the summer he depart to an Alpine retreat to talk , meditate and write. Apart from article and lecture , his output total more than 50 book and monographs. Several of them , include `` The Child 's Conception of Space '' and `` The Growth of Logical Thinking From Childhood to Adolescence , '' be write with Barbel Inhelder , his longtime associate at the Institute of Educational Science in Geneva. Dr. Piaget 's road to child psychology start with a youthful interest in zoology. The son of specialist on the Middle Ages , he be bear Aug. 9 , 1896 , in Neuchatel , Switzerland. Something of a prodigy , he publish article on mollusk in scientific journal by the age of 15. At 22 he be grant a doctoral degree with a thesis on mollusk distribution in the Valais Alps. He become interested also in psychology , attend lecture by Carl Jung. From these and his own speculation , he recall , he become `` haunt by the idea of discover a sort of embryology of intelligence. '' This be the basis for his late idea that life could be understood best in term of `` structure of the whole. '' In 1920 he go to Paris to work with Theodore Simon , a co-developer with Alfred Binet of an intelligence test for children. Scrutinizing responses to the test question , Dr. Piaget believe he saw a pattern in the wrong answer , a pattern that relate to a child 's age group. This finding lead him to investigate the child 's world , include the crib activity of his own three youngsters. Inside the Child 's Mind Possessed of a remarkable empathy with child , he spend long hour on his hand and knee shoot marble with them , explore their notion of space , ethic , number and the like. From these observation come his first book , `` The Language and Thought of The Child , '' which trace the development of child 's speech from egocentric to socialize forms. His research in psychology span over a half-century build up an impressive body of insights. His basic approach be to get inside of the child 's mind and see the world through it eyes. `` I engage my subject in conversation , '' Dr. Piaget recount , `` pattern after psychiatric questioning , with the aim of discover something about the reason underlie their right but especially their wrong answers. '' Among other thing , he find that `` child not only reason differently from adult , but also that they have quite different world view , literally different philosophies. '' For example , he note that in a child 's view `` object like stone and cloud be imbue with motif , intention and feelings. '' The mind be thus not a passive mirror but an active artist a it develop increasingly sophisticated version of reality. The unfolding of Dr. Piaget 's explanation occur over a lifetime , so there be refinement a new evidence be sift ; but these do not alter his basic theories. The elaboration of these be institutionalize in the International Center for Genetic Epistemology that he establish in Geneva in 1955 with fund from the Rockefeller Foundation. In his mature year Dr. Piaget be widely acclaimed. There be honorary degree from dozen of university , include Oxford and Harvard , and impressive guest appearance at scholarly meetings. He remain , however , a remote public figure -- more the distant philosopher than the polemicist .