April 16 , 1980 OBITUARY Jean-Paul Sartre , 74 , Dies in Paris By ALDEN WHITMAN Jean-Paul Sartre , whose existentialist philosophy influence two generation of writer and thinker throughout the world , die of edema of the lung yesterday in Paris. He be 74 year old. Long regard a one of France 's reigning intellectual , Mr. Sartre contribute profoundly to the social consciousness of the post-World War II generation through his leftward political commitment , which take him away from his desk and into the streets. He have idea on virtually every subject , which be develop in novel , play , biography , essay and tracts. Broke With Russian Communism Mr. Sartre 's point of view be less heed -- although still respect -- in the 1970 's a he become a maverick political outsider on the extreme left. His last substantial work be a biography of the 19th-century French novelist Gustave Flaubert. Mr. Sartre complete just three of the four volume he have plan , and while he use the biography to elaborate his own notion of psychology , society , letter and life , the work provoke only limited interest in literary circles. Although he be once closely ally with the Communist Party , Mr. Sartre be for the last 15 or so year an independent revolutionary who speak more in the accent of Maoism than of Soviet Communism. As an intellectual and a public figure -- a man the police dislike to arrest -- he use his prestige to defend the right of ultraleftist group to express themselves , and in 1973 he become titular editor of Liberation , a radical Paris daily. In addition he lend his name to manifesto and open letter in favor of repressed group in Greece , Chile and Spain. He be a rebel with a thousand cause , a modern Don Quixote. Mr. Sartre be scarcely less well know a a writer and thinker than Simone de Beauvoir , his stanch and close companion of many years. Their relationship persist through numerous phase , but their basic attachment to each other , their fortification of each other , be never seriously doubted. Twenty-five year ago Mr. Sartre , with Albert Camus and a few others , be an iridescent intellectual leader , virtually a cult object. But in recent time his stature be that of an ancestor figure whose generative conception have lose their force. It be fashionable to say that his lasting contribution would be his play , imply that his essay and novel would not survive. As a philosopher he be increasingly criticize for his unsystematic approach and for the retraction in his late writing. Nonetheless , few deny him respect for his continued attempt to live his idea , often at the cost of ridicule. `` I have put myself on the line in various action , '' Mr. Sartre say several year ago. He have in mind his activity against the Gaullist regime and his sometimes lonely protest against the American involvement in Vietnam. In 1966 and 1967 , for example , he be a principal in the International War Crimes Tribunal , a private group that condemn the United States role in Indochina long before it be widely reject in the West. Much earlier in his career a a freewheeling leftist , during the Nazi occupation of France , Mr. Sartre have , he say , `` indeed work with the Communists , a do all Resistants who be anti- Fascist. '' His support last until the Hungarian uprising of 1956 and the intervention by Russian troops. `` The French Communist Party support the invasion of Hungary , so I break with it , '' he explained. After back the Algerian nationalist in their struggle with France , he move steadily more leftward , and after the French demonstration and street fighting of May 1968 he be an active militant. Permitted His Own Arrests Among other thing , he permit himself to be arrest -- these arrest do not result in jail terms- -for ultraleftist cause ; his voice become more strident , and he lecture his fellow thinker about class warfare : `` The task of the intellectual be not to decide where there be battle but to join them wherever and whenever the people wage them. Commitment be an act , not a word. '' His sense of commitment preclude homage. For this reason he reject the Nobel Prize in Literature , award him in 1964 , on the ground that he do not wish to be `` transform into an institution. '' He also turn down the Legion of Honor for it bourgeois connotations. Mr. Sartre 's philosophical view develop and shifted. In `` Words , '' the story of his youth publish in the mid-60 's , he criticize the social , philosophical and literary idea with which he have be raise and he call into question the presupposition of his early works. Commenting on his autobiographical novel `` Nausea '' and his philosophical work `` Being and Nothingness , '' he say that an attitude of aristocratic idealism lay behind their composition , which he now rejected. The core of his existentialism , however , be not condemned. Roughly express , this suggest that `` man make himself '' despite his `` contingency '' in an `` absurd world. '' Voice of Disillusionment His existentialism , which be nonreligious despite the clerical origin of the philosophy , seem to express a widespread disillusionment with fixed idea amid the revolutionary change that flow from World War II and the chaotic breakup of colonial empires. Out of this existentialism come such diverse manifestation a the antinovel and the anti-hero , the New Wave cinema and the notion of man 's anguished consciousness. Also implicit in it be a call to action , in which man could vindicate his freedom and assume some control of his destiny. This be a far different set of value from those into which Jean-Paul Sartre be bear in Paris on June 21 , 1905. His father , Jean-Baptiste , be a naval officer who die shortly after his son 's birth. His mother , Anne-Marie Schweitzer , be a first cousin of Albert Schweitzer , the theologian and jungle physician. In `` Words , '' his caustically ironic memoir , Mr. Sartre recall that until 1919 , when she remarry , his mother and he live with her parent , Charles and Louise Schweitzer , mostly in Paris. The grandparental home be , he say , a `` hothouse '' of bourgeois hypocrisy , where role playing be take seriously and he become an imposter , too. His father 's death , he go on , not only mean that the son grow up with the `` incredible flippancy '' of a person without a superego , but also lead to his inherit a mid-19th-century concept of society and literature. As Mr. Sartre describe himself , he be an ugly `` toad '' of a boy , without friend his age. It be demand of him by his doting , authoritarian grandfather that he be a prodigy ; and by pretend to read , he actually learn to read before he be 4. By plagiarize , he learn in a few year how to write story , a process that hasten his retreat from life into word , which he come to regard a `` the quintessence of thing , '' more real than the object they denoted. With his increase erudition , the young Sartre grow in cynicism about all religion , but he cling to one of his grandfather 's Lutheran concept , the Holy Spirit. This be a divine muse that inspire a literary `` elect , '' of whom he once think himself one. As an overprotected child , the boy be tutor at home for some year , and once in school he be slow at first by faulty spelling and a difficulty in get `` use to democracy. '' Shortly , though , he become without effort a very good student , and he have no trouble enter the elite Ecole Normale Superieure when he be 20. Met Lifelong Companion There he begin his lifelong companionship with Simone de Beauvoir , a fellow student , with an agreement pledge mutual loyalty in time of need but allow `` contingent loves. '' Among his other student friend be Albert Camus and Raymond Aron , the political observer , with both of whom Mr. Sartre break after the war. After take his agrege -- a degree slightly high than a Doctor of Philosophy -- he go to Germany in 1933 to study under Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger , two of the most influential European philosopher , interested in the nature of be and reality and the mystery of perception. Existentialism have a mixed parentage and there be several version of it. Mr. Sartre 's idea be sum up by Frank Kappler , an American writer who , after quote Mr. Sartre 's famous formula -- '' Existence precedes essence '' -- write : `` Man come into a totally opaque , undifferentiated , meaningless universe. By the power of his mysterious consciousness , which Sartre call unmeant , man make of the universe a habitable world. Whatever meaning and value the world have come from his existential choice. These choice differ from one to another. `` Each life in his own world , or , a Sartre also say , each create his own situation. Frequently this existential choice be bury in a low level of consciousness. But to become truly alive , one must become aware of oneself a an 'I ' -- that be , a true existential subject , who must bear alone the responsibility for his own situation. '' Commitment Is Free Choice And in this predicament , Mr. Sartre believe , one can choose an `` inauthentic existence , '' or one can commit oneself by a resolute act of free choice to a positive role in human affairs. Most of these idea be elaborate in `` Being and Nothingness , '' which he write during the Nazi occupation of France. In 1938 , he have publish `` Nausea , '' a novel in which a character name Antoine Roquentin , live in Bouville ( or Mudville ) , be seize with the horror of existentialism while meditate in a public park. The novel , which still make instructive reading , end when Roquentin decide that if he can only create something , a novel perhaps , his creativity could mean engagement. The central character be almost certainly Mr. Sartre himself , an impression heighten by the book 's English title , `` The Diary of Antoine Roquentin. '' By the end of World War II , Mr. Sartre be well know in France both for his writing and for his activity in the Resistance. His philosophy suit many of the young generation of student , who have be knock about by the war physically and spiritually , for they saw in existentialism an opportunity for salvation through commitment to a `` new '' French culture. Mr. Sartre and his disciple at first gather at the Cafe de Flore near the Place St.-Germain de Pres on Paris 's Left Bank. Little be available at the Flore then except tasteless tea , but the ferment of discussion be stimulation enough. And a the group grow , it and a crowd of gawker move to the more roomy Cafe Pont-Royal. After do two play during the war , include `` No Exit , '' Mr. Sartre busy himself with the theatre in a number of drama of ideas. These include `` The Respectful Prostitute , '' an indictment of racism in America ; `` The Victors , '' an ordeal of conscience among Resistance fighter ; `` The Devil and the Good Lord , '' in which a group of peasant who accept the kindness of a tyrant discover that complacency be futile so long a others be oppress ; and `` The Condemned of Altona , '' about a former Nazi who be torment by the significance history may place on his acts. In addition to his play Mr. Sartre be write biography of Baudelaire , the 19th-century poet , and Jean Genet. Mr. Genet , a man with a long criminal record who write exceed well , be celebrate a an anti-hero -- an orphan judge delinquent by society who have decide to play the role assign to him. A Fury of Creativity Parts of these and other of his writing be publish in Les Temps Modernes , his monthly review found in 1945. The periodical , once quite influential , have decline in importance. Mr. Sartre be a short , wall-eyed man who always seem in a fury of creativity. Relaxing from his desk , he be attentive , natural and full of good humor. This be in keep with his view that life be a game board on which he create both the game and the rules. He have , he once say , `` incredible levity. '' He live simply , with few possession other than his book , in a small apartment on the Left Bank. His gradual loss of sight -- he be virtually blind at his death -- and fail health force him to curtail his public appearances. On March 20 , Mr. Sartre be admit to Proussais Hospital , where he die yesterday. During his last year he continue to speak out on political and social issues. In 1977 , oppose the emerge trend of Eurocommunism independent of the Soviet Union , he accuse the Italian Communist Party of collaborate with the Christian Democratic Party in a program of patronage and repression. `` Life Situations , '' a collection of his essay , be publish in translation in the United States in the same year. In one of these , `` Self-Portrait at 70 , '' he write amusingly of his careless way with money , his fondness for music and the change he have to make in his life when he could no longer see to read. Although Mr. Sartre betray a certain amiability , he remain until the end an angry man. `` As far a the state of French politics go , I do n't see a lot I can do , '' he wrote. `` It 's so rotten what 's happen in France now ! And there 's no hope in the immediate future ; no party offer any hope at all. '' On death , he comment in a book of photograph in 1978 : `` I think of death only with tranquility , a an end. I refuse to let death hamper life. Death must enter life only to define it . ''