April 13 , 1981 OBITUARY Joe Louis , 66 , Heavyweight King Who Reigned 12 Years , Is Dead By DEANE McGOWEN Joe Louis , who hold the heavyweight box championship of the world for almost 12 year and the affection of the American public for most of his adult life , die yesterday of cardiac arrest in Las Vegas , Nev. He be 66 year old. Mr. Louis , who be champion from 1937 until 1949 , collapse in the bathroom of his home at approximately 9:30 A.M. ( P.S.T. ) . Efforts by Noel Larimer , his personal therapist , and by paramedic to revive Mr. Louis be unsuccessful. He be pronounce dead at Desert Springs Hospital at 10:05 A.M. His wife , Martha , be with him at the hospital. Defended Title 25 Times Slow of foot but redeemingly fast of hand , Joe Louis dominate heavyweight boxing from 1937 to 1948. As world champion he defend his title 25 time , face all challenger and fight the best that the country of the world could offer. In the opinion of many boxing expert , the plain , simple , unobtrusive Brown Bomber - a he be know - with his crushing leave jab and hook , be probably the best heavyweight fighter of all time. The 6-foot-1 1/2-inch , 197-pound Louis win his title June 22 , 1937 , in Chicago , by knock out James J. Braddock in eight round , thus become the first black heavyweight champion since Jack Johnson , who have reign earlier in the century. Before Louis retire undefeated a champion on March 1 , 1949 , his last title defense have be against Jersey Joe Walcott. Louis knock him out on June 25 , 1948 , in New York. As the titleholder , his fight have gross more than $ 4.6 million , of which he receive about $ 800,000. A fighter who waste little time in dispatch his opponent , Louis 's earnings per round be extraordinarily high. Of the 25 title defense , only three go the full 15 rounds. Tony Galento , for example , survive four round in 1939 , and Buddy Baer manage one round in 1942. Excluding exhibition , Louis win 68 professional fight and lose only three. He score 54 knockout , include five in the first round. After retire , he continue to appear in exhibition and in 1950 he decide to make a comeback , but be beat by Ezzard Charles in 15 rounds. His final professional bout take place on Oct. 26 , 1951 , when he lose to Rocky Marciano in New York. His final competition , an exhibition , take place Dec. 16 , 1951 , in Taipei against Cpl. Buford J. DeCordova. Schmeling Blitzed The most spectacular victim of Louis 's robust punch be Max Schmeling , the German fighter who be personally hail by Adolf Hitler a a paragon of Teutonic manhood. Schmeling , who have knock out Louis in 12 round in 1936 , be give a return bout on June 22 , 1938 , in Yankee Stadium. He be knock out in 2 minute 4 second of the first round. Describing the bout in The New York Times , John Kieran write : `` Well , of all thing ! It 's on and it 's over. Just a Joe promised. He step in and start a lightning attack. Lefts and right - Bang ! Bang ! Bang ! Schmeling reel into the rope on the first-base side of the ring and clung like a shipwreck soldier to a lifeline. `` Swaying on the rope , Max peer out in a bewildered manner. He push himself off and Louis strike like dark lightning again. A ripping left and a smashing right. The right be the crusher. Schmeling go down. He be up again and then , under another fusillade , down again. Once more , and barely able to stand , and then down for the third and final time. '' Not all of Louis 's fight be so savage. Many of his adversary enter the ring already quake and his task of finish them off be thus a matter of a half dozen solid punch at the proper moment. A Considerate Man There be no Joe Louis behind any facade. He be the same slowspoken , considerate person in a close social group a he be to the vast crowd that surge in on him to clutch his every word when he be at the apogee of the boxing world. A simple dignity be characteristic of Louis , who never pretend that his sharecropper origins in Alabama be more than humble. Louis be bear Joseph Louis Barrow on May 13 , 1914 , in the cottonfield country near Lafayette , Ala. , the eighth child of Munn and Lilly Barrow. His boyhood be one of want and little schooling. In his teen , he do odd job to help his family until the they move to Detroit. He work a a laborer there in the River Rouge plant of the Ford Company. Studied Cabinet-Making The future champion attend Bronson Vocational School for a time to learn cabinet-making , before turn to amateur boxing at the request of a schoolmate. He make his boxing debut in an amateur tournament in Detroit , where he be then make his home , a a lightheavyweight. He lose the decision , get knock down three time by Johnny Miler in a three-rounder. However , he persevere and , in 1934 , win the national Amateur Athletic Union light-heavyweight title. That end his career a an amateur. His record include 43 knockout victory in 54 bouts. On July 4 , 1934 , Louis appear a a professional fighter for the first time and knock out Jack Kracken in one round in Chicago. Much of Louis 's success be due to the capable manner in which he be handle a a professional. His amateur record bring him to the attention of Julian Black and John Roxborough , who engage the late Jack Blackburn , one of the ring 's great competitor , to polish the rough spot in the young fighter 's style and to get the maximum result out of his tremendous strength and punching power. Louis have 11 more fight in 1934 and 14 in 1935. By then his prowess have attract the attention of Mike Jacobs in New York. Mr. Jacobs be compete against Madison Square Garden for the right to promote boxing. He go to Detroit to see Louis fight Natie Brown in March 1935. After outpoint Brown , Louis soon join the New York promoter. First New York Fight On June 25 , 1935 , Louis appear for the first time before New York fan and be an immediate success , knock out Primo Carnera in six rounds. He be so impressive that fan clamor for a match between him and Max Baer. Baer have lose the heavyweight championship to Braddock only two week before Louis stop Carnera. Louis and Baer meet on Sept. 24 of that year , and the young fighter , already recognize a a punching machine , pound Baer into helplessness in four rounds. Altogether Louis have 14 bout in 1935 and earn a total of $ 368,037 , an almost incredible sum then for a fighter in his second year a a professional. On June 19 , 1936 , Louis have his first meeting with Schmeling in New York and suffer his first professional defeat , a 12th-round knockout. Schmeling tell reporter before the bout that he have see fault in Louis 's style. After the bout , Schmeling disclose that Louis have a habit of lower his left shoulder and arm , leave his chin open for a right-hand counter punch. Floored in Fourth Round Schmeling floor Louis with that weapon in the fourth round , and finally knock him out with more of the right-hand blow in the 12th. Schmeling be promise a title bout against Braddock after he stop Louis , but Mr. Jacobs want Louis to get the chance. After stall Schmeling , Braddock agree to meet Louis. They fight in Chicago and Louis knock out Braddock in the eighth round to win the heavyweight title. In 1938 the new champion have only three bout , but one of those be his second against Schmeling. Germany be then expound it superman propaganda to the world , and Hitler have make it know that Schmeling be one of those supermen. Schmeling make the mistake of believe Hitler and make some disparaging remark about Americans in general and black in particular. Champion in a Rage When Louis and the challenger meet on June 22 , 1938 , in New York , the champion be in a rage. Louis cut his opponent down with terrific head and body punches. Schmeling go to a local hospital to recuperate before he return to Germany. The 2-minute-4-second time span be a record for turn back a challenger in a heavyweight title bout. The bout be the first million-dollar gate Louis attract during his career. After that Louis have thing pretty much his own way in the ring. Tony Galento have him on the canvas briefly in 1939 , Arturo Godoy 's crouch nose-to-the-floor tactic puzzle Louis the full 15 round in 1940 , and Buddy Baer , brother of Max , knock Louis out of the ring for a nine-count in 1941 before losing. That last event come during Louis 's so-called `` bum-of-the-month campaign. '' During it , begin in December 1940 , he meet challenger at the rate of one a month , a performance that no other heavyweight champion ever attempted. Louis come close to lose his crown in the first fight with Billy Conn of Pittsburgh on June 18 , 1941 , at the Polo Grounds. Conn , the light-heavyweight king , relinquish his title to meet Louis. A Lesson in Boxing Before that fight many box writer have say that Conn would be too speedy and would outbox Louis. The champion have the perfect answer when he say , `` He can run but he ca n't hide. '' For 12 round Louis receive a lesson in box from the stylish challenger. However , in the 13th , Conn drop his successful tactic and attempt to slug it out with Louis. The move cost him the championship. Louis knock him out with two second leave in the round. Three month later Louis stop Lou Nova , and in January 1942 , he defeat Buddy Baer again , in 2:56 of the first round. That bout in Madison Square Garden be for the Navy Relief Society , which receive $ 47,000. Two month later Louis knock out Abe Simon in the sixth round of a fight in New York. The Army Relief society gain by $ 36,146. Louis then go into the Army a a private. Traveled Widely in Army As a soldier , Louis travel more than 21,000 mile and stag 96 box exhibition before two million soldiers. Louis come out of the Army on Oct. 1 , 1945 , and shortly after sign to defend his title against Conn. The bout be the second million-dollar gate Louis drew and earn him the large purse of his career , $ 625,916.44. The champion stop Conn in the eighth round at Yankee Stadium on June 19 , 1946. The champion defend his title three more time after the Conn fight , knock out Tami Mauriello and Jersey Joe Walcott twice. After the second Walcott bout on June 25 , 1948 , Louis retire - officially on March 1 , 1949. He later try a comeback but fail to regain his championship form. Ezzard Charles outpoint him in 15 round at Yankee Stadium on Sept. 27 , 1950. A year later Louis 's ring career come to an end when Rocky Marciano knock him out in the eighth round of their bout at Madison Square Garden on Oct. 26 , 1951. Although he make a lot of money , it pass through his finger quickly - and without the sort of accounting that the Internal Revenue Service expects. As a result , the Government calculate that his delinquent tax - after penalty and interest - amount to $ 1.25 million , a sum that Louis find staggering. `` I like the good life , '' Louis said. `` I just do n't know where the money went. I wish I did. I get 50 percent of each purse and all kind of expense come out of my cut. '' In the mid-1960 's , an accommodation be reach with the Government and the boxer be able to pay off his obligations. In 1965 , Dana Latham , the commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service , inform Congress : `` We have get all we could possibly get from Mr. Louis , leave him with some hope that he can live. His earning day be over. '' Louis be not officially forgive by the tax collector , but attempt at get the money he owe cease , accord to a close friend of the boxer. Food Chain Planned Out of the ring for good , Louis try to establish himself in a variety of careers. He wrestle briefly and engage in various sport and commercial promotions. In 1969 , he and Billy Conn , who have lose twice to Louis in title fight , set up the Joe Louis Food Franchise Corporation in the hope of operate an inter-racial chain of food shops. In 1969 , he collapse on a low Manhattan street and be rush to Beekman-Downtown Hospital for treatment of what be then describe a `` a physical breakdown. '' And in 1970 , he spend five month at the Colorado Psychiatric Hospital and the Veterans Administration Hospital in Denver. He be hospitalize by his wife , Martha , and his son , Joe Louis Barrow Jr. , suffer from paranoia. Because of his confinement he be unable to attend a tribute to him in Detroit that be attend by more than 8,000 people. Louis disclose the truth about some of his problem in 1971 in a book , `` Brown Bomber , The Pilgrimage of Joe Louis , '' by Barney Nagler. He say that his collapse in 1969 have be cause by cocaine. And he admit that his hospitalization have be prompt by his fear of a plot to destroy him. Louis 's son once say of his father : `` I could n't help thinking of Arthur Miller 's play , 'Death of a Salesman. ' In the play , the man 's name be Willy Loman , be n't it ? Well , there 's a correlation between them. Was n't Willy a grand guy , just like my father , and then he start grow old and lose his customer ? He be never really aware that he have lose his territory. That 's the tragedy of it , just like my father's. '' Louis 's third wife , Martha , say , during her husband 's trouble , `` Joe 's not broke. He 's rich-rich with friends. If he say he need a dollar , a million people would send him a dollar and he 'd be a millionaire. '' Joe Louis be more than just a boxing champion. He also have a role in the social history of the United States. In a 1970 article about Louis in Ebony magazine , Chester Higgins write : `` He give inspiration to downtrodden and despise people. When Joe Louis fought , black in ghetto across the land be indoors glue to their radio , and when Louis win , a he nearly always do , they hit the street whoop and holler in celebration. For Joe 's victory be their victory , a mean of strike back at an oppressive and hateful environment. Louis be the black Atlas on whose broad shoulder black be lift , for in those day , there be few authentic black heroes. '' In 1974 he take time off from his job a a `` greeter '' at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas , Nev. , to referee the heavyweight fight between Joe Frazier and Jerry Quarry , proclaim Frazier the winner after the fifth round because of heavy cut on Quarry 's face. Mr. Louis and Marva Trotter , a 19-year-old Chicago secretary , be marry on Sept. 24 , 1935. The marriage take place in a Harlem apartment just a few hour before Louis step into the ring and knock out Max Baer. The couple be divorce in March 1945 , but remarry a year later. They be divorce a second time in February 1949. A daughter , Jacquelin , be bear to the couple on Feb. 8 , 1943 , and a son , Joe Jr. , on May 28 , 1947. Mr. Louis 's third marriage be to Rose Morgan , a New York cosmetic manufacturer , on Christmas Day , 1955. His fourth marriage be to Mrs. Martha Jackson , a Los Angeles lawyer. It take place March 17 , 1959 , after his union with Rose Morgan Louis be terminate by annulment. Mr. Louis 's death come only a few hour after he have attend the heavyweight championship fight on Saturday night between Larry Holmes and Trevor Berbick at Caesars Palace where for many year he be employ a a `` greeter. '' Since 1977 , Mr. Louis have be confine to a wheelchair follow surgery to correct an aortic aneurysm. His health over the last decade have be poor , beset with heart problem , emotional disorder and strokes. An electronic pacemaker be implant near his heart last Dec. 23 in Houston. `` He be in a cardiac arrest when he arrive , '' say Shirley Brown , the nursing supervisor at Desert Springs Hospital. `` They do everything they could to revive him. He have be ill for quite some time. He have be hospitalize before. '' `` Mrs. Louis be take it as well a can be expect , '' say Harry Wald , the president of Caesars Palace. `` We 're very shock at what happened. He be at the fight last night. He be really enjoy himself and his pacemaker be work very well. He be look forward to attend the Diana Ross Show tomorrow night at the hotel and then this morning he just collapsed. It 's very sad. '' A spokesman for the Louis family say that the former champion 's body would lie in state on Thursday at Caesars Palace. Burial will be on Friday morning at a burial site yet to be determine .