July 30 , 1981 OBITUARY Robert Moses , Master Builder , be Dead at 92 By PAUL GOLDBERGER Robert Moses , who play a large role in shape the physical environment of New York State than any other figure in the 20th century , die early yesterday at West Islip , L.I. Mr. Moses , whose long list of public office only begin to hint at his impact on both the city and state of New York , be 92 year old. A spokesman for Good Samaritan Hospital say he have be take there Tuesday afternoon from his summer home in Gilgo Beach. The cause of death be give a heart failure. `` Those who can , build , '' Mr. Moses once said. `` Those who ca n't , criticize. '' Robert Moses be , in every sense of the word , New York 's master builder. Neither an architect , a planner , a lawyer nor even , in the strict sense , a politician , he change the face of the state more than anyone who was. Before him , there be no Triborough Bridge , Jones Beach State Park , Verrazano-Narrows Bridge , West Side Highway or Long Island parkway system or Niagara and St. Lawrence power projects. He build all of these and more. Before Mr. Moses , New York State have a modest amount of parkland ; when he leave his position a chief of the state park system , the state have 2,567,256 acres. He build 658 playground in New York City , 416 mile of parkway and 13 bridges. But he be more than just a builder. Although he disdain theory , he be a major theoretical influence on the shape of the American city , because the work he create in New York prove a model for the nation at large. His vision of a city of highway and tower -which in his late year come to be discredit by young planner - influence the planning of city around the nation. His guiding hand make New York , know a a city of mass transit , also the nation 's first city for the automobile age. Under Mr. Moses , the metropolitan area come to have more highway mile than Los Angeles do ; Moses project anticipate such later automobile-oriented effort a the Los Angeles freeway system. But where Los Angeles grow up around it highway , Mr. Moses thrust many of New York 's great ribbon of concrete across an older and largely settled urban landscape , alter it drastically. He far change the landscape with row of red-brick apartment tower for low- and middle-income resident , asphalt playground and huge sport stadiums. The Moses vision of New York be less one of neighborhood and brownstone than one of soar tower , open park , highway and beach - not the sidewalk of New York but the American dream of the open road. For 44 year , from 1924 until 1968 , Mr. Moses construct public work in the city and state cost - in a recent estimate adjust currency to 1968 value - $ 27 billion. Mr. Moses build park , highway , bridge , playground , housing , tunnel , beach , zoo , civic center , exhibition hall and the 1964-65 New York World 's Fair. To do so , he hold several appointive office and once occupy 12 position simultaneously , include that of New York City Parks Commissioner , head of the State Parks Council , head of the State Power Commission and chairman of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority. Throughout his career he point with pride to his ability to `` get thing done. '' It be an ability no one question ; nonetheless Mr. Moses be a controversial figure , especially in the late year of his public career. He be far more agile at behind-the-scenes maneuver than he be at public politicking. In his one try for elective office , his race for Governor on the Republican ticket in 1934 , he be defeat by 800,000 vote , the large margin in New York State history. After the debacle , his administrative power continue unabated , but he never again consider run for office. Associate of High Officials Mr. Moses be close to a number of city , state and Federal Government officials. But with the exception of Gov. Alfred E. Smith , to whom he owe much of his early power , he seem , to many observer , to be less in debt to governor , mayor and even Presidents than they appear to be to him. His era of power have begin long before the election of many of the chief executive for whom he work , and it continue long after many of them have pass from public view. Many official frequently suggest that they do not know how they could get public project build without Mr. Moses ' help. He often threaten to resign when he do not get his way and , have call most mayor ' and governor ' bluff , he usually do get his way - until 1962 , when Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller , to Mr. Moses ' shock , accept his resignation from several of his positions. In 1968 he be relieve of his final position - head of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority - but until then Mr. Moses seem to be a perpetual figure of power in the state 's public work system. He be already long past the retirement age for state official -he have turn 65 back in 1953 - but until Governor Rockefeller balk in 1962 , executive have regularly sign special extension to permit Mr. Moses to stay on. The Grand-Scale Approach Mr. Moses be closely associate with a view of city planning a a sweeping , total process to be carry out on a grand scale and , a that view begin to be replace with a more modest , preservationoriented philosophy in the 1960 's , his reputation begin to suffer. He indicate no wish to change with the time , but hold to his view more ardently than ever in his late year , dismiss community opposition to his vast project by say , a he do in a 1974 statement , `` I raise my stein to the builder who can remove ghetto without remove people a I hail the chef who can make omelet without break eggs. '' The statement come in a much-publicized 3,500-word rebuttal that Mr. Moses offer to a highly critical biography of him by Robert Caro publish in 1974 , `` The Power Broker. '' The exhaustive 1,246-page work , which win the Pulitzer Prize , be write from the perspective of the new approach to planning and redevelopment , and it contend that Mr. Moses have callously remove resident of neighborhood undergo urban renewal , have destroy the traditional fabric of urban neighborhood in favor of a landscape of red-brick tower and throughout his career have work somewhat outside the normal democratic process. Mr. Moses be deeply hurt by the great attention give the book , the only full-length investigative biography of him ever written. For while Mr. Caro call Mr. Moses a genius and `` perhaps the single most influential seminal thinker '' in 20th-century urban renewal , the book 's overall tone clearly indicate the extent to which Mr. Moses ' view have become different from those of the mainstream of planner and politician by 1974. Mr. Moses be , understandably , much happy with the version of thing he present in an autobiography , publish in 1969 , which he call `` Public Works : A Dangerous Trade. '' Not a Professional Planner Mr. Moses be not a professional planner by training , but a political scientist eager to put his education to work for the public welfare. He be a brilliant drafter of legislation , and a his career go on , he use that talent to set up over a dozen of the institution from which he be to derive his great power : public authorities. The public authority , an autonomous organization that create public work with money raise by issue bond , be legally possible before Mr. Moses become active , but it be a device that have rarely be used. He draft legislation to set up such authority a the Jones Beach State Park Authority and the most powerful of them all , the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority. It be through the authority that Mr. Moses be able to conceive of most of his project and create them largely unchallenged by public or political pressures. The most successful project , like his toll bridge , bring in vast revenue that the authority - which mean Mr. Moses himself - could control , free of any public or governmental interference. Critics be later to question whether Mr. Moses ' bias be a cause or an effect of the automobile age , but it be certain that he focus his public-works project on increase suburbanization and use of the automobile. He be largely responsible for the network of parkway on Long Island , for example , as well a for highway within the city that be conceive more for the convenience of suburban automobile owner than inner-city residents. Like many planner in the 1930 's and 1940 's , Mr. Moses do not question , a late planner do , the ultimate effect the automobile would have on the city , choke old street with traffic and lead to the demolition of many neighborhood to make way for expressways. Mr. Moses believe simply , a he state in his 1974 rebuttal to the Caro biography , that `` we live in a motorized civilization. '' He saw the automobile a a force that be bind to revolutionize the landscape , and he intend to help guide that process. Part of 'Our Crowd' Robert Moses be bear in New Haven on Dec. 18 , 1888 , the son of Emanuel Moses , a department-store owner , and Bella Silverman Moses. His family be part of the well-to-do circle of New York German Jews know a `` our crowd , '' and although they be not among the wealthy of the group , Mrs. Moses ' ambition lead the family to resettle in New York in 1897. Robert Moses grow up in a town house on East 46th Street , with the luxurious upbringing that be common to family in the Moses class. He enter Yale in 1905 at the age of 17 , two year young than most of his class. There he write poetry and earn the reputation of be idealistic and somewhat solitary. Tall and imposing , he be also a fine athlete and become an active member of the Yale swimming team. After his graduation in 1909 , he go to Oxford , where he become interested in the British civil service system and begin a thesis urge that government job be award on a merit system , base largely on education and class distinctions. It would earn him a Ph.D. from Columbia University in 1914. Mr. Moses ' idealism find an outlet in 1913 in his first career , with the Municipal Research Bureau in New York , a six-year-old organization that be a research and advisory arm for the nationwide municipal government reform movement. Mr. Moses be accept into the bureau 's training school , but he soon grow impatient and offer to become a regular staff member at no salary , since his family give him sufficient income. The offer be accept , but Mr. Moses be no more comfortable with his high status. First Outlet for Drive The first real outlet for the determined energy and drive with which Mr. Moses would later approach the building of public work project come in 1914 , when John Purroy Mitchel , a lead reformer , be elect Mayor of New York. Mitchel look to the Municipal Research Bureau for help in restructure the city 's Civil Service system , and the bureau put forth the name of it only staff member who be an expert in that area : Robert Moses. Mr. Moses dive with zeal into the chaos that be the Tammany Hall job system. He propose a rigid plan for reform , not unlike what he have suggest in his Ph.D. thesis. It be idealistic but almost Calvinistic in it unswerving rule , require that all job be analyze on a complex scale and that all worker ' performance be quantitatively measured. The system also require that many worker who have receive their job through patronage be downgrade , a provision that earn Mr. Moses the understandable enmity of Tammany Hall. The system be only partly put into effect , and Mayor Mitchel 's defeat in 1917 meant that Mr. Moses have to look elsewhere to advance his career. He do not have to look long. After the 1918 election , he receive a telephone call from Belle Moskowitz , a 40-year-old reformer who be particularly close to the incoming Governor , Alfred E. Smith. Mrs. Moskowitz offer Mr. Moses the job of chief of staff of a new commission that be to recommend total reorganization of the state government. Into the Orbit of Power It be a job that be to bring Mr. Moses far more into the orbit of politician and power than he have ever be , and it would begin his association with Governor Smith , with whom he be to remain close for the rest of Mr. Smith 's life. The commission 's 419-page report urge consolidation of 187 state agency into 16 department , the extension of the Governor 's term from two to four year and the vesting in the Governor of the power to appoint and remove all key officials. It be a model for such reform report around the nation , but like Mr. Moses ' recommendation to the city , it be not adopted. Mr. Moses work with other reform group after 1921 , when Mr. Smith be out of power and the two men be together in New York. But when Mr. Smith be elect again in 1922 , he take Mr. Moses back to Albany , this time a part of his inner circle. It be then that Mr. Moses first become involve with subject that would occupy him throughout his career : park , construction and highways. Influenced by Governor Smith , he be rapidly move away from his theoretical interest in government and toward a concern , which be later to become a virtual obsession , with get thing do , whatever the method , whatever the costs. Several visit to Long Island have awaken Mr. Moses to the enormous amount of unused land not far from New York City 's border , and his grow realization that the automobile would be crucial to the New York region 's development lead him to his interest in set aside the land - or condemn it , if need be - for public use. In typical Moses fashion , he propose to Governor Smith a sweeping plan that call for a $ 15 million bond issue to acquire and improve parkland and for the establishment of a set of regional park commissions. Fur Coat or Underwear ? Governor Smith at first think the plan excessive - `` You want to give the people a fur coat when what they need be red flannel underwear , '' he tell Mr. Moses. But he soon realize the political sense that park make and not only support the scheme , but also make Mr. Moses president of it first major unit , the Long Island State Park Commission. Mr. Moses himself draft the enabling legislation for the commission , and it be an intricate law that give the commission - and it leader , Robert Moses - almost unchallenged power. The legislation be pass in 1924 , and Mr. Moses be then also name chairman of the State Council of Parks. His first great achievement be the erection of Jones Beach , for which he take an almost unused sandbar and at vast expense transform it into an elaborate seaside Xanadu for the mass , complete with bathhouse , restaurant and a tower inspire by a Venetian bell tower. There be vast opposition to the project in the surround area , but Mr. Moses be not deterred. The Jones Beach that Mr. Moses build be extravagant in it appointment , vast in it scale and conservative in it design. Before Jones Beach , bathhouse be generally shack beside the sea ; Mr. Moses decide that he want enormous sandstone and brick palaces. And beach resort for the public be usually honky-tonk boardwalk ; Mr. Moses decide that Jones Beach would change that pattern and contain an open beach , a theater and `` wholesome '' game like shuffleboard. An Overwhelming Success Each of the two Jones Beach bathhouses , face with an especially expensive brick that Mr. Moses have admire on an East Side hotel , cost a million dollars. Designed in a mix of Moorish , Gothic and 1930's-modern style , the sprawling and gracious building be surround by elaborate , fanciful system of sign , fountain , railing and trash can design to imitate ship details. Rich mosaic be set into entry walls. The architecture be the loose sort of eclecticism typical of the 1920 's , but it basically romantic thrust pull the piece of the complex together. Jones Beach , which open in 1930 , be an overwhelming popular success , and the opponent of the project , most of whom be Long Island resident who resent the influx of traffic that the beach would bring , could do little. Mr. Moses have run into much tough opposition with his plan for the Northern State Parkway and the Southern State Parkway. These call for richly landscape , curve road whose design would ultimately influence generation of parkway planners. But it be not the design that cause controversy - it be the very fact of the road in the first place. Both parkways cut through the huge country estate of wealthy New Yorkers who spend weekend and summer on the Island. They be upset not only at Mr. Moses ' presumption that he could appropriate their land , but also at the possibility that the `` rabble '' from the city would overrun the elegant North and South Shores. Mr. Moses himself be no populist , and critic later suggest that he be as interested in further his own power a in help the work class toward some light and air. But Governor Smith 's instinct be more down-to-earth , and in one famous exchange the Governor reply to a landowner 's fear of an invasion of the rabble with the word `` Rabble ? That 's me you 're talk about. '' Long Court Fights There be , however , long court fight on both the North and South Shores. And Mr. Moses , who say , ''As long a you 're on the side of the park , you 're on the side of the angel ; you ca n't lose , '' do not lose , in spite of the fact that court rule that some of his appropriation have in fact be illegal. His park project go ahead - partly because Mr. Moses have always realize that if he could somehow start a project , money and legal authority would always be find to finish it rather than leave it half-done , a monument to bureacratic incompetence. `` Once you sink that first stake , '' he be fond of say , `` they 'll never make you pull it up. '' Mr. Moses ' work crew keep sink stake - and pull up none - through Smith 's governorship , and by the end of 1928 , there be 9,700 acre of state parkland on Long Island. The richly landscape Southern State Parkway be well under way , with the Northern State soon to follow - both , like Jones Beach , an example of carefully detail design that would make a real mark on the planning profession. The Moses recommendation for reorganization of the state government have form the keystone of legislation pass in 1926 to change the state 's bureaucracy finally. And with his appointment a the New York Secretary of State in 1927 , Robert Moses be rapidly become one of the state 's most powerful figures. His power diminish when Franklin D. Roosevelt , with whom he have never be on good term and with whom he be later to feud bitterly , be elect Governor in 1928. Mr. Roosevelt force Mr. Moses to relinquish his Secretary of State title. But the immense popularity of Mr. Moses ' facility , many of which , like Jones Beach , be finally open to the public by the end of the decade , give him a degree of political resilience he would have otherwise lack - and permit him to hold onto his park jobs. Drafted Park Legislation In 1933 , still active on the state level , Mr. Moses be invite to join the new administration of Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia in New York City , a head of a new , unified City Parks Department and head of the Triborough Bridge Authority , a new organization charge with build the Triborough Bridge. Mr. Moses himself draft the legislation unify the five borough park department to create his new job. He begin a massive building program , take advantage of Federal and state unemployment fund that become available in the Depression. Early in 1934 Mr. Moses advertise for architect to assist in public-works project ; by dawn the next morning , a line of unemployed architect in front of Parks Department headquarters on Fifth Avenue stretch for two blocks. Within a few month , 1,700 project , range from park bench repair to new golf course to a rebuilt Central Park Zoo , have be finished. The New York Times comment editorially that Mr. Moses ' achievement `` seem little short of miraculous. '' Soon Mr. Moses ' work begin to spew out even fast , a he drive himself and the staff of his disparate organization harder. A man of extraordinary physical energy , Mr. Moses work 15 hour a day or more , yet rarely a day pass in which he do not set aside time for his favorite activity , swimming. He habitually leave an envelope full of work he have do late at night for an assistant to pick up first thing in the morning , and it usually contain more work than most men finish in an entire day. He maintain several office , one of which be in his limousine ; so eager be he to use every minute that he often hold meeting in his car , take his guest along in whatever direction Mr. Moses happen to be going. When Mr. Moses have finish talk with his guest , a second limousine , which have be follow , would pick up the guest and take him back to his office a Mr. Moses continue on to his destination in the first car. Although he accept a salary from only a few of his position , Mr. Moses use expense account lavishly. He be the nation 's first great builder of highway , but ironically he never learn to drive a car himself , and he maintain a staff of chauffeur on 24-hour call. He have office throughout the city and state , with personal staff in each , and in many there be private dining room with chef at the ready. By the mid-30 's , his output in the city alone have reach an extraordinary level. The Triborough Bridge , by far his big project up to that point , be complete in 1936 , a crucial link in the Moses network of highway and regional parks. In the 1930 's he build hundred of playground , 10 swimming-pool complex , the Grand Central Parkway and the Interborough , Laurelton , Gowanus and Henry Hudson Parkways , among others. He build the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge and the West Side Highway and the 79th Street Boat Basin. Badly Beaten in Election The only break Mr. Moses take from his hectic building activity be in 1934 , when he accept the Republican nomination for Governor. He be not a meek candidate - his speech often include hostile attack on his opponent , Gov. Herbert H. Lehman. But he antagonize the voter , and lose by an enormous margin. By the time of the election , Mr. Moses have move sharply to the right , a political stance he be to retain for the rest of his life. Indeed , he often use his politics a a mean of attack the architecture and the planning professional with whom he disagree ; he call Frank Lloyd Wright a man who `` be regard in Russia a our great builder , '' say that planner , in general , be `` socialist '' and call Lewis Mumford `` an outspoken revolutionary. '' But Mr. Mumford , who be never a fan of Mr. Moses , nonetheless admit that `` in the 20th century the influence of Robert Moses on the city of America be great than that of any other person. '' Built to His Own Tastes If Mr. Moses ' politics be conservative , so be his tastes. He be a cultivated man - he could quote liberally from Shakespeare by memory - and he often fill his speech with quotation from the English poets. Once Mr. Moses subtly insult President Roosevelt with a reference to an obscure remark of Dr. Johnson 's about how patron frequently try to steal credit from the real creator of works. But so far a the shaping of his own creation be concern , Mr.Moses have a deep distrust of the avant-garde , and he seek traditional design in the architecture he build and in the sculpture he instal in his parks. And what be build be always decide on the basis of his personal taste ; architect would often report that Mr. Moses reject nearly finish schemes merely because their stylistic quirk do not please him. Most of Mr. Moses ' public housing be design in the bland style of such architecture in the 40 's and 50 's , when monotonous , sterile tower in open space be the rule for low-income residences. The care Mr. Moses lavish on the design of Jones Beach and his early parkway tend not to show itself in the architectural plan for his public housing ; a with many builder of public housing , he be concern more with order and with number of apartment unit than with make building that would relate to their occupant ' way of living. The general model for such housing be the 1920 's plan for the rebuilding of Paris by Le Corbusier , which call for a city of tower surround by park and divide by highway instead of traditional streets. Mr. Moses , like so many American planner , come to the Le Corbusier approach not for reason of esthetic but for reason of efficiency. An Architectural Plateau But Mr. Moses ' architectural taste do not change substantially with other kind of project in his late years. The New York Coliseum at Columbus Circle be a gray brick box of the sort of undistinguished design that suggest government building of the 50 's , and neither Lincoln Center , Shea Stadium nor the New York World 's Fair have ever be consider to have make major mark architecturally. In the 40 's and 50 's , Mr. Moses ' activity intensified. His Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority suffer one major defeat - his plan for a Battery bridge crossing be build a a tunnel because of public opposition to a bridge block the harbor view. But he expand his activity into other areas. He play a crucial role in the negotiation to bring the United Nations to New York City and to convince John D. Rockefeller to obtain the organization 's East River site ; he be active on , and often control , the City Planning Commission ; he come to dominate the city's Housing Authority , and he obtain for himself another new `` umbrella '' title : City Construction Coordinator , give him authority over virtually every public construction project in the city of New York. But by the 50 's , while Mr. Moses ' remarkable energy be far from exhaust , many of his idea - which have not change substantially in all the year he have be active - be no longer convincing. He lose a bitter battle in 1959 with Joseph Papp , head of the New York Shakespeare Festival , over permit free Shakespeare performance in city parks. And community protest occur over the route for his Cross Bronx Expressway , which require the demolition of at least 1,500 apartment in a one-mile stretch alone. Mr. Moses do not bow to the Bronx protest ; he refuse to switch to an alternative route that would have take away only a few dozen buildings. But the fight be see by many observer a an early chink in Mr. Moses ' armor. A small , but more successful , protest have be mount by wellto-do resident of West 67th Street in 1956 against a Moses scheme to replace a tree-filled play area in Central Park with a parking lot. The event be a severe blow to Mr. Moses ' image : the man who begin his career a a champion of park be be attack a a destroyer of them. Projects Run Into Snags At the same time two more Moses-conceived project - a mid-Manhattan Expressway and the Lower Manhatan Expressway - begin to run into snags. Ultimately they would never be build at all. Neither would another favorite Moses scheme that come up against the objection of a late generation of environmentalist , his plan for a bridge to cross the Long Island Sound between Rye , N.Y. , and Oyster Bay , L.I. Mr. Moses ' reputation be also damage by the Manhattantown urban renewal scandal of the 50 's , in which private developer , to whom the city have sell tenement at a reduced rate with the understand that their site would be clear and new housing erect , simply continue to operate the tenement , milk them for high rents. While Mr. Moses be never himself charge with profiteering , associate of his be implicate in the scandals. And connect to the scandal be a grow public resentment of relocation of tenant from slum clearance sit - a process that Mr. Moses be also in charge of. The Manhattantown scandal also give Mr. Moses his first major taste of press disapproval. Most of the city 's newspaper have be staunch Moses supporter over the year , and editorial support for Moses park and highway project have play a significant role in keep the public , and hence the state 's politician , on Mr. Moses ' side in many a controversy. But editorial writer be take aback by the urban-renewal scandal , and the nearly universal support that Mr. Moses have be receive be sharply curtailed. He do nonetheless get an enormous amount of housing actually build in those year - as well a start other slum-clearance project that would have almost total public support , such a the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts on the Upper West Side. But the urban renewal scandal be perhaps his most serious setback , and in 1959 an opportunity arose for a graceful exit : the presidency of the 1964-65 New York World 's Fair be offer to him. The fair be Mr. Moses ' last major accomplishment , and it be do in typical Moses style , with lavish public relation and elaborate new buildings. The fair be not , however , a total success either esthetically or financially , and Mr. Moses ' dream of convert it Flushing Meadows site into an elaborate permanent park have to be scale down considerably. Mr. Moses have be require to give up all of his official position with the City of New York in 1959 , when he assume the presidency of the fair. He lose most of his state job in 1962 , when Governor Rockefeller , to Mr. Moses ' surprise , accept his resignation , which have be offer merely in protest over a disagreement. His last significant hold on power be lose in 1968 , when the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority be merge into Governor Rockefeller 's new Metropolitan Transportation Authority. Mr. Moses be offer the role of `` consultant '' to the new agency , which permit him to maintain his office , secretary and chauffeur , but give him no real power. The Curtain Comes Down And thus , quietly , the active career of one of the nation 's most powerful public official come to an end. Mr. Moses ' name be virtually a household word , not only in New York but also around the nation , first a a fighter for park and open space and later a a name that have come to symbolize the sweeping , total approach to urban renewal that he favored. In 1915 Mr. Moses marry Mary Louise Sims , a secretary at the Bureau of Municipal Research , his first place of employment. They have two daughter , Barbara Olds of Greenwich , Conn. , and Jane Collins of Babylon , L.I. After his first wife 's death in 1966 , Mr. Moses marry Mary Grady , who have be a staff member at the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority. The Moseses live at 1 Gracie Terrace in Manhattan and in a small house in Gilgo Beach , L.I. , which he have obtain year before when he first begin to lay out the park and parkway system of Long Island. A funeral service will be hold at St. Peter 's Episcopal Church in Bay Shore , L.I. , at 11 A.M. tomorrow .