October 7 , 1981 OBITUARY Anwar el-Sadat , the Daring Arab Pioneer of Peace with Israel By ERIC PACE `` Sadat ! Sadat ! '' ten of thousand of Cairenes chant at the grin figure in the open limousine. `` Sadat ! The man of peace ! '' It be the night of Nov. 21 , 1977. President Anwar el-Sadat have just return from his epochal journey to Jerusalem. Egypt 's people be give their frenzied approval to what his trip have achieve - an Egyptian-Israeli thaw that set the stage for the peace treaty of 1979. What make Mr. Sadat into such a catalytic force in Middle Eastern history be a display of courage and flexibility that transform what have seem to be an average Arab officer-turned-potentate. Unlike so many of his brother Arab leader , he be willing to ignore past Arab-Israeli hatreds. Unlike them all , he be dare enough to do what have be unthinkable in the anguished world of Arab politics - to extend the hand of peace to the Israeli foe. Reversing Egypt 's longstanding policy , he proclaim his willingness to accept Israel 's existence a a sovereign state. Admiration and Hatred Then , where so many Middle East negotiator have fail , he succeed , along with Presidents Carter and Reagan and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel , in keep the improbable rapprochement alive. In the process he earn himself , in addition to the Nobel Peace Prize , the admiration of Americans , Israelis and other supporter of a Middle East settlement. But he also draw outpouring of hatred from Palestinians and other Arabs who felt he be a traitor to their struggle against Israel. And he be unable to quash dissidence in his impoverished , seethe homeland. He often say he want to bequeath democratic institution to his people , but in recent week he stag a dictatorial crackdown on militant Moslems and Coptic Christians as well a secular political opponents. And he claim imperially - but hollowly , a it turn out - to have put an end to `` lack of discipline in any way or form. '' The Treaty Eleven day before Mr. Sadat make his trip to Jerusalem , he say in Cairo that he be willing to go to `` the end of the earth , '' and even to the Israeli Parliament , in the cause of peace. The Israeli Government make known that he be welcome in Jerusalem , and after complex negotiation he fly there , although a state of war still exist between the two nations. His eye be moist and his lip taut with suppressed emotion a he arrive , but his Arabic be firm and resonant when , hour later , he tell the hush Israeli Parliament , `` If you want to live with u in this part of the world , in sincerity I tell you that we welcome you among u with all security and safety. '' Praising Mr. Sadat 's initiative , Prime Minister Begin say , `` We , the Jews , know how to appreciate such courage. '' Mr. Sadat 's flexibility , he say later , stem from his solitary confinement a a political prisoner in cell 54 of Cairo Central Prison in 1947 and 1948. `` My contemplation of life and human nature in that seclude place taught me that he who can not change the very fabric of his thought will never be able to change reality and will never , therefore , make any progress , '' he write in his memoir , `` In Search of Identity , '' which appear in 1978 , eight year after he assume the Presidency. Pact Signed at White House His willingness to make such a change lead to the treaty that , after many snag , he and Prime Minister Begin sign at the White House on March 26 , 1979. Before reach agreement Mr. Sadat and Mr. Begin have drawn-out and sometimes acrimonious negotiation , for which they be the joint winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1978. The treaty provide that Israel return to Egypt in phase the entire Sinai Peninsula , which the Israelis seize in the 1967 war. It also envision internal autonomy for the Palestinian Arabs of the West Bank of the Jordan River under continue Israeli control. The Egyptian and Israeli Governments be help and prod by the Nixon and Carter Administrations , and Henry A. Kissinger , after many meeting with Mr. Sadat , write that the Egyptian leader `` possess that combinat ion of insight and courage which mark a great statesman. '' The former Secretary of State continue in his book , `` White House Years '' : `` He have the boldness to go to a war no one thought he could sustain ; the moderation to move to peace immediately afterward ; and the wisdom to reverse attitude harden by decades. '' Used Harmony a a Technique In dealing with Israel and the United States , Mr. Sadat strive to create a harmonious mood that would make it difficult for others to disagree with him. His most audacious use of that technique be the Jerusalem visit. That gesture and the treaty with Israel bring him hatred and vituperation from many Arab leaders. There be particular outrage because the treaty do not provide a timetable for full self-determination for the West Bank Palestinians that would lead eventually to an independent Palestinian state. Self-determination be originally Mr. Sadat 's minimum demand ; when he settle for less , he find himself virtually isolate in the Arab world. Saudi Arabia 's leader , with whom he have achieve warm relation , cut back their aid to the Egyptian arm force and the economy , which Mr. Sadat have try to strengthen by encourage business. The Saudi action make Egypt more dependent than ever on support from the United States , with which Mr. Sadat have also be careful to cultivate bond of friendship. Under his predecessor , Gamal Abdel Nasser , Cairo 's relation with the Americans , a with the Saudis , be hostile much of the time. Mr. Sadat win moral and political support from Washington as well a large-scale economic and military aid , and in 1975 he become the first Egyptian President to make a state visit to the United States. He return again during the treaty negotiation , and President Carter go to Egypt , where throng hail him and his host. Treaty Welcomed by Egyptians Many of the 40 million Egyptians , have go through four painful and expensive war with Israel , be enthusiastic about the peace treaty. Throngs of well-wisher dance , wave sign and throw rise petal in celebration. Under the treaty Israel 's withdrawal of it civilian and military force from Sinai be to be carry out in stage over three years. Two-thirds of the area be to be hand back within nine month after the exchange of formal ratification documents. In return for the Israeli pullback , Mr. Sadat agree to establish peace. After the nine-month withdrawal be finish , the two Governments be to take up `` normal and friendly relation '' in the diplomatic , economic and cultural sphere , among others. The early withdrawal be complete , and the final phase be schedule for next April. `` This be certainly one of the happy moment of my life , '' Mr. Sadat , deeply move , say at the signing ceremony. `` In all the step I take I be merely express the will of a nation. I be proud of my people and of belong to them. '' Expels Soviet Advisers Another of Mr. Sadat 's major shift in policy be his departure from Nasser 's longstanding pro-Soviet stance. In July 1972 he abruptly order the withdrawal of the 25,000 Soviet military specialist and adviser in Egypt. By so do , he later write , `` I want to tell the whole world that we be always our own masters. '' The change in the relationship with Washington and Moscow be make after Mr. Sadat have conclude that the Arabs could not achieve a satisfactory end to their confrontation with Israel as long a they be ally closely with the Soviet Union while Israel have the all out support of the United States. He be able to make such sharp policy shift in part because for much of his late tenure a President , his power do not seem to be seriously challenge at home. A career officer and longtime confidant of Nasser , he be name Vice President in 1969 , come out ahead in a brief power struggle after Nasser 's death in 1970 and be formally make President by a rubber-stamp vote of member of the Arab Socialist Union , the only legal political organization. He consolidate and enlarge his power in the spring of 1971 when , with the aid of the army , he forestall what he say be a coup and arrest his opponents. Called Himself a Peasant Mr. Sadat be widely though not universally popular with the Egyptian people , with whom , in his highly emotional way , he felt a warm and almost mystic bond. In `` In Search of Identity , '' he proudly call himself `` a peasant born and bring up on the bank of the Nile. '' Early in his presidency , Mr. Sadat enhance his popularity by eliminate many of the police-state control that Nasser have rely on to keep himself in power in the year after the officer ' revolt that bring down the monarchy in 1952. In 1973 Mr. Sadat do much to build national self-respect when he order Egyptian troop to cross the Suez Canal ; they manage to overrun the heavily fortify Israeli position on the east bank within a few hours. That confidence linger although the Israelis counterattack , put a large tank force on the west bank. As an administrator , he concern himself with broad line of policy and for the most part leave it to his subordinate to carry it out. Though an emotional man , he could conceal his feeling and be devious. He repeatedly lie his way out of trouble when he be a young officer plot a military revolt , and a President he pull off a master stroke of deception when he conceal his preparation for the 1973 war , which begin with a surprise attack on Israel. Mr. Sadat have many quirks. He dislike office and rarely appear at Abdin Palace , Cairo 's equivalent of the White House , prefer to work in his modest villa and in Government-owned rest house around the country. He wear elegantly cut British-style suit , though even a President he like to stroll around his native village in a long Arab shirt. He never learn to dance. He could be the high-toned statesman one minute , relish his association with other world leader , and the humdrum homebody the next , always begin the day with a dose of Eno 's Fruit Salts , a British-made aid to digestion. First Steps Mohammed Anwar el-Sadat be bear Dec. 25 , 1918 , in Mit Abul Kom , a cluster of mud-brick building in Minufiya Province between Cairo and Alexandria. He be one of the 13 child of Mohammed el-Sadat , a Government clerk , and his part-Sudanese wife , a heritage manifest in the boy 's skin , darker than the average Egyptian's. Minufiya lie in the fertile Nile Delta , it irrigated field produce rich crop of flax and cotton. In those lush surroundings young Anwar 's early year pass happily. He write later that he have especially relish the sunrise hour `` when I go out with score of boy and men , young and old , take our cattle and beast of burden to the fields. '' His first schooling be at the hand of a kindly Islamic cleric , Sheik Abdul-Hamid , who instill in him a deep and lasting faith in Islam ; a an adult Mr. Sadat bore a dark mark on his forehead , the result of repeatedly touch his head to the floor in prayer. Too Poor to Buy Store Bread In 1925 the father be transfer to Cairo , and the family move into a small house on the outskirt of the capital , not far from Kubba Palace , one of the residence of Egyptian kings. Anwar give early evidence of the audacity he repeatedly show in late life , steal apricot from the royal orchard. Though the elder Mr. Sadat rise to be a senior clerk , the family be poor , so poor that it could not afford to buy bakery bread. In his memoir President Sadat say that his early experience of village life , with it `` fraternity , cooperation and love , '' give him the self-confidence to make his way in the big city , `` It deepen my feeling of inner superiority , a feeling which have never leave me and which , I come to realize , be an inner power independent of all material resources. '' In time the proud schoolboy , like other idealistic Egyptians of his generation , come to have a burn political desire : he want his country freed of the control of Britain , which have maintain troop there and exercise sway in other way since the decline of Ottoman Turkish power late in the 19th century. Wanting to play a role in Egypt 's future , Mr. Sadat decide to become an officer. Despite his family 's lack of influence , he manage to gain admission to the Royal Military Academy , which be once a preserve of the aristocracy but have begin take cadet from the middle and low classes. Graduating in 1938 , he be assign to a signal corp installation near the capital. From that central location , a he later tell it , he become active in the formation of an organization of officer who want to mount an armed revolt against the British presence. Britain a the Main Foe When World War II break out , Captain Sadat continue to regard Britain a the main enemy and take part in a clandestine attempt to fly a former Chief of Staff , Gen. Aziz el-Masri , out of the country after the Germans have send a message ask him to proceed to Iraq to work against British interest there. The plane crash , the attempt fail and Captain Sadat be arrest and interrogate but later be release for lack of evidence. Undeterred , Captain Sadat make contact with two Nazi agent who pass the evening watch the dancer at the Kit Kat , a lead Cairo nightclub. Their heavy spending bring them under surveillance , they be arrest and interrogate , and they implicate their contact. As a result a swarm of British and Egyptian detective and intelligence officer search Captain Sadat 's home. His hidden cache of homemade explosive go undetected , b ut he be arrest and send to a succession of jails. While in jail , he profit from the time by polish his English and learn German. In 1944 Captain Sadat go on a hunger strike and be transfer to a prison hospital , where he dodge his guard , jump into a friend 's car and escaped. He then grow a beard and live a a fugitive for a year , help for a time with work on a resthouse be build for King Farouk , who later be to be oust by the junta of which Captain Sadat be a part. Free to Plot Once Again With the end of the war come the lifting of the martial-law regulation under which Captain Sadat have be detain , enable him to resume his real identity in freedom. He also resume plot against the British and their Egyptian supporters. After a fellow conspirator assassinate Amin Osman Pasha , an aristocrat who favor the British presence , Captain Sadat be try a a conspirator and acquit in 1948. He work for a while in a Cairo publishing house and in 1950 get himself reinstate in the army. He be soon promote , thanks to help from the dissident officer ' clandestine network , the Free Officers Organization , which have be grow in size and power under the leadership of an old friend , Lieutenant Colonel Nasser. The colonel summon Major Sadat to a rendezvous in Cairo on July 22 , 1952 , say the long-awaited uprising , now focus on King Farouk , be to take place soon. When Nasser do not appear , the major take his wife to the movies. Arriving home late in the evening , they find a note from Nasser say operation be begin that night and direct Major Sadat to join the revolutionaries. `` My heart leapt , '' Mr. Sadat recall in one of his book , `` Revolt on the Nile. '' `` I tear off my civilian clothes and throw on my uniform. In five minute I be at the wheel of my car. '' At army headquarters , where the rebel have take control , Nasser tell him to take over the Cairo radio at dawn and to broadcast a proclamation announce the coup. Major Sadat carry out that historic task after wait for the daily reading from the Koran to be completed. The revolution lead to the exile of Farouk , the withdrawal of British troop from Egypt and , before long , the emergence of Nasser a strongman and President. Was Underestimated Although Mr. Sadat fill high post during the Nasser era , his ability be underestimate by many influential men in the Nasser entourage. For more than a decade he be give a succession of job that be highly visible but of secondary importance. He serve a a member of the Revolutionary Command Council , secretary general of an Islamic congress , editor of two newspaper , minister of state in the Cabinet ; deputy chairman , chairman and speaker of the National Assembly and chairman of the Afro-Asian Solidarity Council. When Nasser name Mr. Sadat Vice President , it be widely think that he get the job because it be largely ceremonial and have no real power , but supporter of Mr. Sadat have contend that Nasser choose him to be his successor. Nasser , at odds with many other longtime associate , retain warm relation with Mr. Sadat. Upon Nasser 's death of a heart attack , Mr. Sadat , a the only Vice President , automatically become Acting President under the Constitution. In that office and in his first month a President he have to share power in a collective leadership with others ; some colleague support him for the presidency because they think he could be manipulated. In those first week many Egyptians , especially student and young intellectual , find it difficult to take him seriously. With his grin , his fancy suit and his frequent hollow-sounding vow to wage war on Israel , he do not seem to be a strong and purposeful leader. Power He show his strength of will when , after a few month , he move to consolidate his power by dismiss and imprison two of the most powerful figure in the regime , Vice President Ali Sabry , who have close tie with Soviet official , and Sharawy Gomaa , the Interior Minister , who control the secret police. Mr. Sadat enhance his popularity by display an intuitive sense of what the people wanted. He be do what they want when he cut back the power of the hated secret police , when he oust the Soviet military expert and when he prepare for war with Israel. Nevertheless , Golda Meir , Israel 's Prime Minister when he take office , correctly appraise him , she later write , a a `` reasonable man who might soberly consider the benefit '' of end the confronta tion with Israel. Early in 1973 Mr. Sadat decide to go to war against Israel. He be be criticize by student and others a an ineffective leader , and he conclude that it be necessary to break the Egyptian-Israeli deadlock. `` If we do n't take our case into our own hand , there will be no movement , '' he say in an interview. `` The time have come for a shock. The resumption of the battle be now inevitable. '' 'Landmark ' for Egyptians After Moscow approve a limited Egyptian invasion of Sinai and after more Soviet arm arrive , Mr. Sadat order the attack on Oct. 6. Egyptian troop surge across the canal and Syrian troop strike Israel from their side. In the fighting that follow , the Syrians be throw back and the Israelis counterattack fiercely , encircle Suez and carve out a broad bridgehead west of the canal. Despite Israel 's strong showing , Mr. Sadat , in his memoir , maintain that `` the Egyptian military performance be a landmark in world military history '' and that `` if the United States have n't intervene in the war and fully support Israel , the situation could have be far different. '' The war spur Washington to work to ease tension in the Middle East ; Mr. Sadat be soon visit by Mr. Kissinger. The two hit it off from the first and , Mr. Sadat write , begin `` a relationship of mutual understanding culminating and crystallizing in what we come to describe a a 'peace process. ' `` Before long Mr. Kissinger be able to work out a disengagement agreement between Egypt and Israel that allow the Egyptians to take back a strip of Sinai. Mr. Sadat welcome American participation and say later , `` No one else except the United States can play this role of mediator between two side that harbor intense hate for one another - a gulf of bad blood , violence and massacres. '' The agreement , sign in January 1974 , be follow by month of `` shuttle diplomacy '' by Mr. Kissinger and by a second limited Egyptian-Israeli accord in September 1975. Efforts toward a more comprehensive peace agreement bore no fruit in the next month , however , although the United States and the Soviet Union agree on Oct. 1 , 1977 , on principle to govern a Geneva conference on the Middle East. Syria continue to resist such a conference. Need for a New Approach At that point Mr. Sadat , not want to let Moscow and Damascus determine the pace of event , decide that a new approach be needed. Disregarding objection from his advi sers , he make the trip to Jerusalem. He tell the Israeli Parliment that Egypt 's willingness to `` welcome you among u '' amount to `` a decisive historical change , '' but he continue to insist that the Israelis withdraw from occupy Arab land and recognize what he call ed the right of the Palestinians. He claim a new-found friendship with Mr. Begin and set in motion the first high-level Egyptian-Israeli peace talks. When Mr. Sadat return to Cairo , he tell his people that `` all barrier of doubt , mistrust and fear be shattered. '' But the negotiation bogged down over difference on the Palestinians and other issue ; by January 1978 they be deadlocked , with Mr. Sadat denounce the Israelis a stiff-necked. That deadlock prevail until Mr. Sadat meet with Mr. Begin and President Carter in September 1978 at the Camp David conference call by Mr. Carter. Two week of talk produce signed agreement on what be call `` a framework for peace. '' After further effort Mr. Carter fly to Jerusalem and then to Cairo on March 13 , 1979 , with compromise proposal to break yet another deadlock , and Mr. Sadat approve them quickly in a meeting at a Cairo airport. Later that month Mr. Sadat and Mr. Begin sign the treaty , end 30 year of Egyptian-Israeli confrontation. `` Let u work together , '' Mr. Sadat say , paraphrase the Prophet Isaiah , `` until the day come when they beat their sword into plowshare and their spear into prune hooks. '' In the hard-line Arab protest against the treaty , 17 Arab nation adopt political and economic sanction against his Government. Yet his isolation in the Arab world do not undercut his domestic support ; he deftly reap political profit from the isolation by underscore the idea , widespread in Egypt , that other Arabs have grow wealthy while the Egyptians have bear the burden of the four wars. Economy Displayed Strength His popularity benefit also from the fairly strong condition of the economy , which have seem on the brink of disaster after Egypt 's catastrophic defeat in the 1967 war. By late 1979 the economic growth rate have reach 9 percent a year and be one of the high in the developing world , thanks largely to more than $ 1 billion a year in American aid. President Sadat 's relation with the Americans and the Israelis , despite some intense friction , remain relatively harmonious in the month after the signing of the treaty. That good will pay off when , a a gesture of friendship , Mr. Begin fulfil one provision of the treaty ahead of time , return a 580-square-mile tract of Sinai to Egypt on Nov. 15 , 1979 , instead of on Jan. 25 , a scheduled. Yet no real progress be make in month of Egyptian-Israeli negotiation on home rule for the Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Early in 1980 Mr. Sadat hold inconclusive talk with Mr. Begin at Aswan , in upper Egypt. Israeli force withdraw from more of Sinai , leave two-thirds of the area evacuated. The Israeli-Egyptian border be declare open , and the two country exchange ambassadors. In March 1980 Mr. Sadat draw new criticism at home and in unfriendly Arab capital when the deposed Shah of Iran , who be ill , move to Cairo , accept a longstanding invitation. As the new decade get under way , President Sadat seem confident of his policy , but event seem to have take a somewhat unfavorable turn. Cairo 's isolation in the Arab world and elsewhere in the third world be gall , and the almost total reliance on Washington for food , aid and weapon be a source of concern.Inflation be run at a rate of 30 percent a year , there be sign of increase repression , and Israel 's policy of multiply settlement on the occupied West Bank intensify pessimism. In April 1980 President Sadat visit Washington to discuss the Israeli settlement with President Carter. From there he denounce the Israeli policy a `` unfounded , ill-conceived and illegal. '' Dissent In the final month of Mr. Sadat 's life , a his intricate and sometimes stormy dialogue with Israel continue , there be repeated expression of internal opposition to his rule. They continue , and mount , despite his general popularity and his continued use of such mean a government food-subsidies to dampen disconent. Early this year Egypt 's leftist National Unionist Progressive Party publicly denounce Mr. Sadat 's policy toward Israel. `` This so-called normalization with the Israeli enemy be do at the expense of the Arabs and be oppose by a grow number of Egyptians , '' a party statement said. In June a Government prosecutor say a former Egyptian Chief of Staff , Lieut. Gen. Saad Eddin el-Shazli , and 18 other Egyptian dissident live abroad have plot to overthrow Mr. Sadat. They be say to have be give $ 2.8 million by Libya at Syria 's urging. And the head of the Egyptian Bar Association complain that Mr. Sadat 's regime be try to dismember the a sociation 's leadership because it have oppose the peace treaty with Israel. Yet Mr. Sadat continue to give much of his attention to foreign affairs. In June he meet inconclusively with Mr. Begin , for the first time in 17 months. In the meeting in an abandon restaurant at Sharm el Sheik in Sinai , the Israeli leader reject Mr. Sadat 's appeal to halt Israeli attack on Palestinian guerrilla base in Lebanon. Denounced Bombing of Iraq A few day later Mr. Sadat be denounce Israel for it bombing of an Iraqi nuclear reactor , which he call an `` unlawful , provocative '' act. It be embarrass to him because Mr. Begin have tell him nothing about it. On Aug. 3 Egypt and Israel sign an agremeent establish a 2,500-member international peacekeeping force in Sinai to police their peace treaty. On Aug. 5 and 6 Mr. Sadat hold friendly but inconclusive talk with President Reagan in Washington. And on Aug. 25 and 26 he and Mr. Begin meet yet again , this time in the Egyptian port of Alexandria , to try to resolve problem that have delay normalization of relations. But then Mr. Sadat turn his full attention to internal affair , evidently act in response to information about the extent of dissidence in his perennially unstable land. Citing Moslem and other opposition to his regime , he depart markedly from the largely velvet-glove treatment of opponent that have characterize his 11 year of rule. He crack down hard , detain 1,600 opponent , mostly Moslem militant , partly in response to bloody riot in June between Moslems and member of Egypt 's Coptic Christian minority. After a hastily call referendum , his Government report that 99.45 percent of the voter endorse it measure to curb secular as well a religious dissidence. Moslem dissident resent the rapprochement with Israel and want a more Islamic cast to Egypt 's government. 'Suffering ' From Democracy At a news conference Sept. 9 , Mr. Sadat make a wry reference to his country 's heritage of violence and to the opposition to his rule. To a foreign reporter who ask an impertinent question , he say , `` In other time I would have shoot you , but it be democracy I be really suffer from as much a I be suffer from the opposition. '' Also last month Mr. Sadat accuse a dozen former Egyptian official of `` connive '' with the Soviet Union to destabilize his Government. He order the expulsion of more than 1,000 Soviet citizen , include the Soviet Ambassador , Vladimir P. Polyakov. The Government-supervised Egyptian press report that Egyptian intelligence have uncover anti-Government plotting by Soviet agent in league with Egyptian religious extremist , leftist , Nasserites , educator , journalist and others. Later in the month - even a official of Egypt , Israel and the United States hold talk in Cairo seek a plan for self-rule for Palestinians - Mr. Sadat 's Government take further action to quell dissidence. Among other measure , uniformed guard in university campus be reinforced. A sweeping investigation of the bureaucracy be decreed. Said Indiscipline Had Ended In a widely quote speech , Mr. Sadat assert , in what prove to be a display of overconfidence , that all of Egypt 's internal indiscipline have come to a halt. `` Lack of discipline in any way or form , '' he say , in a two-hour televised address , `` in the street , in the Government , in the university , in the secondary school , in the factory , in the public sector , in the private sector , this all have end , it have ended. '' In Israel , however , a long-time observer of Mr. Sadat be already speak of the possibility that his work might be snuff out. The Israeli Chief of Staff , Lieut. Gen. Raphael Eitan , say bleakly , `` There be trouble in Egypt , and it be possible that President Sadat will go and everything will come to an end. '' Mr. Sadat be divorce from his first wife , who be from his native village ; they have three daughters. His second wife , Jihan , have play a strong role in public affair , particularly concern the condition of woman and children. The four child of his second marriage be a son , Gamal , name for Nasser , and three daughter , Lubna , Noha and Jihan. `` In Egypt , personality have always be more important than political programs. '' - `` Revolt on the Nile , '' 1957. `` Do n't ask me to make diplomatic relation with them. Never. Never. Leave it to the come generation to decide that , not me. '' - On Israel in 1970 , a few month before he become President. `` The situation here - mark my word - will be bad than Vietnam. '' - In a magazine interview , July 1973. `` We have always felt the sympathy of the world , but we would prefer the respect of the world to sympathy without respect. '' - In a speech to the People 's Assembly after the first attack of the Yom Kippur war , Oct. 6 , 1973. `` Let every girl , let every woman , let every mother here - and there in my country - know we shall solve all our problem through negotiation around the table rather than start war. '' - During his visit to Israel , November 1977. `` I have a great ally in Israel that I depend upon. Do you know who ? The Israeli mother. '' - Commenting on the vote of approval by Israel 's Parliament of the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel , March 22 , 1979. `` In all the step I take I be not perform a personal mission. I be merely express the will of a nation. I be proud of my people and of belong to them. `` Today a new dawn be emerge out of the darkness of the past. `` Let u work together until the day come when they beat their sword into plowshare and their spear into prune hooks. '' - At the peace treaty sign between Egypt and Israel at the White House , March 26 , 1979. `` There will be no barrier between our people , no more anxiety or insecurity , not more suffering or suspicion. '' - Meeting with Menachem Begin at Beersheba , May 27 , 1979. `` It be democracy I be really suffer from as much a I be suffer from the opposition. '' -Speaking to foreign journalist of unrest in Egypt , Sept. 9 , 1981 .