August 31 , 1982 OBITUARY Ingrid Bergman , Winner of 3 Oscars Is Dead By MURRAY SCHUMACH Ingrid Bergman , the three-time Academy Award-winning actress who exemplify wholesome beauty and nobility to countless moviegoer , die of cancer Sunday at her home in London on her 67th birthday. Miss Bergman have be ill for eight years. Despite this , she play two of her most demanding role in this period , a concert pianist in Ingmar Bergman 's `` Autumn Sonata '' and Golda Meir , the Israeli Prime Minister in `` A Woman Called Golda. '' her last role. Miss Bergman say in an interview earlier this year that she be determine not to let her illness prevent her from enjoy the remainder of her life. `` Cancer victim who do n't accept their fate , who do n't learn to live with it , will only destroy what little time they have leave , '' she said. Miss Bergman add that she have to push herself to play the role of Golda Meir : `` I honestly do n't think I have it in me. But it have be a wonderful experience , a an actress and a a human be who be get more out of life than expected. '' Lars Schmidt , a Swedish producer from whom Miss Bergman be divorce in 1975 , be with her at the time of her death. Incandescent , the critic call Ingrid Bergman. Or radiant. Or luminous. They say her performance be sincere , natural. Sometimes a single adjective be not enough. One enraptured writer saw her a `` a breeze whipping over a Scandinavian peak. '' Kenneth Tynan need an essay before he distil her quality down to a sort of electric transmission of `` I need you '' that register instantly upon yearn audiences. At the heart of the Swedish star 's monumental box-office magnetism be the kind of rare beauty that Hollywood cameramen call `` bulletproof angle , '' mean it can be shoot from any angle. Her beauty be so remarkable that it sometimes seem to overshadow her considerable acting talent. The expressive blue eye , wide , fulllipped mouth , high cheekbone , soft chin and broad forehead project a quality that combine vulnerability and courage ; sensitivity and earthiness , and an unending flow of compassion. It all seem so natural that not until she be well into middle age , in Ingmar Bergman 's tax `` Autumn Sonata '' in 1978 , do many of her fan fully realize the talent , work and intelligence that be behind the performance that win her three Academy Awards. She be honor a best actress for her role in `` Gaslight '' in 1944 and `` Anastasia '' in 1956 , and a best support actress in `` Murder on the Orient Express '' in 1974. Different in Temperament In temperament , Miss Bergman be different from most Hollywood superstars. She do not indulge in tantrum or engage in harangue with directors. If she have a question about a script , she ask it without fuss. She could be count on to be letter perfect in her line before she face the camera. And during the interval between scene , her relax smile and hearty laugh be as unaffected a her low-heeled shoe , long walk stride and minimal makeup. Yet this even-tempered and successful actress , who be apparently happily marry , become involve in a scandal that rock the movie industry , force her to stay out of the United States for seven year and make her life as tempestuous a many of her roles. In a sense , she become a barometer of change moral value in the United States. In 1949 she fell in love with Roberto Rossellini , the Italian film director , and have a child by him before she could obtain a divorce from her husband , Dr. Peter Lindstrom , and marry the director. Symbol of Moral Perfection Before the scandal , million of Americans have be move by her performance in such box-office success a `` Intermezzo , '' `` For Whom the Bell Tolls , '' `` Gaslight , '' `` Spellbound , '' `` The Bells of St. Mary 's , '' `` Notorious '' and `` Casablanca , '' roles that have make her , somewhat to her annoyance , a symbol of moral perfection. `` I can not understand , '' she say , long before the scandal , `` why people think I 'm pure and full of nobleness. Every human be have shade of bad and good. '' Suddenly , in 1949 , the American public that have elevate her to the point of idolatry cast her down , vilify her and boycott her films. She be even condemn on the floor of the United States Senate. Then , seven year after she have fall from grace in this country , she return to gather new acclaim and honor for her acting , and she never again suffer any noticeable loss of favor a an actress or a a person. But she spend nearly all of her remain work life in Europe , sometimes for American movie companies. So complete be Miss Bergman 's victory that Senator Charles H. Percy , Republican of Illinois , enter into the Congressional Record , in 1972 , an apology for the attack make on her 22 year earlier in the Senate by Edwin C. Johnson , Democrat of Colorado. 'Had a Wonderful Life' By this time Miss Bergman have already express publicly her feeling and philosophy. Upon her return to the United States in 1956 , for the first time since her departure , she tell a jammed airport press conference , in English , Swedish , German , French and Italian : `` I have have a wonderful life. I have never regret what I did. I regret thing I do n't do. All my life I 've do thing at a moment 's notice. Those be the thing I remember. I be give courage , a sense of adventure and a little bit of humor. I do n't think anyone have the right to intrude in your life , but they do. I would like people to separate the actress and the woman. '' Though her marriage to Mr. Rossellini fell apart less than two year later , she win custody of their three child Robertino , Isabella and Ingrid ; she never change her attitude. And Miss Bergman continue to defend the film she make for him , though all be financial failure and receive poor review in this country. The Rossellini debacle create a myth that before she work for him she have only successes. Among her pre-Rossellini failure be `` Arch of Triumph , '' `` Joan of Arc '' and `` Under Capricorn , '' all of which come immediately before she go to work for Mr. Rossellini. Desire for Artistic Growth It be Miss Bergman 's lifelong desire for artistic growth that draw her to Mr. Rossellini. She have be deeply move by his film `` Open City '' and `` Paisan , '' which establish him a a major force in neorealism. Money have never be enough for Miss Bergman. `` You do n't act for money , '' she said. `` You do it because you love it , because you must. '' Even the Oscars she have win be not enough. On Broadway , her portrayal of Joan of Arc , in Maxwell Anderson 's `` Joan of Lorraine , '' win her an Antoinette Perry award , the high honor in the American theater. Audiences and critic could adore her love scene with Humphrey Bogart in `` Casablanca '' and with Cary Grant in `` Notorious. '' But praise , too , be not enough. `` There be a kind of act in the United States , '' she say many year later , `` especially in the movie , where the personality remain the same in every part. I like change as much a possible. '' Sought Out Rossellini This artistic need prompt her to write to Mr. Rossellini : `` I would make any sacrifice to appear in a film under your direction. '' He leap at the opportunity , rewrite a script he have intend for Anna Magnani , and go with Miss Bergman to the Italian island of Stromboli to make the film of that name. While this movie be be make , she ask her husband for a divorce so she could marry Mr. Rossellini. He try to block it , even after learn she be pregnant with the director 's child. The first of her three child with the director be bear , under a medium siege , in Italy , seven day before she be remarried. Dr. Lindstrom , a neurosurgeon , win custody of their daughter , Pia , who subsequently become a well-known television reporter. By 1957 , she and Mr. Rossellini be separate , but before that Miss Bergman have begin a new phase in her career. She make `` Anastasia '' for 20th Century-Fox and win her second Oscar in 1956 , play the mysterious woman who might or might not be the survive daughter of Czar Nicholas II. She then win a television Emmy award for her performance of the tormented governess in a dramatization of Henry James 's `` The Turn of the Screw. '' In 1958 she marry Lars Schmidt , a successful Swedish theatrical producer. Enjoyed All 3 Media Miss Bergman refuse to be draw into argument about act in movie , the theater and television. She enjoy all three. In the movie , she say , one act for one eye , the camera. In the theater , for a thousand eye , the theater audience. Television be `` wonderful , '' she say , allow for the frenzied schedule. Maturity strengthen her determination to be more selective in roles. This be one of the main reason she return to Broadway in 1967 , after a 21-year absence , in the role of a mother dislike by her son in Eugene O'Neill 's `` More Stately Mansions. '' She have meet the playwright in her Hollywood year , when , during a vacation from film , she play the prostitute in his `` Anna Christie '' in theater in New Jersey and on the West Coast. During another sabbatical from Hollywood , in 1940 , she have make her Broadway stage debut a Julie in `` Liliom , '' opposite Burgess Meredith. Miss Bergman 's next growth period , which include stage performance of work by George Bernard Shaw and Henrik Ibsen and the role of the vengeful millionaire in the film version of `` The Visit , '' be climax by the fulfillment of a 13-year effort to persuade Ingmar Bergman , the director , to let her work for him. In his `` Autumn Sonata , '' she give what she consider her fine performance , a a middle-aged concert pianist who , during a brief visit to her married daughter , play by Liv Ullmann , engage in prolonged and tearful confrontation that reveal a complex and sear love-hate relationship. She be nominate for her fourth Oscar for this 1978 movie , and she say it might be her last role. `` I do n't want to go down and play little part , '' she said. `` This should be the end. '' Miss Bergman always refuse to play any part that require her to be nude or seminude. Although she be oppose to movie censorship , she consider nudity , particularly in love scene , ugly , say : `` Since the beginning of time , good theater have exist without nudity. Why change now ? '' Born in Stockholm Miss Bergman be bear in Stockholm on Aug. 29 , 1915. Her mother , who be from Hamburg , Germany , die when Ingrid be three year old. As an only child , she learn to create imaginary friends. Her father , who have a camera shop , adore her and photograph her constantly , often in costume. He die when she be 13. She live briefly with an unmarried aunt and then with an uncle and aunt who have five children. At 17 , although she be tall and somewhat ungainly - she be 5 foot 9 inch and weigh about 135 pound - she audition successfully for the government-sponsored Royal Dramatic School. Within seven year she be one of the lead movie star in Sweden and have refuse several offer from Hollywood. Finally , in 1939 , at the age of 24 , Miss Bergman agree to do a film for David O. Selznick. It be `` Intermezzo , '' with Leslie Howard. She return to Sweden to her husband , who be then a dentist , and their daughter , Pia. The film be so successful that Mr. Selznick , convince he have find `` another Garbo , '' persuade her to return to Hollywood. Looking back on her career many year later , particularly on her feeling of youthful shyness and awkwardness , the actress say : `` I can do everything with ease on the stage , whereas in real life I feel too big and clumsy. So I do n't choose acting. It chose me. '' Miss Bergman be survive by her four child , who be report to be fly to London yesterday for the funeral. The funeral will be `` a very quiet , family affair , '' say Alfred Jackman , funeral director at Harrods , the London department store that be handle the arrangements. Mr. Jackman add , `` After cremation , her ash may be take back to Sweden . ''