October 10 , 1982 OBITUARY Anna Freud , Psychoanalyst , Dies in London at 86 By Reuters Anna Freud , daughter of Sigmund Freud and an eminent psychoanalyst in her own right , die at her London home today at the age of 86 , her family said. Focused on Child Analysis `` I start out a an elementary-school teacher. I change from that to the field of analysis and child analysis. From then on , I move constantly back and forth , from the theoretical study of these problem to their practical application. I agree that one have to have special luck to do this , and that most people do not have this. '' This be Anna Freud 's self-effacing summary of a long and productive life. It be true , of course , so far a it go ; but it obscure the fact that Miss Freud , eminent in her own right , virtually invent the systematic study of the emotional and mental life of the child and elaborate it in 50 year of observation , discussion and writing. She also understate her powerful role a the guardian and elucidator of her father 's revolutionary doctrine on the nature of the human psyche and it behavioral implications. Although Miss Freud be not alone in alter establish perception of child development , she be among the first to discern the significance of the secret wish and fear of the young , their phobia , obsession and nightmares. Earlier it be generally assume that child be arbitrarily motivate and that discipline be the sure path to healthy development. Stages of Emotional Development Miss Freud suggest that a child develop emotionally through a number of stage - the oral , anal , urethral and phallic sexual stage that Sigmund Freud have outline from circumstantial evidence. His argument for the existence of these stage be often fault because it have be base on the recollection of adult , and troubled one at that. Dr. Robert Coles of Harvard be among many who credit Miss Freud with prove one of her father 's basic hypothesis ; but there be others who doubt that her proof be more than self-serving , or who challenge Freudianism altogether. Even doubter , however , seem willing to agree that Miss Freud have indeed contribute to an understanding of the way child find to get along with their parent , sibling and friends. Two of her book be count essential for those who work with child - '' The Psychoanalytic Treatment of Children '' and `` Psychoanalysis for Teachers and Parents. '' Both be publish in the late 1920 's and be write with what Dr. Coles call `` a modesty of spirit. '' Worked With Dorothy Burlingham Another of her significant book be `` War and Children , '' write in collaboration with a friend , Dorothy T. Burlingham , and base on case study of the effect of World War II bomb on British children. It upset preconceived notion of child 's reactions. `` General sympathy have be arouse by the idea that little child , all innocence , should come into close contact with the horror of war , '' the author write , and then show by example that child be not at all sadden by the sight of destruction. `` Love for the parent be so great that it be a far great shock for a child to be suddenly separate from it mother than to have a house collapse on top of it , '' the book reported. `` It be surprising how little interest child show in siren , bomb , gun and allclears. '' Miss Freud and Miss Burlingham conclude that the world of the small child be pivot on the mother and that the child have little if any instinctive horror of combat , blood or destruction. Youngest of Six Freud Children Miss Freud , the young of six child , be bear in Vienna on Dec. 3 , 1895 , and be rear in comfortable bourgeois circumstances. Close to her father , who be in his late 40 's when she be grow up , Anna be keenly aware of the patriarchal figure that her blackbearded father cut , of his rather rigid routine and of his happy sense of fun. She be aware , too , of her father 's ostracism by the anti-Semitic scientific establishment in Vienna despite his standing a a neurologist , a hostility so harsh that his masterwork , `` The Interpretation of Dreams , '' be ignore when it be publish in 1900. It take eight year to sell 600 copy of the book. Reticent about her adolescence , a she also be about most aspect of her life , Miss Freud be unwilling to tell how or why she be draw to psychoanalysis a a life absorption ; friend say that admiration for her father be at the bottom of it , and she undertake to comprehend his theories. He , in turn , psychoanalyze her - an unorthodox procedure. In her late 20 's , Miss Freud become a psychoanalyst without acquire a medical degree , a most unusual circumstance. Her first patient be adult , but she quickly shift to child and be the leader of a small group of analyst who meet regularly to discuss the problem of children. In the group be Dr. Marianne Kris and Dr. Erik H. Erikson. Father 's Commanding Presence Co-workers remember Miss Freud a have even then some of her father 's command presence - `` a certain tilt of the head and a fire in the eyes. '' Robert Sussman Stewart , a New York editor who write about psychoanalysis , say of Miss Freud : `` She also have her father 's ability , though on a small scale , to rally others or , more to the point , to generate disciple when she need them. But if she be formidable in these respect , there be way in which she could be surprisingly modest and self-effacing : with difficult child she show inexhaustible patience ; and to the work of the few she consider her colleague she give all manner of attention , often at the expense of her own productivity. '' Her paper and article from these and other year be later collect in a multivolume `` The Writings of Anna Freud , '' and issue in the United States by International Universities Press. One of her book , `` The Ego and Mechanism of Defense , '' publish in English in 1937 , be describe by Dr. Coles a `` one of the most important psychoanalytic book ever written. '' Miss Freud be with her father in Vienna when the Germans take over Austria in 1938 and hold the Freuds for ransom. The family be permit to go to Britain after the payment of money and after Freud have sign a statement that he have be well treated. To the statement he append the ironic note , `` I can recommend the Gestapo to anyone. '' In London , Miss Freud help to establish her father and mother at 20 Marsefield Gardens , in the Hampstead area , where Freud die in 1939. The house be the site of the Hampstead Child Therapy Clinic , which she establish for the study of child and the training of analysts. She be it director until her death. Ruled Clinic With Tactful Hand She rule over the clinic with a tactful but firm hand , select it staff and approve both the child admit for study and the analyst who would be trained. She herself live in the house where her father die , and in plain circumstance , consider her fame. A sunny , pleasant , memento-filled room on the second floor be her study. She often greet visitor there , and would talk patiently with them if she felt they be not too inquisitive about her. Understandably , she be suspicious ( or fearful ) l her word be distort , for she felt that vulgarization have contribute to misunderstanding about the humanist core of psychoanalysis. Her anger with Vienna be almost implacable. Not only have the Viennese scorn her father and refuse to protest the German outrage against him , but they have never , in the year since World War II , honor his memory in any way. She relent only in 1971 for a meeting of the International Psychoanalytic Association and only after Vienna have officially express regret for it treatment of the Freuds. Earlier , she have say half-jokingly that she would visit Vienna only if the city provide her with a Lippizaner horse on which to ride through the gates. As it be , the city give her a special reception , at which she waltz and sip wine. Appearing at the association 's session , she be move almost to tear by an ovation from the delegates. A Constitution of Iron Then a seemingly frail woman of 75 with frizzy gray hair and dance eye , she have a constitution of iron and a mind that miss nothing. She sum up the long and complex session in an hour 's extemporaneous speech that be remarkable for it organization , pithiness and coherence. She be undismayed by the minuscule number of psychoanalyst in the world - about 3,000 - and the disregard that many psychiatrist have for Freudianism on scientific grounds. Remarking on the difference among Freudians over aggression , she ask , `` But who should arrive at valid conclusion if not we ? '' With a firm grasp of her father 's work , she be the accepted explicator of his text and be listen to accordingly. However , she do not wield absolute authority over child psychoanalysis. Her rival ( and bete noire ) be the late Melanie Klein , the daughter of a Viennese physician , who be encourage by Freud himself to study children. Whereas Mrs. Klein believe that a child be bear to be paranoiac and depressive , Miss Freud saw the early year of infancy a a prologue to great maturity. Her therapy stress protective , supportive and educational attitude toward the child patient. Among other thing , she suggest how the classic modality of adult psychoanalysis - transference , resistance , motivation and free association - could be utilize with child 4 year old and upward. Some Problems Called Transitory Miss Freud , of course , do not advocate analysis for every disturbed child. Many child pass through developmental upset , and their problem be transitory , she believe , so that candidate for her therapy be largely the pathologically sick. Although Miss Freud be loath to talk about herself , she be eager to take center stage in lecture about child , especially with regard to protect their natural rights. To this end , she hold seminar at the Yale Law School that dealt with penal code and child , and at the Yale Child Study Center on related subjects. Miss Freud felt certain that her work ( and by that she mean the work of her Hampstead center ) fulfil her life and benefit child generally. She be not so sanguine , however , about the immediate future of psychoanalysis in Western culture. `` Young people now be not interested in man 's struggle against himself , but in man 's struggle against society , '' she said. `` They see that what psychoanalysis may lead to be adaptation to society , and that be the last thing they have in mind. '' `` But eventually , '' she go on , `` psychoanalysis will grow and take u deep and deeper into life . ''