November 11 , 1982 OBITUARY Brezhnev Attempted to Advance Soviet Goals Through Detente ; Soviet Leader Used Consensus in Politburo on Domestic Issues By THE NEW YORK TIMES As the leader of the Soviet Union , Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev be a canny and careful Communist Party functionary who seek to make his country the military equal of the United States and promote it political influence around the world through the policy of detente. In domestic affair , a General Secretary of the Communist Party , Mr. Brezhnev ( pronounced BRYEHZH-nyev ) rule a first among his equal on the Politburo , not a an autocrat , and profess to want economic development of his country of 265 million people spread over a sixth of the globe 's land area. Both his policy and his health falter in these task in the last year of his life. Detente , which have seem a necessity to many Western leader after Soviet tank move into Czechoslovakia in 1968 to crush the liberalization of the `` Prague Spring , '' lose much of it appeal in the United States after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 , and President Carter impose an embargo on grain sale and other trade curbs. After the Polish military authority cede to pressure from Moscow and declare martial law in December 1981 , President Reagan impose further economic and political sanction on the Soviet Union , though not an embargo on grain sales. The Western European ally remain more reluctant to cut back their important industrial trade with the Russians , and insist on go ahead with the deal , create a political rift within the NATO alliance that Mr. Brezhnev obviously seek to exploit. But domestic economic stagnation have become an acute domestic problem by the end of the Brezhnev years. In this area , despite their recognition of the crisis , the age Soviet leader make no effective attempt to reform the rigidity of centralized economic planning. And a the standard of living decline , political repression increased. Dissidents , who have emerge openly in the mid-1970 's to criticize violation of human right , be later harass until most have either leave the country or be in prison camp by the early 1980's. Soviet Jews , who have be permit to emigrate by the thousand a month in 1977 and 1978 , find that by 1982 permission to emigrate be virtually impossible to get. In his last year , Mr. Brezhnev 's speech become labored and his feature pale and bloat , apparently a a result of medical treatment for a disability that be never publicly revealed. At the height of his power in the early 1970 's , in contact with Presidents Nixon , Ford and Carter and Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger , he be a burly , gray-haired , black-browed figure of 5 foot 10 inch , gregarious and talkative , but powerful and very much aware of his power over associate and adversary alike. Then he have a reputation a a lover of good food and drink , fast car - which he collect - and hunting. Mr. Brezhnev talk extensively about his weight , which he seek vainly to keep under control , and often joke about his excessive cigarette smoking , which be think to have aggravate his health problems. His smoking ( Philip Morris Multifilters ) be such a vexation that he use a box with a time lock to slow his pace. But he concede to one visitor , `` I keep a reserve pack in the other pocket. '' Ultimately he have to give up smoke altogether. Long Part of Coalition Mr. Brezhnev be long part of a coalition in the ruling Politburo of his party 's Central Committee. Two other member of the coalition who for year be most visible to the West be Prime Minister Aleksei N. Kosygin , who die in December 1980 , and President Nikolai V. Podgorny , who be oust from the leadership group in 1977. In the early year , after this coalition have oust Nikita S. Khrushchev in a bloodless coup in 1964 , it operate a a troika , with none of it member seemingly more authoritative than the others. Prominent , first in support of Mr. Khrushchev and then a a member of the coalition that oust him , be Mikhail A. Suslov , the party 's ideologist. As Mr. Brezhnev encounter grow problem with his health , Mr. Suslov 's authority , already enormous , seem to grow to the point where many consider him the second-ranking figure in the hierarchy. But death remove the ascetic ideologist from the leadership on Jan. 25 , 1982 , at the age of 79. In the fall of 1970 Mr. Brezhnev emerge from his post a the party chief to become the personal ambassador for detente. This occur in his first meeting with Chancellor Willy Brandt of West Germany and in a subsequent conference with President Charles de Gaulle of France. In these and in other meeting in 1971 , the Soviet leader appear stiff and uncomfortable , but he loosen up remarkably a his selfconfidence grew. On June 11 , 1979 , Mr. Brezhnev and President Carter , meeting in the ornate Hofburg Palace in Vienna , sign an arm control treaty that for the first time limit both side to the same maximum number of long-range bomber and missiles. For million of television viewer around the globe , Soviet-Western rapprochement be symbolize when the two leader embrace just after the signing and , to a crescendo of applause from onlooker , Mr. Brezhnev give Mr. Carter hearty kiss , Russian-style , on both cheeks. Despite the optimism express by the two men at the signing ceremony , the treaty come under criticism from a number of United States senator who believe it confer a unilateral advantage on the Soviet Union in heavy land-based missiles. Mr. Carter withdraw the treaty from Senate consideration after the invasion of Afghanistan , and it be never approve by the Senate. Detente Policy Set Back Mr. Brezhnev 's detente policy be far set back by the establishment of martial law in Poland in December 1981. With the intervention in Afghanistan begin a hardening of attitude in the West , include an American boycott of the Moscow Olympics in 1980 and the imposition of trade restriction by the United States and other Western country ; Mr. Brezhnev criticize these step a a return to the cold war , but never acknowledge the Soviet Union 's responsibility for provoke them. Instead , in his statement and speech , Mr. Brezhnev seek to portray his country a still open to arm reduction talk and detente , not only with the West but also , with increase emphasis a relation with the West deteriorate , with China. In February 1982 , the Soviet leader propose a two-thirds cut by 1990 in both side ' medium-range nuclear arsenal in Europe. He say the Soviet Union be ready to reach agreement not only on the complete termination of all test of nuclear weapon but also on end their further production and on the reduction and subsequent elimination of their stockpiles. Early in March he announce that Moscow be suspend it deployment of new medium-range missile in the European part of the Soviet Union. He say this be intend to set `` a good example. '' But United States official saw his move a attempt `` to convey the impression of restraint while divert attention from the enormous growth of Soviet capability. '' In a public appearance in Tashkent on March 24 , Brezhnev issue a new appeal to Peking to revive the search for way to end the Chinese-Soviet feud. `` We remember well the time when the Soviet Union and People 's China be unite by bond of friendship and comradely cooperation , '' he said. Negotiations with the Chinese do resume in the fall of 1982 , and Mr. Brezhnev , in a speech to an audience of Soviet general shortly afterward , say that while the prospect of a real improvement in relation be slim , the Soviet Union have an interest in press for them. Regarding detente with the West , the still unratified arm control treaty with the United States entail some Soviet concession , but on several other issue , Mr. Brezhnev 's approach to the policy - call `` peaceful coexistence '' under Mr. Khrushchev - accomplish much for the Soviet Union. These accomplishment include strategic nuclear parity with the United States ; an increase in conventional military strength on land and at sea ; acknowledgment by West Germany and the rest of Western Europe of the division of Germany and of Europe ; recognition of East Germany and it admission to the United Nations ; increase import of Western technology to modernize the Soviet economy , and a grow role in the Middle East and Africa. Concession on Emigration These be attain with few concession to the West. A major concession -or certainly the most publicized - be the Soviet willingness to permit some emigration , mostly for Jews , start in the late 1960's. The policy of allow emigration for Soviet citizen be , however , a controversial one within the leadership , and there be periodic indication , especially from the police apparatus , of disquiet with this relaxation of traditional curbs. The most recent tightening come in 1981 in response to stiffen Western position over the intervention in Afghanistan. In addition , there be some evidence that Mr. Brezhnev 's critic in Moscow felt that he have not gain sufficient trade and credit advantage in bargain with the United States. Efforts in Washington to make improved commercial tie dependent on further relaxation of emigration restriction illustrate one of the practical problem of detente. Mr. Brezhnev could not explicitly lift emigration barrier because this might be construe a bow to external pressure , and the United States could not do less than insist , owe to it domestic pressures. Although Mr. Brezhnev and American Presidents be in accord on avoid situation that might lead to armed conflict , there be world area where the interest of the two superpower clashed. In the Middle East , the Soviet Union support Arab nationalism with arm and technical expert and carry on a campaign to discredit Israel. Syria and Iraq be among the main beneficiary of Soviet backing. When strike and riot in Iran in late 1978 begin to build up into a revolution , Mr. Brezhnev issue a warning against `` outside interference , especially military interference '' by the United States. At about the same time , he cement Moscow 's tie with the new pro-Soviet regime in Afghanistan by sign a 20-year treaty of friendship and cooperation , bind the two country to close economic and military links. In the Horn of Africa , the power balance be reverse a Ethiopia , once a client of the United States , shift to the Soviet camp , while Somalia , once close to Moscow , effect a rapprochement with Washington. Invasion of Czechoslovakia There be also an adversary conflict over India. In Southeast Asia , Soviet military aid help North Vietnam to victory over Americansupported South Vietnam. In Central America , the Reagan Administration charge that the Soviet Union , through it Cuban ally , be try to expand Communist influence in Nicaragua under the Sandinist regime that come to power in 1979 , and by support the leftist guerrilla movement in El Salvador. In Europe , on the other hand , the superpower be less at daggersdrawn. One evidence of this be the change in Western attitude toward Czechoslovakia after 1968. In that year , Soviet-led force go into Czechoslovakia to depose Alexander Dubcek , the Communist leader who have become an apostate from Kremlin orthodoxy. Mr. Brezhnev , defend the incursion , find his name associate with `` the Brezhnev Doctrine '' - that the Soviet Union have a right to enforce by arm it control in Eastern Europe. The bluntness of Mr. Brezhnev 's intervention in Czechoslovak internal affair be as much condemn then a the baldness of his doctrine. Ranged against him be not only a large segment of public opinion in the West , but also dissenter within two major Communist party in Western Europe. Both the French and the Italian party rebuke Mr. Brezhnev , and their assertion of independence from Moscow develop into the separate line of Communist development know a Eurocommunism , though it also fade towards the end of his rule. Despite the Czechoslovak episode , Mr. Brezhnev manage to maintain the cohesiveness of Eastern Europe , and only independent-minded Rumania be the odd man out in retain cordial relation with China. But the cohesion among Moscow 's ally in Eastern Europe come under strain - more even perhaps than occur over Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968 - a the rise of the Solidarity trade union movement in Poland in 1980 foster a wide-ranging liberalization of Polish life that end in December 1981 with the imposition of martial law. Chinese-Soviet Dispute With China , Mr. Brezhnev maintain strictly correct relation at the governmental level while hurl anathema against the Peking leadership , both in the last decade of Mao Zedong 's life and under Mao 's successors. For a long time , the Chinese-Soviet dispute be both doctrinal and territorial , and it involve a struggle for hegemony over nationalist and revolutionary force in the third world. Soviet policy toward the Chinese fluctuate in response to change in the situation. At first , Mr. Brezhnev make a number of effort to convoke a congress of adherent to Moscow 's version of Communism that would read China out of the world Communist movement , but he be unable to gather a sufficiently impressive alignment. This failure be ascribe partly to an underlying distaste among Communists , even in the Soviet Union , to a formal splitting of the Communist movement ; partly to Peking 's stature in strategic area of the third world , and partly to hope among substantial segment of pro-Moscow Communists that the Soviet Union and China could ultimately be reconciled. The confrontation never escalate to the point of war. When China invade Vietnam early in 1979 , Mr. Brezhnev duly warn Peking to halt it `` brazen bandit attack , '' but the statement be relatively subdue in tone. Tentative move to improve relation betweeen the two country follow ; at the same time , Vietnam fell clearly into the Soviet sphere of influence. Mr. Brezhnev 's power within the Soviet Union derive from his position a the head of the rule party rather than from his assumption of the nation 's presidency - for the second time - in 1977. In the gradual loosening of the Soviet system of one-man rule , Mr. Brezhnev be not , however , the single dominant leader , a Lenin , Stalin and Khrushchev have be , and he seek , not always successfully , to reduce many of the trapping of `` the cult of personality '' that Stalin and then Khrushchev have nurtured. Because Mr. Brezhnev 's power be more circumscribed than that of his predecessor , he be oblige to come to term with often compete interests. Careful Arms Negotiator One of the group that Mr. Brezhnev have to take into account be the military establishment. Like their counterpart in Western country , Soviet military leader tend to favor large budget , impressive display of weaponry and conservative mentalities. But the Soviet leader be never so much at odds with his `` militaryindustrial complex '' a some Western politician and analyst think and hoped. In the slow-moving negotiation on the limitation of strategic arm , Mr. Brezhnev bargain carefully with American Presidents , constantly check during the negotiation with other Politburo member , include the representative of the military. He always seem careful to move in tandem with the military on all significant policy issues. On the other hand , Mr. Brezhnev , by wheel and deal ( how be never make public ) , alter the complexion of the Politburo over the year so that he be able to accumulate a large measure of personal power without arouse his colleague ' fear of a return to one-man rule. Shortly after the collective leadership be instal in 1964 , he neutralize Aleksandr N. Shelepin , an ambitious Politburo member , by shift him from control of the security police to the trade union leadership. And in December 1965 , he persuade Mr. Podgorny to yield a key party secretary 's post to become chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet , a ceremonial post equivalent to that of President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Mr. Podgorny be to hold the presidency for 12 year until Mr. Brezhnev himself assume that post in addition to the party leadership. In 1971 four new men , all Brezhnev supporter , be elect to the Politburo. And two year later he ease out Pyotr Y. Shelest and Gennadi I. Voronov , both consider opponent of detente. Despite this seem majority in the Politburo , which be far consolidate in subsequent year , Mr. Brezhnev be subject to scrutiny on such matter a the performance of the economy , the size of the grain harvest , corruption in the party machinery and the development of Siberia. In addition , of course , the detente policy be examine from time to time in term of specific Soviet advantage , political and commercial. One of Mr. Brezhnev 's dream be to oversee the rapid development of Siberia with the aid of outside credit and technology. Blocked by United States reluctance to commit substantial capital to the venture , he turn increasingly to Western Europe and Japan for partner in Siberian development projects. Projected Air of Realism The ebullience Mr. Brezhnev display abroad or to foreign visitor be in contrast to his staid and conservative deportment in Soviet public life. There he be very much the Communist in the gray flannel suit , proper and formal and serious. The air he project be one of realism , calmness and stability. He be not much in the public view , except on ceremonial occasions. Nonetheless , there seem to be a conscious effort to humanize him in official photograph that show him , for example , in shirtsleeve talk with Chancellor Brandt of West Germany , greet woman factory worker in Yugoslavia with a kiss on the lip , hoist up young child in Poland , or wear dark glass and an opennecked windbreaker and lean against the gunwale of a yacht. Although Mr. Brezhnev appear to enjoy the limelight , he be careful to let a share fall on his principal colleagues. Both Mr. Kosygin and - while he be President - Mr. Podgorny journey abroad from time to time , and Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko , who be elevate to Politburo membership under Mr. Brezhnev , remain the principal Soviet spokesman abroad. Mr. Brezhnev 's attitude toward expression of dissent in the Soviet Union be firm. A number of intellectual , artist and scientist oppose the Kremlin 's ideological policy in whole or in part , and there be restiveness among Soviet youth. Outspoken dissident in the Brezhnev year often find themselves commit to prison , mental institution or deprive of their jobs. Some be deport to the West , notably Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn , the novelist. Those who remain , include Andrei D. Sakharov , be denounce a lacking in socialist consciousness , which mean a refusal to place their talent at the disposal of the ruling ideology. Describes His Ideology As Mr. Brezhnev describe his view a couple of year ago : `` People who fall for self-publicity , ready to make a name for themselves not through work for the homeland but by any politically dubious mean - and not disdain to praise our ideological opponent - sometimes fall into their net. The Soviet public harshly denounce the abominable deed of these double-dealers. `` Renegades should not expect to get away unpunished. The country 's enemy clutch with great tenacity at any manifestation of ieological immaturity or hesitation among the intellectuals. '' Mr. Brezhnev leave the formulation of ideology to others , chiefly Mr. Suslov , the party ideologist and Politburo member whose close association with the party leader grow in the year after the ouster of Mr. Khrushchev in 1964. Mr. Brezhnev 's speech be often more pragmatic than ideological , although early he have stud his remark with Marxist reference to the decline and corruption of capitalism. But he avoid the flourish that be associate with Mr. Khrushchev , who once promise `` to bury capitalism. '' Nor do Mr. Brezhnev contend , a his predecessor do , that the Soviet Union would become a wonderland of material satisfaction while the United States and other capitalist society be develop into wasteland for their citizens. Mr. Brezhnev and his colleague display some uncertainty in handle Soviet public opinion , especially regard Stalinism. Whereas Mr. Khrushchev have pursue a clear-cut policy of de-Stalinization after denounce Stalin 's excess in l956 , the Brezhnev group temper the policy on the ground that it be undermine the authority and unity of the Communist system. The Stalin issue , with which the Soviet Union have not come fully to term , be hush up , but a nostalgia for some aspect of Stalin 's rule be permit to revive. His leadership in World War II be occasionally mention ; his face reappear on movie screen ; and his bust be mount on his grave behind the Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square. The memory of Mr. Khrushchev be , on the contrary , long drown in official silence. The anniversary of his death be not note , nor be his regime recall in panegyrics. But Mr. Brezhnev , in reminiscence publish in November 1978 in the Soviet magazine Novy Mir , give Mr. Khrushchev some credit a an administrator of agricultural policy - although he also describe him a have be petulant , stubborn and apt to use strong language. When Mr. Brezhnev come to power after Mr. Khrushchev 's ouster , his hold on the Communist party seem a little uncertain at first. In recent year , however , he appear to accept great deference a due his position a both the nation 's President and the party 's chief. For Red Square parade , for instance , he usually mount to the review stand on the top of the Lenin Mausoleum ahead of other member of the Politburo. When the crowd applaud , he sometimes doff his hat , wave and smile in response. Mr. Kosygin and others look at the throng but refrain from respond to it acclaim. In contrast to the endless anecdotes illuminate Mr. Khrushchev 's jaunty and unpredictable personality , little humor surround Mr. Brezhnev or his colleagues. But Soviet citizen quietly exchange joke about the Soviet leader , most of them unflattering. He ride around Moscow in a ZIL limousine , model after the 1965 Lincoln Continental , and he be often observed rid out of the Kremlin on a Sunday afternoon through crowd of visitors. He be in the front seat beside the driver with only one security guard in the back and no escort vehicles. The crowd look at him blankly , and he look back in the same fashion. Some Earthy Amusements Because of his position , he have a choice of good housing , but he continue to live in his old apartment on Kutuzov Prospekt. In moment away from his office in the Kremlin , he seem to enjoy earthy amusement and glad-handing. Once at a circus performance , woman performer in scanty costume present him with bouquet of flowers. He thank the first few with kisses. Then a few more. And then he make certain that those at the rear be not omit , for they , too , receive hearty , full-faced busses. Finally , he don his glass and settle back to watch the performance , with the pleasure of one who find a circus more entertaining than the ballet or an opera. Mr. Brezhnev 's broad face with it dominating eyebrow often lose some of it impassivity at cocktail party , once he could down an impressive number of cognac or straight vodkas. In the last few year , though , he be under physician ' order to cut down on drinking. Before he assume the party leadership in 1964 and when he travel abroad on good-will mission during a previous stint a President , he like to unbend in toasts. On a visit to Iran in 1963 , after toast a seemingly endless list of worthy objective , he lift his vodka glass to exclaim : `` Down with protocol ! Long live freedom ! '' In some private conversation he display a certain candor. In 1963 , while talk with Glenn T. Seaborg , then chairman of the United States Atomic Energy Commission , he concede that most Soviet building be hideous and suggest that the Soviet Union might profit by send some of it young architect abroad to study. Although Mr. Brezhnev do not have much time for hobby , he be know to enjoy hunting , swimming and watching soccer. He also collect antique watch and be an ardent ornithologist , repute to have one of the fine collection of live bird in Moscow. He have an interest in agriculture and land reclamation. Born in the Ukraine Before his rise to eminence a Mr. Khrushchev 's protege , Mr. Brezhnev be not conspicuous in Soviet life. Of Great Russian parentage , he be bear Dec. 19 , 1906 , in Kamenskoye , now Dneprodzerzhinsk , in the Ukraine. His father be a steelworker. The boy begin his work life at 15 in the local steel mill. Starting in 1923 , he go to school night and be graduate four year later from a land survey and reclamation school in Kursk. In this period he join the Komsomol , the Young Communist League , and at the age of 25 he be accept a a member of the Communist Party. At the same time he enter the steel engineering school in his hometown. He be graduate in 1935 and work a an engineer for two years. In May 1937 he be elect deputy mayor of Dneprodzerzhinsk , his first post in government. Having impress party leader with his ability , he be promote the following year to a party secretaryship of Dnepropetrovsk Province at a time when Mr. Khrushchev head the party in the Ukraine. Their friendship be believe to have begin at that time. In World War II Mr. Brezhnev serve with the Red Army a a political commissar with the 18th Army in a beachhead on the Black Sea coast of the Caucasus , in the Crimea and in the Ukraine. On his 60th birthday Soviet authority review his war record and say : `` In the period of severe trial during the Great Patriotic War against Hitler 's aggressor , while direct the army 's political department and the southern and fourth Ukrainian front 's political board , you play a direct part in devise and conduct combat operation ; you experience such historic engagement a the battle of the Caucasus , and the liberation of Crimea and the Ukraine. The fight men and commander of the Soviet Army know you a an outstanding political worker and a man of great spirit and courage. '' Mr. Brezhnev 's wartime exploit be also romanticize and effusively praise in biographical article that begin appear in the late 1970's. By then , he also carry to honorific title of Marshal of the Soviet Union. Mr. Brezhnev 's war experience be the foundation for his many friendship among Soviet military men , who be one of the chief source of his late influence in party and government affairs. Mr. Brezhnev , return to civilian life in 1946 , be name to a series of responsible party post in the Ukraine , supervise postwar reconstruction , and be then bring to Moscow in 1950 for further seasoning in the Central Committee 's secretariat. In the middle of 1950 he be send to the Moldavian Republic a party leader , a post he hold for two years. Simultaneously , he be elect a member of the national Central Committee and a candidate member of it Presidium , a the Politburo be then called. He be also name a national secretary , a position he occupy until the death of Stalin in 1953. When the party leadership be reorganize after the dictator 's death , Mr. Brezhnev be drop from the secretaryship and from the Presidium , apparently because he be not in the confidence of Vyacheslav M. Molotov , Georgi M. Malenkov and others who take over from Stalin. After a brief return to political work in the Ministry of Defense a the chief political commissar of the armed force , Mr. Brezhnev resume his rise in the party hierarchy in July 1957 , when Mr. Khrushchev oust some of his rival from the leadership. Supervised Virgin Lands For his loyalty to Mr. Khrushchev , Mr. Brezhnev be reward with the leadership of the republic of Kazakhstan. His job be to supervise Mr. Khrushchev 's virgin land project , which bring vast acreage into productive use. In two year 87 million acre be place under cultivation. Mr. Brezhnev have prove the program a success , confound expert who have forecast it failure. The project later run into difficulty , but not until Mr. Brezhnev have earn a splendid reputation a an administrator , a man who could accomplish the impossible. After be call back to Moscow , Mr. Brezhnev be make President of the Soviet Union in 1960 , replace Marshal Kliment Y. Voroshilov. As President , Mr. Brezhnev become a travel saleman for the Soviet system , visit Italy , North Korea , Finland , Morocco , Guinea , Ghana , Yugoslavia and Iran. His travel and his friendship with Mr. Khrushchev convince many observer that he be be groom a the party leader 's successor. That speculation increase in 1963 , when Mr. Brezhnev combine his job a President with that of second national secretary of the party , in charge of personnel selection. Then , in the summer of 1964 , he step down as President to devote full time to his party tasks. Suddenly that fall , criticism of Mr. Khrushchev within the party council come to an abrupt climax , and he be oblige to retire , ostensibly because of his age ( he be in his 70 's ) and his health. Although there be no official bill of particular , it become known that he have be oust on accusation of bungle the Cuban missile crisis with the United States in 1962 , mishandle the Soviet rift with China , mismanage the Soviet economy and support a cult of personality. Although he defend his policy , his removal from office by the Central Committee 's Presidium be confirm by the committee itself. In his stead the collective leadership of Mr. Brezhnev , Mr. Kosygin and Mr. Podgorny take over. Four day later Mr. Brezhnev and his associate appear atop the Lenin Mausoleum at a celebration for three astronaut , the first to circle the earth in a multiseat spacecraft. Speaking in a deep baritone and read his address through darkrimmed glass , Mr. Brezhnev promise to spur the economy , lift living standard and insure social democracy. In foreign matter , he say , the Soviet Union would continue effort toward peaceful coexistence with capitalist states. Seeking to assure the Soviet public , to which he be virtually unknown , he also promise that the party 's new leader would `` constantly feel the pulse of the people 's life. '' Health Seemed to Decline Mr. Brezhnev subsequently become , of course , well know to the Soviet public , and in recent year the state of his health become a continual subject of speculation in the Soviet Union a elsewhere. A United States intelligence report , early in 1978 , that he be suffer from gout , leukemia and emphysema be not officially confirm , but by February 1979 it be evident that he be ailing. He seem to lack stamen , to have become unable to put in the long work day that his position require , to be lean more heavily than in the past on such aide a Konstantin U. Chernenko , who become a full member of the Politburo in November 1978. At the same time several other ally of Mr. Brezhnev be promote to the inner circle of the Soviet leadership , but the shift give no hint of who his eventual successor might be. Mr. Brezhnev 's apparent ill health be in evidence during his meeting with President Carter in June 1979 , which be the first Soviet-American summit meeting since late 1974. While in Vienna , Mr. Brezhnev be see to stumble on a couple of occasion , and he shut his eye from apparent fatique while President Carter make a short public statement on the day the treaty be signed. And in his trip to East Berlin in October 1979 , Mr. Brezhnev 's condition seem to have deteriorate even far a he frequently slur his word during his 35-minute address to the East German Parliament. Mr. Brezhnev hold a number of decorations. In 1961 he be make a Hero of Socialist Labor `` for outstanding service in the development of rocket technology and in guarantee the successful flight of man into out space in the Sputnik spacecraft 'Vostok. ' `` The citation do not elaborate on his contribution to that flight , nor do his official biography specify his role. He also hold five Orders of Lenin and be twice give the title of Hero of the Soviet Union , on his 60th and 70th birthdays. In keep with Soviet practice , little of Mr. Brezhnev 's family life be in the public domain. It be know that he and his wife , Viktoriya , have three child ; two son , one of whom , Yuri , be a First Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade , the other a student at Moscow University ; and a daughter , Galina , who work a a journalist at Novosti , the Soviet news feature agency .