December 21 , 1982 OBITUARY Arthur Rubinstein Dies in Geneva at 95 By THE NEW YORK TIMES Arthur Rubinstein , one of the great pianist of the century , die quietly in his sleep at his home in Geneva yesterday. He be 95 year old. For about 85 of those year he have be play the piano in public , and he live to see himself win the high acclaim. He start at the age of 3 , make his debut shortly thereafter , and be still play until about five year ago. In his youth he be eclipse by such giant a Sergei Rachmaninoff and Josef Hofmann. But a the pianist of an old generation die , and a Mr. Rubinstein go on from strength to strength , he become the most popular pianist before the public and the most respected. His only rival be Vladimir Horowitz. In his autobiography , Mr. Rubinstein concede that Mr. Horowitz be the good pianist but not the good musician. Mr. Horowitz , however , be absent from the public from 1952 to 1965 , and in those year Rubinstein have no real rival. Idolized All Over the World Possible competitor , such a Sviatoslav Richter , do not play that often in the West , and the legendary , eccentric Arturo Benedetti Michelangeli give relatively few concerts. Mr. Rubinstein have the international field pretty much to himself , and be idolize all over the world. In the pantheon of 20th-century pianist , Mr. Rubinstein 's place be assure a one of the titans. With his remarkable technique , golden tone and musical logic , with the elan he bring to his interpretation , with his natural , unforced and unflurried style , he be unique - a , indeed , every great artist is. What Mr. Rubinstein offer , above all others , be the ability to transmit the joy of music. `` What good be vitamin ? '' Mr. Rubinstein demand when he be ask , at the age of 75 , to explain his youthful vivacity and fire. `` Eat a lobster , eat a pound of caviar - live ! If you be in love with a beautiful blonde with an empty face and no brain at all , do n't be afraid. Marry her ! Live ! '' The great pianist conscientiously apply the prescription to himself , and everything he do be con brio. There be dash to his rich mode of life , just a there be to his making of sumptuous music. From his early to his late day he be the embodiment of the grand manner. Even at an age when most musical artist slow down , he be give concert on an average of one every three day ; he be record furiously out of his vast repertory ; he be the life of innumerable party and luncheon ; he be the irrepressible talker and raconteur ; he be , ineffably , Rubinstein. The supreme and serious musician that most Americans know be Rubinstein since 1937 , the year of his historic reappearance at Carnegie Hall that mark a new dedication to his art. `` It be say of me that when I be young I divide my time impartially among wine , woman and song , '' he remark afterward. `` I deny this categorically. Ninety percent of my interest be women. '' There be an element of exaggeration to this comment , but it be certainly true that the post-1937 Rubinstein be a mature artist. His special fusion of Romanticism and intellectualism catch the public fancy. Audiences could not hear enough of him ; his concert be standing-room only ; his recording sell in the million ; he perform all over the world at fee of $ 6,000 and more a concert , then the high fee for any artist before the public. Chopin a Specialty Rubinstein move with confident ease through a repertory ( `` my musical valise '' ) that start with Mozart , proceed through Beethoven and the entire 19th century and wind up with such modern a Heitor Villa-Lobos , Igor Stravinsky and Karol Szymanowski. Chopin , however , be his specialty and it be a Chopinist that he be consider by many without peer. As superb an interpreter of Chopin a he be , he count himself also a a Mozart man. He return to Mozart `` on my knee '' in late life. Undeniably , part of the Rubinstein manner ( and mystique ) be his pianistic pedigree , which go back to many legendary 19th-century musicians. Rubinstein 's first big-name enthusiast be Joseph Joachim , the violinist friend of Brahms. His early piano training come from Karl Heinrich Barth , a pupil of Franz Liszt , who have be teach by Carl Czerny , who have in turn be a pupil of Beethoven. Rubinstein , moreover , draw personally from such titan a Camille Saint-Saens , Ignace Jan Paderewski , Eugene Ysaye , Claude Debussy , Cesar Franck , Artur Schnabel and Vladimir de Pachmann. Played 'Crowd Pleasers' In his youth Rubinstein tend to perform what he call `` the crowd pleaser '' - Tchaikovsky , Rachmaninoff and Liszt - and his piano belch fire. With maturity , however , he turn more and more to Chopin , his fellow Pole , whose composition of delicate expression call for an artist who could make the piano breathe. Rubinstein be so spontaneous and exuberant that he decline to think of his artistry a work. `` I can play 10 hour , '' he remark in his late 70's. `` I do n't feel that make art should be call work. Work be something disagreeable that you have to do. '' That statement , like so many of Rubinstein 's about himself , be true and not true ; for this most gifted of pianist work very hard by any other standard than his own to perfect and project his artistry , even if he like to create the impression that it be all effortless , a it indeed sound to audiences. In a recording session for RCA Victor Records , in Webster Hall here , he would play and replay a piece until he be satisfied that it be his best ; and before a concert he would practice , particularly passages that he think he might have difficulty with. Nothing less than perfection be tolerated. Practice for it own sake , however , be not Rubinstein 's notion of how to extract music from the print notes. `` I be bear very , very lazy and I do n't always practice very long , '' he say once. `` But I must say , in my defense , that it be not so good , in a musical way , to overpractice. When you do , the music seem to come out of your pocket. If you play with a feeling of 'Oh , I know this , ' you play without that little drop of fresh blood that be necessary -and the audience feel it. '' On another occasion he explain in his tumble English his philosophy this way : `` At every concert I leave a lot to the moment. I must have the unexpected , the unforeseen. I want to risk , to dare. I want to be surprise by what come out. I want to enjoy it more than the audience. That way the music can bloom anew. It 's like make love. The act be always the same , but each time it 's different. '' Happiness in Performance One of the element of freshness in a Rubinstein concert be also the evident happiness with which he played. `` Do n't tell Hurok '' - Sol Hurok , his impresario of many year - he admonish one interviewer , `` but I 'd play the piano for nothing , I enjoy it so much. '' This be of the essence of the pianist 's attitude toward life generally , which he express by say : `` Happiness be to live. It be the only happiness possible. '' This total joie de vivre undoubtedly lend a special quality to Rubinstein 's music ( `` Music be not a hobby , not even a passion with me ; music be me '' ) and lift him above his contemporaries. Moreover , underneath his panache he possess insight and a capacity for musical growth tht markedly enrich the work of his late years. For example , he record the Schumann `` Carnaval '' at 65 ; and when he record the piece 10 year later `` there be no question but that it be a good performance , '' in the opinion of Harold C. Schonberg , then The New York Times music critic. `` His colleague consider him a miracle , geriatric expert mumble when they talk about him and nobody will put up much of an argument when he be call the great living pianist , '' Mr. Schonberg write on Rubinstein 's 75th birthday. He continue : `` Vladimir Horowitz may have a more glittering technique , Rudolf Serkin may have a good way with German music , Rosalyn Tureck more of an affinity for Bach , Sviatoslav Richter for Prokofiev and Scriabin , and Claudio Arrau may have a big repertory. `` But no pianist have put everything together the way Rubinstein has. Others may be superior in specific thing , but Rubinstein be the complete pianist. '' Presence of Majesty To see and hear Rubinstein at a concert be to be in the presence of majesty. A 5-foot-8-inch figure resemble a cube on stick in impeccable evening clothes stride briskly on stage and receive the homage that his subject ' thunderous applause connoted. He bow slightly from the waist , and his pearl-gray hair glisten in the stage light and his blue eye dart around the hall. Before the applause subside , he seat himself on the piano bench and carefully drape the tail of his coat over it back. Then he raise his face , mask in concentration , until his nose tilted upward at a 45-degree angle. His back be erect. He knead his fingers. He bow his head for a moment a the last cough die out and then he ease into the keyboard. Sometimes in play he seem about to overwhelm the instrument a he rise off the bench ; other time , when the music be lyrical , he move his arm and hand in graceful symmetry. His eye appear fix on a distant object. `` I like to look up over the piano , '' he explain , `` so I can listen and follow the line of the piece. Looking at your finger for accuracy be too confusing. I 'd rather miss a few note than play by phrase instead of a a whole. '' Rubinstein 's sound , or tone be elegant. One critic describe it a `` a firm , clear , colorful sonority that be one of the miracle of 20th-century pianism. '' `` He simply can not produce an ugly , force or jag sound no matter how heavily he come down on the keyboard , '' this observer continued. `` As soon a his finger touch the key , one know that the Old Master be at work ; and the penetrate tone roll out and fill the house. '' Ingredients of Tone The pianist himself do not know how to account for the distinctiveness of his tone. Contributing to it , however , be his physique , consider perfect for a pianist. His torso be short and muscular ; his arm be long , his biceps those of a blacksmith and his fist like a longshoreman's. He would spread his spatulate finger whose tip be callous from year at the keyboard , to encompass the 12 note from C to G -two more than normal. Moreover , his pinky be nearly as long a his index finger , and his elongate thumb extend downward at an obtuse angle. Another ingredient of Rubinstein be an unusually fine ear that , among other thing , permit him to spin music through his mind. `` At breakfast , I might pass a Brahms symphony in my head , '' he said. `` Then I be call to the phone , and half an hour later I find it 's be go on all the time and I 'm in the third movement. '' This phenomenon be the basis for a game Rubinstein 's friend like to play with him , in which they would randomly name musical excerpt that he would then play. He be seldom stumped. `` Rubinstein be the only pianist you could wake up at midnight and ask to play any of the 38 major piano concerto , '' accord to Edouard van Remoortel , the conductor. The pianist be usually label a Romantic , but that be an error , in the opinion of many critics. Mr. Schonberg , for example , write : `` Rubinstein today be call - mistakenly - a Romanticist. And he be - in relation to the young pianist , just a he be a Classicist in relation to the old ones. Today 's new style be represent by the young spit-and-polish pianist , who never hit a wrong note , who come to music with the utmost dedication and who all tend to sound alike. '' A Born Extrovert If Rubinstein have not be a pianist , his friend be certain that he could have make an enjoyable living a a stand-up comedian and raconteur. A born extrovert , he love to meet people , to act out his story and to tell them in the eight language in which he be fluent - English , Polish , Russian , French , German , Italian , Spanish and Portuguese. When he tell a story , he perform all the role with appropriate facial expression and gesture -climbing atop a chair or table and beating time if the anecdote be about a conductor , or simper coquettishly if it be about a young woman. Even light a cigar ( he prudently lay in a big stock of Upmann 's just before the United States break with Cuba ) be an act worth watching. One of his story concern the time he and Albert Einstein play a violin and piano sonata. The physicist miss a cue in one passage and come in four beat late. They start again , and once more Einstein miss the cue. Rubinstein turn to his partner in mock exasperation and exclaim `` For God 's sake , professor ca n't you even count up to four ? '' In another Rubinstein story which he delight to tell on himself , he be make a recording in Webster Hall when a porter in overall carry a pail and mop come up to the piano , watch silently and then ask , `` Do you do this professionally ? '' Rubinstein always say that at this point he be for the only time in his life nonplussed. In addition to a sensitive appreciation of the best in cigar , haute cuisine and wine , the pianist be a connoisseur of paint who be able to say , `` I know Picasso before he be Picasso and I be Rubinstein. '' Apart from his Picassos , Rubinstein 's collection be dominate by Vuillards , Chagalls and Dufys. Rubinstein 's start in life be much more modest than his eventual eminence. Born in Lodz , Poland , on Jan. 28 , 1887 , he be the young of seven child of Ignace Rubinstein , a textile producer , and Felicia Heyman Rubinstein. ( Late in life , Rubinstein become vain about his age , and advance his birth date to 1889 , accord to those who know him. ) He take piano lesson at the age of 3 , and at 4 he be perform in public and flourish a call card that read `` Artur the Great Piano Virtuoso. '' A little later , tire of be ask if he be a relative of the great Anton Rubinstein , he inscribe the word `` No Relation '' on the cards. By the time he be 8 he have exhaust the teaching resource of the Warsaw Conservatory of Music and be send to Berlin to perform for Joachim , the violinist. Impressed by the boy 's precocity , the friend of Brahms and Schumann assume responsibility for his study. He be indeed , the conductor at Rubinstein 's Berlin debut at the age of 11. There follow recital in Dresden , Hamburg , Warsaw ( where he play under the baton of Emil Mlynarski , his future father-in-law ) and a visit to Paderewski in Switzerland. Among Paderewski 's guest be a Boston critic who bring Rubinstein to the attention of the Knabe Piano Company , which underwrite his first American tour in 1906. His showpiece be Saint-Saens's Concerto No. 2 in G for Piano and Orchestra , which he perform at Carnegie Hall. The tour last 75 concert and it be not a critical success. He return to Europe disheartened. He go back to school , so to speak , by play in private for Paderewski. `` I just play and listen , and he would tell me little thing , '' Rubinstein recalled. He do not return to the concert stage until 1910. He live in Paris , have a series of love affair , become friend with artist and writers. `` I have , often , lobster and champagne , and often I have nothing , '' he said. `` Once I spend two day on a park bench because I could not pay my hotel bill. But I also have wonderful chamber music with Ysaye and Thibaud and Casals. '' Recitals for Allied Cause Back a a performer Rubinstein establish himself in Europe a a top-ranking pianist. In the early part of World War I he give recital for the Allied cause. At that time he become so enraged with the German treatment of the Poles and the Belgians that he vow never to appear in Germany , and he never thereafter did. A turn point in Rubinstein 's career come in 1916 , when he make a tour of Spain. It be a grand success. Four concert stretch to 125. And from there he go to South America. `` They love me for my improvised way of playing , '' he recalled. `` It be not really intentional with me , because I could not even then work out a conception and stick to it. But to them it be a relief from what they call 'the pedants. ' `` Convinced that he would now be a hit in the United States , he reappear in Carnegie Hall in 1919 , but his reception be lukewarm. `` When I play in the Latin country they love me because of my temperament , '' he say later. `` But when I play in England and America , they felt that because they have pay their money they be entitle to hear all the notes. I drop too many note in those day , and they felt they be cheated. '' Rebuffed but not chasten , he return to Europe , where he divide his time between concert and high living with the international set. He be a frequently sit on the Riviera or pal around with Picasso , the Prince of Wales , an attractive woman or Ernest Hemingway a he be sit before a concert grand. The late 20 's be decisive for the pianist 's later career. First , in 1928 , he meet 15-year-old Aniela Mlynarski , daughter of the Polish conductor. According to them both it be love at first sight , although they be not marry until 1932. Second , Rubinstein begin recording. Third , he begin to take stock of himself a an artist. The result be the end of his day a a playboy and intensive study and practice - six , eight , nine hour a day. In the process he bring discipline to his abundant temperament and intelligence to his grand manner. `` I do n't want my kid to grow up thinking of their father a either a second-string pianist or a a has-been , '' he remarked. Rubinstein 's early recording ( now collector ' item ) call renew attention to him , and Mr. Hurok , his agent , persuade him to have another go at the United States. When he make his reappearance at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 21 , 1937 , he be acclaim a `` a giant who have transform his joie de vivre into the strong alloy of his music. '' It be the start of the love affair between American music lover and Rubinstein that never thereafter abated. Moved to California In World War II he move his family from Paris to Beverly Hills , Calif. , where he ghost at the piano for movie actor who play the role of Schumann , Liszt , Brahms and others. The film be `` I've Always Loved You '' ( 1946 ) , `` Song of Love '' ( 1947 ) , `` Night Song '' ( 1947 ) , `` Carnegie Hall '' ( 1947 ) and `` Of Men and Music '' ( 1950 ) , in which he appear a himself. Meanwhile , Rubinstein tour the world - North Africa , China , Japan , Indonesia , Australia , Europe. In 1958 he return to Warsaw after an absence of 20 year , and the audience cheer and applaud and bring him back from the wing 10 time after he play Chopin 's `` Polonaise '' in A flat. `` He be consider on all level a great pianist and a great Pole , '' an American in Warsaw report recently. `` The Poles pay him the great compliment of consider him one of theirs malgre tout. '' Became U.S. Citizen Rubinstein become an American citizen in 1946 and move to New York in the 1950's. As his career come to a halt , because of his extreme age and loss of sight , Rubinstein find time to concentrate on his autobiography , which he have promise to write for Alfred A. Knopf many year previously. In 1973 , the first volume , `` My Young Years , '' be publish , and be follow in 1980 by `` My Many Years. '' In his last year his constant companion be his secretary , Annabelle Whitestone. His American audience have a chance to enjoy Rubinstein the man and the musician once more when he be interview on a 90-minute television special , a part of the `` Great Performances '' series , entitle `` Rubinstein at 90. '' The pianist 's other honor include Commander of the Legion of Honor , officer of Portugal 's Order of Santiago , Commander of the Chilean Republic and Commander of the Crown of Belgium's Order of Leopold I , and he wear Spain 's Cross of Alfonso XII. In addition , he have the Bronze Medallion of the City of New York and the Gold Medal of London 's Royal Philharmonic Society. He hold honorary degree from Yale , Northwestern , Brown and Rutgers. Mr. Rubinstein be survive by his wife , Aniela , of Paris , and four child , Eva , Paul , Alina A. and John A. , all of Manhattan .