February 18 , 1982 OBITUARY Thelonious Monk , Created Wry Jazz Melodies and New Harmonies By JOHN S. WILSON Thelonious Monk , the pianist and composer whose wry , angular melody and unusual harmonic progression be among the most striking contribution to the jazz repertory , die yesterday in Englewood Hospital in New Jersey at the age of 64. He have suffer a stroke on Feb. 5. Although Mr. Monk 's music be root in the stride-piano tradition of Willie ( The Lion ) Smith , James P. Johnson and Duke Ellington , it stand apart from the main flow of jazz. `` He have n't invent a new scheme of thing , '' Paul Bacon write in the jazz magazine The Record Changer in 1948 , `` but he have , for year , look with an unjaundiced eye at music and see a little something else. `` He play riff that be old than Bunk Johnson but they do n't sound the same. His beat be familiar but he do something strange there , too. He can make a rhythm almost separate , so that what he do be inside or outside it. Monk be really make use of all the unused space around jazz , and he make you feel that there be plenty of unopened doors. '' 'An Original' Randy Weston , a pianist who study with Mr. Monk , have call him `` a complete an original a it be possible to be '' and he cite the unifying `` simplicity '' in his music. `` Not that his music be n't often complex to execute , '' Mr. Weston explain , `` but it always come through so clear and accurate , so uncluttered. His music be simple in the sense that it have totality of personality. It 's all him. '' Among his work be `` Round Midnight , '' `` Straight No Chaser '' and `` Well , You Needn't. '' The strange contour of Mr. Monk 's tune lead the jazz critic Whitney Balliett to describe them a ripple `` with dissonance and rhythm that often give one the sensation of miss the bottom step in the dark. '' When Mr. Monk be a guest at a jazz class at Columbia University , the lecturer turn to him and ask if he would `` play some of your weird chord for the class. '' Mr. Monk bridled. `` What do you mean , weird ? '' he asked. `` They 're perfectly logical. '' `` Jazz , '' he say on another occasion , `` be my adventure. I 'm after new chord , new way of syncopate , new figuration , new runs. How to use note differently. That 's it. Just use note differently. '' A Dancing Conductor His way of do thing differently -but , a he insist , logically - extend beyond playing and composing. During a performance with his group , he often get up from the piano and go into an intense shuffling dance. This be his method of conducting. He might be set a rhythmic pulse to move his musician into the rhythm he want or simply check to make sure that the performance be swing properly. Mr. Monk once explain the difference between himself and the bop musician with whom he be often associate in the 1940 's : `` They think differently , harmonically. They play mostly stuff that 's base on the chord of other thing , like the blue and 'I Got Rhythm. ' I like the whole song , melody and chord structure to be different. I make up my own chord and melodies. '' Self-Taught Musician Mr. Monk be a man of unwavering musical principle , strong opinion and sardonic wit. When a saxophonist , Sahib Shihab , tell him that he be go back to the Juilliard School to study , the largely self-taught Mr. Monk remark , `` Well , I hope you do n't come out any bad than you sound now. '' Thelonious Sphere Monk , whose father be also name Thelonious , be bear on Oct. 10 , 1917 , in Rocky Mount , N.C. When he be 4 , his mother bring him and two other child to New York , but his father remain in the South. In the early 1930 's , the family move into a small apartment on West 63d Street in the area know a San Juan Hill , where Mr. Monk continue to live until a few year ago , when the building be torn down. He begin play in band when he be 13. Four year later he join a group that travel with an evangelist ( `` She preach and feared and we play , '' he say ) . When the troupe reach Kansas City , Mary Lou Williams , the pianist , who become one of his close friend , hear him and report later that `` he be play the same style then that he be now. '' In the late 30 's and early 40 's , Mr. Monk be the pianist in the house band at Minton 's Playhouse in Harlem , where young and then unknown musician such a Charlie Parker , Dizzy Gillespie and Kenny Clarke come to jam. The music that become know a be-bop develop out of the sessions. Went His Own Way Mr. Monk , however , be not part of the be-bop movement. He go his own way. To the public who find the `` boppers '' strange , he be even strange and more difficult to accept. His first slight brush with success come in 1944. Bud Powell , the pace-setting pianist of the 40 's who have be influence by Mr. Monk , persuade Cootie Williams , in whose orchestra Mr. Powell be play , to record Mr. Monk 's tune `` Round Midnight. '' In the same year he make his first record with a group lead by the saxophonist Coleman Hawkins , who , unlike most jazz musician who come up in the 1920 's , be interested in the new jazz development of the 40's. Mr. Monk 's first record under his own name , for the Blue Note label in 1947 , gain some attention in black area of large cities. But white listener tend to reject him because , a Alfred Lion of Blue Note Records point out , `` They think he lack technique. '' His Cabaret License Revoked He be get only occasional work in the late 40 's , and even that be cut off completely when , in 1951 , he and a friend be arrest for possession of narcotics. Although Mr. Monk be know to be `` clean '' and be widely consider to be innocent in this case , he take the full blame , refuse to be what he call `` a drag '' by implicate his friend. He serve 60 day in jail but , what be much bad , he lose his cabaret card , without which he could not perform in a New York club. For the next six year , until 1957 , he record occasionally. Most of his time be spend compose many of the tune that become the core of his repertory , include `` Bemsha Swing , '' `` Blue Monk , '' `` Little Rootie Tootie '' and `` Pannonica , '' name for Baroness Nica de Koenigswarter. The Baroness have befriend several jazz musician of the period , include Charlie Parker. In 1957 , with the help of the Baroness , Mr. Monk regain his cabaret card and start to play at the Five Spot in New York. The club become a steady base for him. Success in the 60's During the late 50 's , he lead a quartet that include John Coltrane , the saxophonist. In the 1960 's , Mr. Monk finally gain the recognition that have elude him for almost 20 years. He work regularly with a quartet feature Charlie Rouse , the tenor saxophonist , appear in club and at concert and festival all over the world. He also give concert with large orchestra , play his composition at Town Hall in 1959 , at Philharmonic Hall in 1963 and in Carnegie Hall in 1964. In the 1970 's , his public appearance become infrequent because of illness. His last official performance be at Carnegie Hall in 1976 , although he sit in informally one night after that at Bradley 's on University Place. Mr. Monk , who live in Weehawken , N.J. , in recent year , be survive by his wife , Nellie ; a son , Thelonious Monk Jr. , who be a drummer , and a daughter , Barbara. A funeral service will be hold Monday at 11 A.M. in St. Peter 's Church , Lexington Avenue at 54th Street. The body will be at the Walter B. Cooke Funeral Home , 85th Street and Third Avenue , Saturday from 4 to 9:30 P.M. and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 9:30 P.M .