February 18 , 1982 OBITUARY Lee Strasberg of Actors Studio Dead By MEL GUSSOW Lee Strasberg , father of `` Method act '' in America , artistic director of the Actors Studio , stage director , film actor and a major figure in world theater , die of a heart attack yesterday. He be 80 year old. Mr. Strasberg , a a master teacher , guide several generation of actor , include Marlon Brando , James Dean , Marilyn Monroe , Al Pacino and Robert De Niro. He revolutionize the art of acting and have a profound influence on performance in American theater and movies. The Method , a system of vocal , physical and emotional exercise , be initiate in Russia by Constantin Stanislavsky ; it encourage the actor to use his psyche and subconscious in prepare for a role. Mr. Strasberg adapt it to the American theater , impose his refinement , but always credit Stanislavsky a his source. Elected to Hall of Fame At 6:30 A.M. yesterday in his Central Park West apartment , Mr. Strasberg have chest pain and , in an ambulance on the way to Roosevelt Hospital , suffer cardiac arrest. By the time he arrive at the hospital , there be no vital sign and , accord to a spokesman , John Springer , at 7:56 he be pronounce dead. With him at his death be his wife , Anna , and their two son , Adam , 12 , and David , 11. Immediately after , Mr. Pacino arrive , follow by Mr. Strasberg 's old offspring from a previous marriage , his son , John , and his daughter , Susan - and Ellen Burstyn , the actress. On Tuesday , Mr. Strasberg be officially notify that he have be elect to the Theatrical Hall of Fame. His last public appearance be Sunday night at the `` Night of 100 Stars '' in the Radio City Music Hall , a benefit for the Actors Fund. Along with Mr. Pacino and Mr. De Niro , his co-star in `` Godfather II , '' and many others , he dance in the chorus line with the Rockettes. Oscar Nominee in 1974 Ironically , he make his early professional appearance a an actor in the mid-1920 's , singing and dancing in theatrical such a the `` Garrick Gaieties. '' He soon move from act to direct and teaching , but in 1974 return to act and make his film debut in `` Godfather II , '' a role for which he receive an Academy Award nomination for support actor. He subsequently perform in other film , include `` The Cassandra Crossing , '' `` Boardwalk , '' `` And Justice for All , '' in which he play Mr. Pacino 's father , and `` Going in Style. '' Despite his late-blooming acting career and his early work a a stage director , he remain primarily a teacher of act , in private class as well a at the Actors Studio. His pupil be also his disciples. To many of them , he be a principal motivating force in their choice of career. As Jane Fonda say at his death , `` I 'm not sure I even would have become an actress be it not for him. He will be miss , but he leave behind a great legacy. '' Joined Chrystie Street Group Born Israel Strassberg on Nov. 17 , 1901 , in Budzanow , Poland , now part of the Soviet Union , he be the son of a provincial innkeeper. At the age of 7 , he emigrate with his family to the United States , where his father work in the garment industry. Growing up on the Lower East Side , he attend the theater whenever possible and join the Chrystie Street Settlement 's drama group a an actor. It be at that time that he change his name to I. Lee Strasberg , subsquently drop the initial. He work a a wigmaker ; study improvisational act technique with Richard Boleslavsky , a student of Stanislavsky , and begin work a an actor. He make his professional debut in `` Processional , '' produce by the Theatre Guild in 1925 , and be also assistant stage manager for the Lunts in `` The Guardsman. '' Working for the guild , he meet , among others , Harold Clurman. In his book `` The Fervent Years , '' Mr. Clurman recall his first impression of Mr. Strasberg on stage in a play by Pirandello , `` a a young , pale-faced man of intellectual demeanor. '' Meeting him , Mr. Clurman say , `` we be draw together by our common dissatisfaction , our still unshaped ideals. '' In Search of a Responsive Theater Those ideal take shape with the formation of the Group Theater , found in 1931 by Mr. Clurman , Mr. Strasberg and Cheryl Crawford. It be a pivotal moment in the growth of American performing art , bring together actor , director and writer in search of a theater that would be responsive to society. Their production be Paul Green 's `` The House of Connelly , '' direct by Mr. Strasberg. As Mr. Clurman say : `` Lee Strasberg be one of the few artist among American theater directors. He be the director of introverted feeling , of strong emotion curb by ascetic control , sentiment of great intensity mute by delicacy , pride , fear , shame. The effect he produce be a classic hush , tense and tragic , a constant conflict so hold in check that a kind of beautiful spareness results. The root be clearly in the intimate experience of a complex psychology , an acute awareness of human contradiction and suffering. '' Climax of Character 's Existence Mr. Clurman 's description of his friend a director bear a direct relationship to Mr. Strasberg 's subsequent work at the Actors Studio. The Method require that an actor in prepare for a role delve not only into the character 's life in the play , but also , far more importantly , into the character 's life before the curtain rises. In rehearsal , the character 's prehistory , perhaps go back to childhood , be discuss and even act out. The play become the climax of the character 's existence. Mr. Brando base his act technique on the Method. `` It make me a real actor , '' he once said. `` The idea be you learn to use everything that happen in your life and you learn to use it in create the character you 're work on. You learn to dig into your unconscious and make use of every experience you ever had. '' Kim Stanley , explain what she learn at the studio , have say : `` Lee try to make you find thing in yourself that you can use. In this respect , it 's not unakin to analysis. The time I most fulfil myself be the time I remember what Lee tell u in class - to do the work 'moment by moment , ' to allow yourself to look and listen. '' Controversial Teachings Throughout Mr. Strasberg 's career , his teaching be controversial. Opponents of the Method believe that it encourage actor to be self-indulgent , to forget the character in pursuit of behavorial motivation , and that it do not prepare actor to play classics. Stereotypically , opponent contend , the Method actor be mannered to the point of unintelligibility. On the other hand , Tennessee Williams , whose play have be populate by graduate of the studio , have say studio actor have a more intense and honest style of acting. `` They act from the inside out , '' he said. `` They communicate emotion they really feel. They give you a sense of life. '' Mr. Strasberg be not a founder of the studio ; it be create in 1947 by Elia Kazan , Mr. Crawford and Robert Lewis. But in a year , Mr. Srasberg have join the three , associate from the now defunct Group Theater , and he soon become the guiding force. He remain synonomous with it work for the rest of his life. Perceiving Talent `` At the studio , we do not sit around and fee each other 's ego , '' Mr. Strasberg once said. `` People be shocked how severe we be on each other. Duse , probably the great I 've ever see , be capable of better. If she come to the studio , we would pull her apart. '' The first role of the studio , he say , be to perceive talent before it be fully trained. Among the many actor who have work at the studio be Julie Harris , Paul Newman , Joanne Woodward , Geraldine Page , Maureen Stapleton , Anne Bancroft , Dustin Hoffman , Patricia Neal , Rod Steiger , Mildred Dunnock , Eva Marie Saint , Eli Wallach , Anne Jackson , Ben Gazzara , Sidney Poitier , Karl Malden , Shelley Winters and Sally Field. A number of play be develop there , include `` A Hatful of Rain , '' `` End a a Man , '' `` Any Wednesday , '' `` The Night of the Iguana , '' `` The Zoo Story '' and `` The Death of Bessie Smith. '' A major reversal for Mr. Strasberg occur in 1961 , when the studio be not invite to become the resident theatrical company at Lincoln Center. Mr. Kazan , his former associate , be select to head the initial company. Broadway Season in 1963 To demonstrate it ability a a production unit , in 1963 the studio present a season of play on Broadway , include `` Strange Interlude '' and `` The Three Sisters , '' production that generally disappoint the critics. From that time , most play be perform a in-house project in the studio 's home at 432 West 44th Street. Mr. Strasberg retain his hope that the studio could become the basis for a national theater. He retire a an actor in 1929 , return to the stage briefly in 1936 to perform in a one-act play by Clifford Odets. However , he be famous for perform in class. At the suggestion of Mr. Pacino , he resume his professional act career in `` Godfather II. '' He divide his late year between act in film and teaching. He make his final appearance a an actor in November in the television film `` Skokie. '' He also find time to finish his autobiography. He marry three time , to Nora Z. Krecaun and Paula Miller , both of whom die , and Anna Mizrahi. He be survive by his third wife and his four children. In an 80th birthday interview , he say that he be look forward to his next 20 year in the theater. According to friend , he be healthy until the day he died. `` It be so unexpected , '' Mr. Pacino said. `` What stand out be how youthful he was. He never seem as old a his years. He be an inspiration. '' There will be a service today at 11 A.M. in the Shubert Theater. Among the scheduled speaker be Mr. Pacino , Mr. De Niro , Miss Burstyn and Geraldine Fitzgerald. Burial will be in the Westchester Hills Cemetery .