June 9 , 1982 OBITUARY Satchel Paige , Black Pitching Star , Is Dead at 75 By JOSEPH DURSO Leroy ( Satchel ) Paige , one of the folk hero of baseball 's old Negro league who become a rookie pitcher in the major league at the age of 42 , die yesterday at his home in Kansas City , Mo. He be believe to be 75 year old when he die after a long siege of heart trouble and emphysema. But his exact age be one of the mystery in the legend that accompany him into the big league in 1948 with the Cleveland Indians , and it be still a mystery when he pitch his final three inning for the Kansas City A 's in 1965 when he be admit to 59. That be the end of what he laughingly call `` my 100-year career in baseball. '' And , by then , he be celebrate for his homespun wit as well a for his fastball and stamen , and most especially for his admonition : `` Do n't look back. Something might be gain on you. '' View From Rocking Chair By then , he be view the world from a rock chair in the Kansas City bullpen , a tall , thin man with a thin mustache who have live one of the phenomenal career in sport : 22 year a a barnstorming pitcher in the era before black player be admit to the big league , then five season with three club in the American League , include the World Series of 1948. In the barnstorming day , he pitch perhaps 2,500 game , complete 55 no-hitter and perform before crowd estimate at 10 million person in the United States , the Caribbean and Central America. He once start 29 game in one month in Bismarck , N.D. , and he say later that he win 104 of the 105 game he pitch in 1934. By the time Jackie Robinson sign with the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1947 a the first black player in the major , Mr. Paige be past 40. But Bill Veeck , the impresario of the Cleveland club , sign him to a contract the follow summer , and he promptly draw crowd of 72,000 in his first game and 78,000 in his third game. Five Full Seasons His career in the big league be spread over 18 year but , because he retire twice during that span , it total only five full season with these statistic : 28 victory , 31 defeat , 476 inning , 290 strikeout and an earned-run average of 3.29. But by then , he already occupy a special rank a a showman and country philosopher who advise people to `` avoid run at all time , '' and who once reflect : `` There never be a man on earth who pitch as much a me. But the more I pitch , the strong my arm would get. '' Despite the uncertainty about his age , there be general agreement that he be the old player ever to appear in a major league game when he pitch three inning against the Boston Red Sox on Sept. 25 , 1965. And , two year later , clearly enjoy his role a an athletic phenomenon , he write an autobiography with the title : `` Maybe I 'll Pitch Forever. '' Leroy Robert Paige be bear in Mobile , Ala. , the son of John and Lula Page. The family name become `` Paige , '' he remember , because `` my folk later stick in the 'i ' to make themselves sound more hightoned. '' He tease people about the date of his birth , say that the certificate have be place between the page of a Bible that be eat by the family 's goat. But later he do not argue with evidence that he have be bear on July 7 , 1906. Origin of His Nickname He be specific , though , about his nickname. He get it a a 7-year old while hustle baggage at the railroad depot in Mobile after he have invent a contraption for carry more bags. `` I rig up rope around my shoulder and my waist , and I carry a satchel in each hand and one under each arm , '' he said. `` I carry so many satchel that all you could see be satchels. You could n't see no Leroy Paige. '' He take up pitch during four year spend at the Alabama Reform School for Boys , and become exceptional. In 1924 , he present himself to Candy Jim Taylor , the manager of the Mobile Tigers , a black semiprofessional team , and fire 10 fastball past the manager in an audition. He have a job , and soon a career. For the next two decade , he travel around the hemisphere wit h black team , pitch across the season and the border of countries. He also pitch in exhibition game against white major league stars. Once he outpitched Dizzy Dean , 1-0. Another time , he strike out Rogers Hornsby five time in one game. Joe DiMaggio call him `` the best I 've ever face , and the fastest. '' An Imposing Figure He be a lean but imposing figure on the mound , 6 foot 3 1/2 inch tall and 180 pound , with thin leg and a mean fastball , numerous curveballs and pinpoint control. And one year after Jackie Robinson break the color line , Mr. Veeck sign him a a draw card and pitcher on a Cleveland team head for the championship. The date be July 7 , 1948. Many baseball people deride the signing a a box-office gimmick , since the rookie be past 40 and probably past his prime. But Lou Boudreau , the Indians ' manager , introduce his new pitcher carefully , use him six time in relief before start him in a game. In his first start , he defeat the Washington Senators , 5-3 , before 72,434 fan in Cleveland 's Municipal Stadium. Then he pitch two shutout against the Chicago White Sox , and by then have pitch before combined crowd of 201,829 in three starts. His record after less than three month show six victory and one loss , and he make one brief appearance in the World Series that October against the Boston Braves. But after one more season with Cleveland , he be release after Mr. Veeck sell his control interest. However , two year later , Mr. Veeck buy the St. Louis Browns and promptly sign his former rookie , who now be at least 45 year old. But , in his most flamboyant defiance to age , Mr. Paige win 12 game in 1952 and be select for the league 's All-Star team. After the 1953 season , he be release once more , but once more refused to quit baseball. He pitch in the minor league , then take the barnstorming route again and even appear with the Harlem Globetrotters basketball team a a guest celebrity. He play the part of a cavalry sergeant in a 1958 motion picture , `` The Wonderful Country. '' Rocking Chair Provided Then another baseball showman , Charles O. Finley , draw him back to the big league briefly in 1965 with the Kansas City A's. The theme be revival , and Mr. Paige be provide with a rock chair in the bullpen and a nurse who massage his right arm with liniment. He pretend that the compound be base on a secret formula and , continue the tease , spar with person who ask whether he perhaps rely on `` doctor '' pitches. `` I never throw an illegal pitch , '' he replied. `` The trouble be , once in a while I toss one that ai n't never be see by this generation. '' Reviewing his 40 year on the public baseball scene , he once say that the tough hitter he have ever face be Josh Gibson , the celebrate catcher from the Negro league , and Charley Gehringer of the Detroit Tigers. `` They say I be the great pitcher they ever saw , '' he remark recently , reflect on the segregation in sport that have cost him a full career in the big leagues. `` I could n't understand why they could n't give me no justice. '' Mr. Paige make his last public appearance last Saturday in ceremony at a Kansas City baseball park that be name for him. He attend in a wheelchair , and say : `` Nobody on earth could feel as good a I do now. '' Paige 's Guide to Longevity To a world that marvel at his stamen a a 59-year-old pitcher , Satchel Paige often offer these `` master 's maxim '' a his guide to longevity : 1. Avoid fry meat , which angry up the blood. 2. If your stomach dispute you , lie down and pacify it with cool thoughts. 3. Keep the juice flow by jangle around gently a you move. 4. Go very light on the vice , such a carry on in society. The social rumble ai n't restful. 5. Avoid run at all times. 6. Do n't look back. Something might be gain on you .