June 1 , 1983 OBITUARY Jack Dempsey , 87 , be Dead ; Boxing Champion of 1920's By RED SMITH Jack Dempsey be one of the last of a dwindling company whose exploit distinguish the 1920 's a `` the golden age of sports. '' His contemporary be Babe Ruth in baseball , Red Grange and the Four Horsemen of Notre Dame in football , Bobby Jones and Walter Hagen in golf , Bill Tilden , Helen Wills Moody and Suzanne Lenglen in tennis , Johnny Weissmuller and Gertrude Ederle in swimming , Paavo Nurmi in track , Man o' War , the racehorse , and Earl Sande , the jockey. But none of the others enjoy more lasting popularity than the man who rule box between 1919 and 1926. Strangely , though , Mr. Dempsey 's popularity never approach it peak until he have lose the championship. He be revile a a slacker during World War I , and although a jury exonerate him of a charge of draft-dodging , the odium clung to him until the night Gene Tunney punch him almost blind and take his title. `` Lead me out there , '' Jack tell his trainer after that bout. `` I want to shake his hand. '' 'Honey , I Forgot to Duck' Back in their hotel , Estelle Taylor Dempsey be appal by her husband 's battered face. `` Ginsberg ! '' she cry , use her pet name for him. `` What happen ? '' `` Honey , '' the former champion say , `` I forget to duck. '' From that day on , the gallant loser be a folk hero whose fame never diminished. Almost 23 year after he lose the championship , he be have breakfast with friend in Chicago , where Ezzard Charles and Jersey Joe Walcott be to box the following night for his old title , leave vacant by the retirement of Joe Louis. A stranger pass their table recognize the old champion. `` Jack Dempsey ! '' he say , offer his hand. `` Oh , boy , Jack , do I know you ! Do I remember how you give it to Jack Willard back there in Toledo ! '' Leaning forward , he put his face close to Jack 's ear , and his voice drop to a conspiratorial level. `` I hope you beat hell out of that guy tomorrow night , '' he say and turn away. Speechless for an instant , Mr. Dempsey star after him. `` Well , I 'll be damn , '' he said. `` He think I 'm still champion ! '' Free Spender and Soft Touch To many , Mr. Dempsey always remain the champion , and he always comport himself like one. He be warm and generous , a free spender when he have it and a soft touch for anybody down on his luck. After retirement from the ring , he make his headquarters in New York in Jack Dempsey 's Restaurant , first at the corner of 50th Street across Eighth Avenue from the old Madison Square Garden and later at 1619 Broadway , where his partner be Jack Amiel , whose colt , Count Turf , win the Kentucky Derby. At almost any hour , Mr. Dempsey be on hand to greet friend and stranger with a cordial , `` Hiya , pal , '' in a voice close to a boyish treble. ( He be n't much good at remember name than Babe Ruth , who call people `` kid. '' ) He pose for thousand of photograph with an arm around a customer 's shoulder or - if the customer prefer , and many male do -squared off face to face. Autographing ten of thousand of menu , he never scribble an impersonal `` Jack Dempsey '' but always take the trouble to write the recipient 's name and add `` good luck '' or `` keep punching. '' His ebullient good humor be even demonstrate against the occasional drunk who simply have to try out his Sunday punch on the old champion. Grantland Rice say Mr. Dempsey be perhaps the fine gentleman , in the literal sense of gentle man , he have meet in half a century of write sport ; Mr. Dempsey never knowingly hurt anyone except in the line of business. A Tiger in the Ring In the ring , he be a tiger without mercy who shuffle forward in a bobbing crouch , hum a barely audible tune and punching to the rhythm of the song. He be 187 pound of unbridled violence. That be n't big by heavyweight standard , yet in the judgment of some , this black-browed product of Western mining camp and hobo jungle be the best of all pugilists. In 1950 , a poll by The Associated Press name Mr. Dempsey the great fighter of the half-century. Certainly nobody surpass him in color and crowd appeal. He draw box 's first million-dollar gate in fight Georges Carpentier , box 's large pay attendance in his first bout with Tunney and the big `` live '' gate in their second meeting. As champion , Tunney receive $ 990,445 for the latter fight , which gross $ 2,658,660. He give Tex Rickard , the promoter , his personal check for $ 9,555 and Mr. Rickard write a check for $ 1 million , the big purse ever collect for a single performance in sport before the day of closed-circuit television. Dempsey be less than two week past his 24th birthday but have be through more than 80 professional fight , some unrecorded , when he burst upon the championship scene like a mortar shell. It be July 4 , 1919 , a blistering day on the shore of Maumee Bay outside Toledo , Ohio. Awaiting the opening bell a challenger for the heavyweight title , the 6-foot-1-inch contender be tan and fit at 187 pounds. But he look no more than half the size of Jess Willard , the champion , a pale tract of meat measure 6 foot 6 1/2 inch tall and weigh 245 pounds. 7 Knockdowns in 3 Minutes Three minute later Willard look like a case for the coroner. He have be down seven time , and one leave hook have break his cheekbone in 13 places. Thinking the seventh knockdown have end the fight , Dempsey and his manager , Jack ( Doc ) Kearns , leave the ring but be call back. After two more round the helpless Willard be spar far damage when one of his second signal surrender by throw a towel into the ring. Now it be Dempsey , heavyweight champion of the world , and the bottom line of his record read : `` KO 3. '' But the winner 's jubilation be temper by the discovery that Mr. Kearns have bet $ 10,000 of their guarantee on a first-round knockout , take odds of 10 to 1 , and the remain $ 17,500 have go for `` training expense , '' an omnibus term in the manager 's lexicon. In a ghost-written autobiography many year later , Mr. Kearns take partial credit for the destructive effect of his man 's punches. He write that he have use plaster-of-paris bandage on Dempsey 's hand and that these have harden into cast inside the glove after be douse with water. Dempsey deny that his glove have be load , and the tale never win general acceptance because Doc Kearns be know to be a creative artist who seldom let truth spoil a good story. Overalls and Fancy Shoes The destruction of Willard convince box men of the new champion 's greatness , but the public be slow to accept Dempsey because of his war record. Ostensibly do essential work in a Philadelphia shipyard , he have pose for a news photograph hold a riveting gun and wear overall , with patent-leather shoes. The fancy footgear raise noisy doubt about his contribution to the war effort. More than two year after the armistice , Mr. Rickard capitalize on this unfavorable publicity to build up the first million-dollar gate. Carpentier , the light-heavyweight champion , have be decorate in the French arm forces. When Mr. Rickard match Dempsey with the Paris boulevardier in a wooden arena call Boyle 's 30 Acres in Jersey City , the `` hero '' become a sentimental favorite over the `` slacker. '' A crowd of 80,183 pay $ 1,789,238 to see Dempsey win by a knockout in the fourth round. Having break all financial record , Dempsey and Mr. Kearns proceed to break the city of Shelby , Mont. After an oil strike near their small community , Shelby booster give way to delusion of grandeur and promise the champion $ 250,000 to defend his title against the light-hitting Tommy Gibbons. The promotion lay an egg , but Mr. Kearns collect the entire guarantee and have a locomotive and caboose wait to rush the money and the champion 's party out of town as soon a Dempsey have win on points. Behind them , the bank that have put up the cash closed. Shelby have a hole in the seat of it civic breech for a generation. Wild Bout With Firpo To those who saw it , the Dempsey-Firpo bout of 1923 be the most wildly exciting ever fight for the heavyweight title. Luis Angel Firpo of Argentina , unpolished and untamed , daze the champion with a right to the jaw second after the opening bell. Only half-conscious , Dempsey drop Firpo four times. Firpo knock the champion into the press row , where reporter instinctively raise hand and shove to protect themselves. Thus aid , Dempsey get back in the ring and put Firpo down once more before the bell. Two more knockdown finish the Argentine in the second round. The Firpo fight be Dempsey 's fifth title defense ( he have knock out Billy Miske and Bill Brennan before meet Carpentier ) . Three year later he make his sixth and last against Tunney , the Shakespeare-loving veteran of the Marine Corps who have move into heavyweight rank after win the American light-heavyweight championship , lose it and win it back. `` I never seed anything like it , '' Mr. Rickard say , watch 120,757 customer crowd into the huge horseshoe in Philadelphia then call Sesquicentennial Stadium. The promoter have be tell the fight would draw big in Philadelphia , but he have not dream what a stir it would make. Starter Is Late Scratch Down in Maryland , for instance , be a race official name Jim Milton. He be the starter when the Havre de Grace track open in 1912 , and when he retire half a century later he have start every race at that track except the last one on the program on Sept. 23 , 1926. He leave that to an assistant starter and catch a train for Philadelphia and the fight. Many year afterward Mr. Tunney be tell about Mr. Milton 's only dereliction. `` He probably be bet on Dempsey , '' he said. If he be , he lost. Jabbing and circle through a drenching rainstorm , Tunney win go away. One day less than a year later , the pair meet again in Soldier Field in Chicago in a match that would make Dave Barry the world 's most widely know referee. In the seventh round Tunney be knock down for the first time in his life. Gracious outside the ring , Dempsey in battle be no slave to the rules. Not many year ago , when Joe Frazier be champion , he be scandalize by film of Dempsey crouch over a fall Firpo ready to slug him a he rose. `` That 's bad for boxing , '' Frazier protested. The Long Count With Tunney on the floor , it do not occur to Dempsey to retire to a neutral corner until Barry stop the count and lead him across the ring. Returning , the referee start the count all over. Tunney get up at `` 9 '' - it be establish that he have have about 14 second to recuperate - and win a clear decision , score a knockdown in the eighth round. To this day , the Dempsey cult believe Tunney be save by the long count ; Tunney always insist he be in full control throughout. That be the last time around for Dempsey a a fighter of importance. Thirty-two year have pass since his birth on June 24 , 1895 , in Manassa , Colo. , to Hyrum and Celia Dempsey , who have pause there with their brood on a meander journey from Mudfork , W.Va. Manassa be only one of many stop for a nomadic family , but year later the fact that Mrs. Dempsey have give birth there inspired Damon Runyon , the sportswriter , to dub the new champion the Manassa Mauler. Hyrum Dempsey be a tough , restless descendant of Irish immigrant who have quit a job a schoolteacher to venture west. There be a strain of Indian blood in both parent reveal in the baby 's blueblack hair and high cheekbones. They name him William Harrison Dempsey and call him Harry , but at 16 he go his own way and adopt his own names. The first be Kid Blackie. For about three year he fight under that name in mountain mining camps. Between saloon bout he work in the mine , shin shoe , pick fruit and hustle , rid the rod on train and sleep in hobo jungles. Meanwhile , his old brother , Bernie , be box a Jack Dempsey , have borrow the name of an oldtime middleweight know a `` the Nonpareil. '' One night in Denver , Harry substitute for Bernie and be introduce a Jack Dempsey. The name stuck. 21 First-Round Knockouts He be manage for a while by one Jack Price and later by John ( the Barber ) Reisler before he and Mr. Kearns become partners. They start slowly but pick up speed a they moved. By the time they reach Maumee Bay and the rendezvous with Willard , Dempsey 's record include 21 first-round knockouts. If any other puncher ever deal such swift destruction to so many , the record book do not report it. Willard have win the championship in 1915 and defend it once in a 10-round no-decision match with Frank Moran in 1916. On Feb. 15 , 1918 , an item in The New York Times report that Dempsey have knock out Fireman Jim Flynn in one round , add that Willard have agree to meet the winner of a bout between Dempsey and Fred Fulton. That bout take place on July 28 , 1918. It last 23 seconds. One punch be throw , a right by Dempsey. Fulton be count out and his name enter in the long list of Dempsey 's victim -Gunboat Smith , Carl Morris , Bill Brennan , Billy Miske , Battling Levinsky , Arthur Pelkey. There be n't a heavyweight of repute Dempsey have n't beat , except Willard. After take care of that oversight , the new champion take his time about defend his title. In 1920 he take on two of his old victim , Miske and Brennan , and dispose of them. In 1921 he beat Carpentier , in 1922 he rest , and in 1923 he beat Tommy Gibbons and Firpo. Three year intervene before he fight again and lose to Tunney. Attracted to the Stage Like John L. Sullivan , Jim Corbett and other champion before him , he give the stage at least as much attention a he bestow on the ring. He accept a featured role on Broadway in a play call `` The Big Fight , '' direct by David Belasco. The feminine lead be Estelle Taylor , his wife. In his early day in the mining camp , he have be marry to Maxine Gates , a saloon piano player , but not for long. Miss Taylor be a star of silent film whom he meet in Hollywood. After their Broadway adventure , they go back to Hollywood and make a movie call `` Manhattan Madness , '' which be also a disaster. By this time Dempsey and his manager have fall out. A series of suit and countersuit keep them in litigation right up to the Philadelphia match with Tunney in 1926. The distraction be no help to Dempsey in his preparation for the bout , but when he lose , he do not mention this a an excuse. He have learn that fighter suffer many distractions. `` Some night , '' he tell a young boxer , `` you 'll catch a punch between the eye and all of a sudden you 'll see three guy in the ring against you. Pick out the one in the middle and hit him , because he 's the one who hit you. '' Mr. Dempsey and Miss Taylor be divorce , and he marry the singer Hannah Williams. They have two daughter , Joan in 1934 and Barbara in 1936. He and Miss Williams be divorce in 1943. In 1958 he be marry for the fourth time , to the former Deanna Piattelli , who survives. He later adopt her daughter from a previous marriage. She take the name Barbara Dempsey and help him write his 1977 autobiography , `` Dempsey. '' Served in Coast Guard In 1938 Mr. Dempsey be the first winner of the Edward J. Neil Memorial Plaque , award by the New York Boxing Writers Association to the man who have do the most for box that year. He be elect to the Boxing Hall of Fame in 1954. Except during World War II , when he enlist in the Coast Guard and be commission a lieutenant commander , he remain identify with the ring , a a referee of boxing and wrestling and a participant in various promotions. In the early day of Louis ' reign a champion , Mr. Dempsey lend his name and restaurant facility to a `` white hope '' tournament , a term that have survive in box long after it racial implication have evaporated. Dropping into Dempsey 's , John Lardner , the writer , saw a horde of young male devour steak and chops. `` Finest bunch of white hope ever assemble , '' the proprietor say proudly. `` What about him ? '' Mr. Lardner ask , indicate a husky young black in the middle of the pack. Mr. Dempsey fetch him a slap on the shoulder. `` You get a good eye for a fighter , '' he said. `` He 's the best prospect in the bunch . ''