April 24 , 1983 OBITUARY Earl Hines , 77 , Father of Modern Jazz Piano , Dies By JON PARELES Earl ( Fatha ) Hines , the father of modern jazz piano , die Friday in Oakland , Calif. , after a heart attack. He be 77 year old. In his pioneering work with Louis Armstrong in the late 1920 's , Mr. Hines virtually redefine jazz piano. With what he call `` trumpet style , '' Mr. Hines play horn-like solo line in octave with his right hand and spur them with chord from his left. He thus carve a place for the piano a a solo instrument outside the rhythm section and define the role of both hand for the next generation of jazz pianists. Mr. Hines 's strong right hand and angular melodic idea continue to sound contemporary throughout his career. In the 1930 's and 1940 's , he lead a Chicago big band that begin the career of the singer Billy Eckstine and Sarah Vaughan and include the saxophonist Wardell Gray and Budd Johnson. That band become an incubator for be-bop in the early 1940 's , when it feature the trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie and the saxophonist Charlie Parker. Son of Two Musicians Earl Hines be bear in Duquesne , Pa. His father be a trumpeter and his mother play piano and organ. He take up the trumpet a a child , but begin study classical piano at the age of 9. After three year of lesson , he decide he be more interested in jazz piano , and by the time he be 15 year old he be lead his own trio. Mr. Hines work with big band lead by Lois B. Deppe in Pittsburgh and Carroll Dickerson and Sammy Stewart in Chicago , and in 1927 he join a quintet lead by Louis Armstrong at Chicago 's Savoy Ballroom. With Mr. Armstrong , he make such recording a `` West End Blues '' and `` Weather Bird , '' and in 1928 he record solo , include `` A Monday Date '' and `` Caution Blues , '' that establish his style and have have a lasting influence on jazz piano. Mr. Hines start his own big band in 1928 at Chicago 's Grand Terrace Ballroom , and stay in residence there for more than a decade , although he tour for part of each year. His be one of the first black big band to tour the South. Thn `` Jelly Jelly '' and `` Stormy Monday Blues. '' Although he leave the Grand Terrace in 1940 , Mr. Hines lead a big band nearly continuously until 1947 ; at one point the group include a string section compose entirely of women. Origin of Nickname A Chicago disk jockey call him `` Fatha '' in the 1930 's and the nickname - a in `` Father of modern piano '' -stayed with him. After dissolve his band , Mr. Hines work with small groups. He rejoin Mr. Armstrong from 1948 to 1951 , then lead his own bands. In 1957 , he tour Europe with an all-star group include the trombonist Jack Teagarden , but he spend much of the 1950 's play Dixieland jazz - music that he have not be Jack Teagarden , but he spend much of the 1950 's play Dixieland jazz - music that he have not be a part of - on the West Coast. He re-emerge with triumphant concert and recording in the early 1960 's , and be elect a member of Downbeat magazine 's jazz hall of fame in 1965. In 1966 , the United States sponsor Mr. Hines ' group on a tour of the Soviet Union , where he play for 92,000 people. Since the 1950 's , Mr. Hines have be base in the San Francisco Bay area , and he continue to tour Europe , Japan and the United States through the early 1980's. He play his final engagement last weekend in San Francisco. Mr. Hines be survive by a granddaughter. He be divorce from his wife , Janie , in 1980 .