May 1 , 1983 OBITUARY Muddy Waters , Blues Performer , Dies By ROBERT PALMER Muddy Waters , who play a key role in the development of electric blue and rock-and- roll and be the great contemporary exponent of the influential Mississippi Delta blue style , die in his sleep early yesterday at his home near Chicago. The singer and guitarist be pronounce dead at Chicago 's Good Samaritan Hospital , reportedly of a heart attack. He be 68 year old. Beginning in the early 1950 's , Mr. Waters make a series of hit record for Chicago 's Chess label that make him the undisputed king of Chicago blue singers. He be the first popular bandleader to assemble and lead a truly electric band , a band that use amplification to make the music more ferociously physical instead of simply make it a little louder. In 1958 , he become the first artist to play electric blue in England , and while many British folk-blues fan recoil in horror , his visit inspire young musician like Mick Jagger , Keith Richards and Brian Jones , who later name their band the Rolling Stones after Mr. Waters 's early hit `` Rollin ' Stone. '' Bob Dylan 's mid-1960 's rock hit `` Like a Rolling Stone '' and the lead rock newspaper Rolling Stone be also name after Mr. Waters 's original song. Played at Carnegie Hall Mr. Waters play his blue at Carnegie Hall in 1959 , and in 1960 he make a triumphant appearance at the Newport Jazz Festival , where he introduce his blue hit `` Got My Mojo Working '' to white music fans. His music be widely imitate by a generation of young white musician , and virtually all the lead rock guitarist who emerge in the 1960 's , include Eric Clapton , Jeff Beck , Jimmy Page and Johnny Winter , name Muddy Waters a one of their early and most important influences. Mr. Clapton return the favor by hire Mr. Waters to open the concert on one of his American tour of the 1970 's , where hundred of thousand of rock fan hear Mr. Waters. Mr. Waters make his final concert appearance last June when he perform his early hit `` Blow Wind Blow '' in an Eric Clapton show in Miami. But Muddy Waters be more than a major influence in the pop music world. He be a great singer of American vernacular music , a vocal artist of astonish power , range , depth , and subtlety. Among musician and singer , his remarkable sense of timing , his command of inflection and pitch shading , and his vocabulary of vocal sound and effect , from the purest falsetto to grainy moan rasp , be all frequent topic of conversation. And he be able to duplicate many of his sing technique on electric guitar , use a metal slider to make the instrument `` speak '' in a quivering , voice-like manner. His blue sound simple , but it be so deeply root in the tradition of the Mississippi Delta that other singer and guitarist find it almost impossible to imitate it convincingly. `` My blue look so simple , so easy to do , but it 's not , '' Mr. Waters say in a 1978 interview. `` They say my blue be the hard blue in the world to play. '' Raised in Mississippi Delta McKinley ( Muddy Waters ) Morganfield be bear April 4 , 1915 , in Rolling Fork , in the southern Mississippi Delta near Highway 61. His father , Ollie Morganfield , farm and play blue guitar , but his parent separate when he be six month old and he go to live with his maternal grandmother on a plantation outside Clarksdale , Miss. , a town in the central Delta where John Lee Hooker and other future blue and gospel star grow up. His grandmother begin call him `` Muddy '' when he be a baby because he like play in the mud , and when he be a child on the plantation playmates add the surname `` Waters. '' Muddy Waters begin make music when he be 3 or 4 year old. He begin perform on harmonica at country picnic and fish fry when he be 12 or 13 , and have plenty of opportunity to watch old blue singer and guitarists. Robert Johnson influence him , and so do the impassioned singer-guitarist Son House. But he also listen to commercial blue recording by Memphis Minnie , Lonnie Johnson , Tampa Red , and Blind Lemon Jefferson on a neighbor 's phonograph. In 1941 and 1942 , Alan Lomax and John Work record Mr. Waters in Mississippi for the Library of Congress. Hearing himself on record encourage Mr. Waters to try to make commercial recording , and in 1943 he move to Chicago. The following year he acquire an electric guitar , and by 1948 his band , with Jimmy Rogers on second guitar , Little Walter on harmonica , and Baby Face Leroy on guitar and drum , be the most popular blue combo work on Chicago 's black South Side. He record for Columbia record and for Aristocrat in 1948 , and his record career take off after Aristocrat , own by Leonard and Phil Chess , become Chess Records , with Muddy Waters a it lead blue artist. In the early and middle 1950 's , Muddy Waters and his band make a number of record popular with black record buyer , especially in the Deep South and in Middle Western city with large population of Southerners , like Chicago and Detroit. The song Mr. Waters record and perform in the 1950 's include `` Hoochie Coochie Man , '' `` Just Make Love To Me , '' `` She Moves Me , '' `` Mannish Boy , '' and `` Louisiana Blues. '' His song , some of which be original while others come from the blue tradition or be write for him by Willie Dixon , be still in the repertory of countless blue and rhythm-and-blues band in the United States and around the world. He receive widespread recognition in the 1970 's , include six Grammy award and a dynamic featured performance in Martin Scorcese 's 1978 film `` The Last Waltz. '' Mr. Waters never grow rich from his music , but he be able to work virtually as often a he want to , and in recent month he have be take time off , `` enjoy the fruit of his labor , '' accord to his manager , Scott Cameron. He live comfortably in Westmont , Ill. , a Chicago suburb. His most recent album , record for the Columbia distribute Blue Sky label and produce by his longtime admirer , the rock guitarist Johnny Winter , sell good than all but a handful of his early recording , and he be proud of them. `` This be the best point of my life that I 'm live right now , '' he say in 1978. `` I 'm glad it come before I die , I can tell you. '' He be survive by his wife , Marva ; three daughter and one son ; four grandchild and several great-grandchildren .