August 26 , 1984 OBITUARY Truman Capote be Dead at 59 ; Novelist of Style and Clarity By ALBIN KREBS Truman Capote , one of the postwar era 's leading American writer , whose prose shimmer with clarity and quality , die yesterday in Los Angeles at the age of 59. Mr. Capote die at the home of Joanna Carson , former wife of the entertainer Johnny Carson , in the Bel-Air section , accord to Comdr. William Booth of the Los Angeles Police Department. `` There be no indication of foul play , '' he say , add that the county coroner 's office would investigate the cause of death. The novelist , short story writer and literary celebrity pioneer a genre he call `` the nonfiction novel , '' exemplify by his immensely popular `` In Cold Blood. '' He die apparently without have complete his long- promise `` masterwork , '' an extensive novel call `` Answered Prayers. '' Mr. Capote 's first story be publish while he be still in his teen , but his work total only 13 volume , most of them slim collection , and in the view of many of his critic , notably his old friend John Malcolm Brinnin , he fail to join the rank of the truly great American writer because he squander his time , talent and health on the pursuit of celebrity , rich and pleasure. `` I have to be successful , and I have to be successful early , '' Mr. Capote say in 1978. `` The thing about people like me be that we always know what we be go to do. Many people spend half their life not knowing. But I be a very special person , and I have to have a very special life. I be not mean to work in an office or something , though I would have be successful at whatever I did. But I always know that I want to be a writer and that I want to be rich and famous. '' Success , both a a writer and a a celebrity , come early , when he be 23 year old and publish his first novel , `` Other Voices , Other Rooms. '' It be a critical and financial success , and so be most of the volume of short story , reportage and novella that follow , include `` Breakfast at Tiffany 's , '' `` The Muses Are Heard , '' `` The Grass Harp , '' `` Local Color , '' `` The Dogs Bark '' and `` Music for Chameleons. '' Claim to Literary Fame But the book that perhaps solidify his claim to literary fame be `` In Cold Blood , '' his detailed , painstakingly research and chill account of the 1959 slaying of a Kansas farm family and the capture , trial and execution of the two killers. Published serially in The New Yorker and then a a book in 1965 , `` In Cold Blood '' consume more than six year of his life. But it win him enthusiastic praise , mountain of publicity , million of dollar and the luxury of time to work on `` Answered Prayers. '' But he accelerate the speed of his journey to celebrity , appear on television talk show and , in his languid accent , which retain it Southern intonation , indulge a gift for purvey viperish wit and scandalous gossip. He continue to cultivate score of the famous a his friend and confidant , all the while publish little and , he say later , develop a formidable `` writer 's block '' that delay completion of `` Answered Prayers. '' To keep alive the public 's interest in the promised work , in 1975 he decide to allow the magazine Esquire to print portion of the unfinished novel. The decision be catastrophic to the grand social life he have cultivate because , in one of the excerpt , `` La C^ote Basque , '' Mr. Capote tell apparently true and mostly scandalous story about his famous friend , name name , and in so do forever lose their friendship and many other friendship a well. Alcohol and Drug Problems Soon his long-simmering problem with alcohol and drug grow into addiction , and his general health deteriorate alarmingly. The once sylphlike and youthful Mr. Capote grow paunchy and bald , and in the late 1970 's he underwent treatment for alcoholism and drug abuse , have prostate surgery and suffer from a painful facial nerve condition , a tic doloreux. In `` Music for Chameleons , '' a collection of short nonfiction piece publish in 1980 , Mr. Capote , in a `` self-interview , '' ask himself whether , at that point in his life , God have help him. His answer : `` Yes. More and more. But I 'm not a saint yet. I 'm an alcoholic. I 'm a drug addict. I 'm homosexual. I 'm a genius. Of course , I could be all four of these dubious thing and still be a saint. '' Named Truman Streckfus Persons after his birth in New Orleans on Sept. 30 , 1924 , he be the son of Archulus Persons , a nonpracticing lawyer and member of an old Alabama family , and of the former Lillie Mae Faulk , of Monroeville , Ala. Years later he adopt the surname of his stepfather , Joe Capote , a Cuban-born New York businessman. Mr. Capote 's mother , who eventually commit suicide , like to be call Nina and be not , accord to her own testimony as well a her son 's , temperamentally suit to motherhood. Living with her husband in a New Orleans hotel , she send Truman to live with relative in Monroeville when he be barely able to walk , and for the first nine year of his life he live mostly in Alabama under the supervision of female cousin and aunts. 'A Spiritual Orphan' In that period , he say year later , he felt like `` a spiritual orphan , like a turtle on it back. '' `` You see , '' he say , `` I be so different from everyone , so much more intelligent and sensitive and perceptive. I be have fifty perception a minute to everyone else 's five. I always felt that nobody be go to understand me , go to understand what I felt about things. I guess that 's why I start writing. At least on paper I could put down what I thought. '' Most summer the boy return to New Orleans for a month or so , and accompany his father on trip up and down the Mississippi aboard the riverboat on which Mr. Persons work a a purser. Truman learn to tap dance , he say , and be proud of the fact that he once dance for the passenger accompany by Louis Armstrong , whose band be play on the steamboat. Many of his story , notably `` A Christmas Memory , '' which pay love tribute to his old cousin , Miss Sook Faulk , who succor him in his childhood loneliness , be base on his recollection of life in and around Monroeville. So be his first publish novel , `` Other Voices , Other Rooms , '' his second , `` The Grass Harp , '' and the collection of story , `` A Tree of Night. '' Character in 'Mockingbird' The young Truman 's best friend in Monroeville be the little girl next door , Nelle Harper Lee , who many year later put him into her Pulitzer Prize-winning novel , `` To Kill a Mockingbird , '' in the character of the precocious Dill Harris. ( He have earlier use Miss Lee a the prototype for the character of Idabel Tompkins in `` Other Voices , Other Rooms. '' ) After his mother 's divorce from Mr. Persons and her marriage to Joe Capote , she bring her son to live with them in New York. He be send to several private school , include Trinity School and St. John 's Academy in New York , but he dislike school and do poorly in his course , include English , although he have teach himself to read and write when he be 5 year old. Having be tell by many teacher that the precocious child be probably mentally backward , the Capotes send him to a psychiatrist who , Truman Capote say triumphantly some year later , `` naturally classified me a a genius. '' He later credit Catherine Woods , an English teacher at Greenwich High School in Connecticut , with be the first person to recognize his write talent and to give him guidance. With her encouragement he write poem and story for the school paper , The Green Witch. He do not complete high school and have no further formal education. At the age of 17 , Mr. Capote wangle a job at The New Yorker. `` Not a very grand job , for all it really involve be sort cartoon and clip newspaper , '' he write year later. `` Still , I be fortunate to have it , especially since I be determine never to set a studious foot inside a college classroom. I felt that either one be or be n't a writer , and no combination of professor could influence the outcome. I still think I be correct , at least in my own case. '' First Stories and Novel In a two-year stay at The New Yorker , Mr. Capote have several short story publish in minor magazines. `` Several of them be submit to my employer , and none accept , '' he write later. In the same period , he write his first , never-published novel , `` Summer Crossing. '' Mr. Capote make his first major magazine sale , of the haunt short story `` Miriam , '' to Mademoiselle in 1945 , and in 1946 it win an O. Henry Memorial Award. ( There be to be three more O. Henry awards. ) The award lead to a contract and a $ 1,500 advance from Random House to write a novel. Mr. Capote return to Monroeville and begin `` Other Voices , Other Rooms , '' and he work on the slim volume in New Orleans , Saratoga Springs , N.Y. , and in North Carolina , finally complete it on Nantucket. It be publish in 1948. The novel , a sensitively write account of a teen-age boy 's come to grip with maturity and accept his world a it be , achieve wide popularity and critical acclaim and be hail a a remarkable achievement for a writer only 23 year old. In 1969 , when `` Other Voices , Other Rooms '' be reprint , Mr. Capote say the novel be `` an attempt to exorcise demon : an unconscious , altogether intuitive attempt , for I be not aware , except for a few incident and description , of it be in any serious degree autobiographical. Rereading it now , I find such self-deception unpardonable. '' Famous Dust-Cover Photograph The book 's back dust cover receive almost a much comment a the novel itself , and for year be the talk of the literary set. The jacket be a photogragh of an androgynously pretty Mr. Capote , big eye look up from under blond bang , and wear a tattersall vest , recline sensually on a sofa. The striking , now-famous dust-jacket photograph may have be prophetic , because Mr. Capote , for the remainder of his life , assiduously seek personal publicity and celebrity and say he have `` a love affair with camera - all cameras. '' In the pursuit of literary celebrity in succeed year , the writer be photograph in his home in the Hamptons on Long Island , in Switzerland and at United Nations Plaza. He be photograph escort well- dress society woman who seem always to tower over Mr. Capote , who be only 5 foot 4 inch tall. He be also photograph , for dozen of magazine and newspaper , when he give a much-publicized masked ball at the Plaza Hotel in New York in 1966 for some 500 of his `` very close friends. '' For many of the postwar year Mr. Capote travel widely and live abroad much of the time with Jack Dunphy , his companion of more than a quarter-century. He turn out short- story collection and nonfiction for Vogue , Mademoiselle , Esquire and The New Yorker , which first publish `` The Muses Are Heard , '' a 1956 book chronicle a tour of the Soviet Union by a company of black Americans in `` Porgy and Bess. '' `` I conceive the whole adventure a a short comic 'nonfiction novel , ' the first , '' Mr. Capote said. `` That book be an important event for me. While write it , I realize I just might have find a solution to what have always be my great creative quandary. I want to produce a journalistic novel , something on a large scale that would have the credibility of fact , the immediacy of film , the depth and freedom of prose , and the precision of poetry. '' Praise for 'In Cold Blood' The result of Mr. Capote 's discovery be `` In Cold Blood , '' which be almost universally praised. John Hersey call it `` a remarkable book , '' for example , but there be dissenters. Stanley Kauffmann , in The New Republic , snip at `` In Cold Blood , '' say `` this be n't write , it 's research '' - a sly borrow from Mr. Capote 's witty thumbnail critique , year earlier , of the ramble book of the late Beat Generation author Jack Kerouac : `` This be n't write , it 's typing. '' The critic Kenneth Tynan take Mr. Capote to task for be too strictly a reporter and not make an effort to have the killer ' life spared. Many reader be strike by Mr. Capote 's verbatim quotation of long , involved conversation and incident in his book. He explain that this come from `` a talent for mentally record lengthy conversation , an ability I have work to achieve while research 'The Muses Are Heard , ' for I devoutly believe that the taking of note , much less the use of a tape recorder , create artifice and distorts or even destroy any naturalness that might exist between the observer and the observe , the nervous hummingbird and it would-be captor. '' He say his trick be to rush away from an interview and immmediately write down everything he have be told. Mr. Capote be co-author of the movie `` Beat the Devil '' with John Huston and write the screenplay for a film of Henry James 's `` The Innocents. '' Mr. Capote turn his second novel , `` The Grass Harp , '' into an unsuccessful Broadway play and , with Harold Arlen , write the 1954 musical , also unsuccessful , `` House of Flowers. '' Mr. Capote also adapt a number of his story , include `` A Christmas Memory '' and `` The Thanksgiving Visitor , '' for television. Critics note his deft handling of child a character in his work , his ability to move from the real to the surreal , and his use of lush word and images. In 1963 , the critic Mark Schorer write of Mr. Capote : `` Perhaps the single constant in his prose be style , and the emphasis he himself place upon the importance of style . ''