July 1 , 1984 OBITUARY Lillian Hellman , Playwright , Author , and Rebel , Dies at 77 By THE NEW YORK TIMES Lillian Hellman , one of the most important playwright of the American theater , die of cardiac arrest yesterday at Martha 's Vineyard ( Mass. ) Hospital near her summer home. She be 77 year old and also live in Manhattan. The playwright have be take to the hospital by ambulance from her home at Vineyard Haven. Isidore Englander , her lawyer and one of her executor , say that Miss Hellman have suffer from a weak heart for several years. Among Miss Hellman 's play that have enter the modern repertory be `` The Children 's Hour , '' `` The Little Foxes '' and `` Watch on the Rhine. '' Wrote for Motion Pictures She be also one of the most successful motion-picture scenarist , and the three volume of her memoir be both critical and popular success - and even more controversial than her plays. Yet the Hellman line that be probably most quote come from none of these , but from a letter she write in 1952 to the House Committee on Un-American Activities when it be investigate link between American leftist and the Communist Party in this country and abroad. `` I can not and will not cut my conscience to fit this year 's fashion , '' Miss Hellman wrote. She offer to testify about her own opinion and action , but not about those of others , because `` to hurt innocent people whom I know many year ago in order to save myself be , to me , inhuman and dishonorable. '' For this , she risk imprisonment for contempt of Congress , be blacklist and saw her income drop from $ 150,000 a year to virtually nothing. Although she have participate with Communists in many cause , she be not a Communist. `` Rebels seldom make good revolutionary , '' she explained. And Lillian Hellman be a rebel , possess a headstrong , argumentative , stubborn - some say arrogant - streak that seldom enable her to admit she could have be wrong. She also find it difficult to admit that viewpoint that conflict with her own might possess some merit , a trait that in her late year embroil her in public dispute with the author Diana Trilling and Mary McCarthy. She rebel first against her family , especially the wealthy branch of her mother , the former Julia Newhouse. They be Southern merchant of German-Jewish origin , who have settle in Alabama , then New Orleans , where she be bear on June 20 , 1907. Her father , Max , move to New York after a business reversal and begin a successful career a a salesman. An only child , Miss Hellmann spend her girlhood shuttling between upper West End Avenue and the genteel boardinghouse keep by two maiden aunt in New Orleans. Her memoir , which be less an autobiography than a montage of the people who mean most to her , portray relation of love and tension between the girl and her wet nurse , her aunt , a cousin who be a `` lose lady '' and other extraordinary kinfolk and friends. A loner , disaffect from family and school , she take refuge in books. Revealing Anecdotes After a scolding , she run away at the age of 14. Received with love on her return two day later , she recount that she learn something `` useful and dangerous - if you 're willing to take the punishment , you be halfway through the battle. '' She add , `` That the issue may be trivial , the battle ugly , be another point. '' In another revealing anecdote , she say she pawn a ring give her on her 15th birthday by her maternal uncle , Jake Newhouse , and buy book with the money. `` I go immediately to tell him what I 'd do , '' she say , `` deciding , I think , that day that the break have to come. . . . He laugh and say the word I later use in 'The Little Foxes ' : 'So you 've get spirit after all. Most of the rest of them be make of sugar water. ' `` After graduation from Wadleigh High School , Miss Hellman be enrol at the Washington Square campus of New York University for three year and later study journalism at Columbia University. But , she say , she often cut class to explore Bohemian Greenwich Village. This lead in 1924 to her first job , read manuscript at the venturesome new publishing house of Boni & Liveright. She leave the next year and marry the writer Arthur Kober. The marriage end in a friendly Hollywood divorce in 1932. In between she do book review , write short story that she say she do not like , visit France and Germany and read script for Metro- Goldwyn-Mayer. Met Dashiell Hammett It be a period , a she recall it , of frequent idleness , discontent and drinking. It terminate when she meet Dashiell Hammett , with whom she would live off and on for 31 years. Mr. Hammett tell her that she be the model for Nora Charles , the cool and witty wife in his book `` The Thin Man '' - but be also the model for his villainous woman a well. Miss Hellman write a play , a comedy , with Louis Kronenberger. She say it amuse them both enormously , but nobody else find it funny , and it be never performed. Thereafter , each of her play be write in several draft , after long research and under harsh coaching by Mr. Hammett. The next , `` The Children 's Hour , '' be suggest by a book about a lawsuit in Scotland. It be the story of a vicious girl destroy the life of two teacher by falsely accuse them of have a lesbian affair. Miss Hellman , who be then read script for the producer Herman Shumlin , take it to him and sit in a corner while he read it. After the first act , she recount , he say `` Swell ! '' After the second , `` I hope it keep up. '' After the third , `` I 'll produce it. '' It open in 1934 , and be an immediate hit. Although it be ban in Boston , Chicago and other city , and in Britain , Miss Hellman earn $ 125,000 from it first run , and a $ 50,000 contract from Samuel Goldwyn to turn it into a movie. A Play About Slander It be a period , a she recall , when a film could not show a man on a couch with a girl unless at least one foot be touch the floor. But with what would become her legendary skill , she revise her tale of slander to one involve jealousy and a love triangle , rather than lesbianism. The picture , call `` These Three , '' be consider dare enough in that age of Pollyanna film , and it be a success. Speaking of `` The Children 's Hour , '' Miss Hellman say , `` I never see character as monstrously a audience do. '' For her , it be a play not about a vicious child but about the evil power of a slander , and to some degree anticipate the political investigation of the left that be to come. By 1935 , she be able to dictate term for an occasional scenario for Hollywood ( `` The Dark Angel , '' `` Dead End '' ) , and be one of the country 's highest-paid writers. Yet she draw close to the left. She write a drama about a strike , `` Days to Come , '' which appear in late 1936 and be unsuccessful. She then go to Spain , help write Joris Ivens 's film , `` The Spanish Earth , '' and come home to campaign for aid to the Loyalists fight the Franco force in the Spanish Civil War. Meanwhile , she be work hard on a play about a Southern family obsess with money and power - the play , she later say , that get out of her system her own resentment toward her mother 's family. Her close friend Dorothy Parker suggest the title : `` The Little Foxes. '' Frightened by Success It be a great hit on stage and in the screen version , which Miss Hellman also wrote. She flee New York after the Broadway opening ; she explain that she be frighten by success and what it do to people. With her earnings , she buy an estate in Westchester County and convert it into a working farm. For 13 year , she live there and help run it , while write play , book and magazine article and carry on an active social life. Interviewers , condition by the toughness of her writing , be surprise to find her intensely feminine , fond of clothes and cooking , a short , attractive person with reddish hair and an aquiline nose. Late in life her face be generously lined and her voice be raspy , a condition she attribute to nearly a lifetime of chain-smoking. While concede the taut excitement of her work , some critic complain that her plot be melodramatic. She reply : `` If you believe , a the Greeks do , that man be at the mercy of the god , then you write tragedy. The end be inevitable from the beginning. But if you believe that man can solve his own problem and be at nobody 's mercy , then you will probably write melodrama. '' Deeply engage with the fate of Spain and what she foresee a the come war with Nazism , Miss Hellman be widely attack a a Communist. But when her anti-Nazi play , `` Watch on the Rhine , '' open in early 1941 , the Communist press criticize her for support the Allies in what it then call the `` phony war. '' Inspired by Childhood Friend The play , name the best of the year by the New York Drama Critics Circle , describe a tragic encounter between a German foe of the Nazis and a cynical Rumanian in the home of a cultivate , liberal American family. The hero 's American wife seem to have be inspire by a girlhood friend of Miss Hellman 's who join the anti-Nazi underground and be killed. One of the Hellman memoir , `` Pentimento , '' tell the story of `` Julia , '' and recount that Miss Hellman once smuggle $ 50,000 to her to be use in bribe Nazi guard to free prisoners. Last year , Yale University Press publish a memoir by Muriel Gardiner , a psychoanalyst who be active in the Austrian underground in World War II , and suggest that Dr. Gardiner 's experience be the model for the Hellman story. Since the Hellman story end with her bring Julia 's body back to the United States , some critic raise question about the authenticity of the Hellman story. Miss Hellman respond that Miss Gardiner `` may have be the model for somebody else 's Julia , but she be certainly not the model for my Julia. '' Two War Movies During the war , Miss Hellman write a scenario for a movie about the Eastern front call `` The North Star , '' extol the bravery of the people of the Soviet Union , by then an American ally. After heavy rewriting , it emerge a a simplistic affair and she deplore it , although it be well received. She also write a play , later a movie , `` The Searching Wind , '' about an American diplomat and prewar appeasement of Hitler , and visit the Eastern front outside Warsaw a a guest of the Soviet Government. Then come `` Another Part of the Forest '' ( 1946 ) and `` The Autumn Garden '' ( 1951 ) , both return to the theme of bitter strife over money and power in genteel Southern settings. Both be successes. Never Denounced Stalinism Miss Hellman be attack by a number of critic for never denounce the excess of Stalinism , a others on the left did. Mr. Hammett be jail in 1951 for refuse to submit a list of contributor to what the Federal Bureau of Investigation have brand a Communist front , the Civil Rights Congress , of which he be a trustee. He emerge with his health shattered. Miss Hellman receive her summons the next year. She formally offer to testify about herself but not about others. Further , she refuse to let her lawyer cite the fact that she have be criticize by the Communists. She say that to use this `` would amount to my attack them at a time when they be be persecuted. '' Balmain Costume for Courage Wearing a new Balmain costume to give her courage , she say later , Miss Hellman appear before the House committee , repeat her offer to testify about herself , then invoke the Fifth Amendment on question about others. The committee do not choose to cite her for contempt. But she suddenly become an untouchable in the movie and the theater. Her income drop from $ 150,000 the year before to a pittance. She have to sell her farm. She work briefly in Italy on a scenario that be stillborn , and briefly a a salesclerk in a department store , under an assumed name. Not until `` Toys in the Attic '' appear in 1960 do her financial strait end. This play again win the drama critic ' award , but the Pulitzer prize board reject the recommendation of it drama jury that it receive that honor a well. In `` Scoundrel Time , '' a memoir that be a best seller in 1976 , Miss Hellman recall that era with bitterness - not so much for those hunt Communists a for the former leftist who name name , and for those liberal who remain silent or who participate in anti-Communist effort that she say be subsidize by the Central Intelligence Agency. These event , she say , lead directly to Vietnam and the Watergate affair. `` Such people would have a right to say that I , and many like me , take too long to see what be go on in the Soviet Union , '' she wrote. `` But whatever our mistake , I do not believe we do our country any harm. And I think they did. '' Twice Planned to Marry Mr. Hammett die in Jan. 1960. In an introduction to a collection of his short story , Miss Hellman say of his last year with her , `` It be an unspoken pleasure , that have come together so many year , ruin so much and repair a little , we have endured. '' In an interview in 1973 , she shed a bit more light on that relationship , trouble by his drinking , their temper and a `` modern '' attitude toward marriage. `` We do have two period of planning to be marry , '' she said. `` The first time , he disappear with another lady. That 's not really fair - I be disappear too. . . . We be both of that nutty time that believe that alliance could stand up against other people. I should have know well , because I have a jealous nature. '' During the decade when she be blacklist by Hollywood , Miss Hellman write four adaptation for the stage : `` Montserrat , '' base on a novel by Emmanuel Robles ; `` The Lark , '' from Jean Anouilh 's play about Jeanne d'Arc ; the book for `` Candide , '' an operetta , with music by Leonard Bernstein , and `` My Mother , My Father , and Me , '' base on a novel by Burt Blechman. All of the late play get mixed review , but be occasionally revived. `` The Lark , '' which Miss Hellman also direct , be describe a much good than a Christopher Fry version stag in London. The critic ' judgment of some of these show , a with the Hellman play that be smash hit , have improve a time passed. `` The Little Foxes '' be revive in 1980 a a vehicle for Elizabeth Taylor and have a successful run on Broadway and a national tour. Her Last Play By the end of the 1950 's , motion-picture offer be come in again , but Miss Hellman be no long interested. She explain that she do not want to work in a medium where director be free to revise a writer 's work at will. `` Toys in the Attic , '' still another drama about a doomed Southern family , be hail a perhaps her fine play. It be also her last. `` I do not like the theater at all , '' she say in a lecture in 1966. `` I get restless. '' Elsewhere , she quote Mr. Hammett a tell her , `` The truth be you do n't like the theater except the time when you 're in a room by yourself put the play on paper. '' But she be not idle. Occasionally , she teach class in write at Harvard , Yale and the City University of New York. She edit the letter of Chekhov and the Hammett story and work on her memoir : `` An Unfinished Woman '' ( 1969 ) , `` Pentimento '' ( 1974 ) and `` Scoundrel Time. '' In her town house on the Upper East Side and her cottage on Martha 's Vineyard , she hold court for a circle of young writers. 'Julia ' Story Filmed Miss Hellman at first turn down an offer of more than $ 500,000 for the movie right to these book , on the ground that they involve live person who might be hurt. But she later sell movie right to the `` Julia , '' story and it be make into a film in which Miss Hellman be play by Jane Fonda. She herself have criticize her friend Lionel and Diana Trilling , among others , for their writing on the cold war. But when Miss Hellman 's publisher , Little , Brown & Company , reject a book by Mrs. Trilling because it respond to Miss Hellman , the latter comment , `` My goodness , what difference would that make ? '' Mrs. Trilling have to find another publisher , however , and the feud between the two woman continue , at one point , in 1981 , come down to battle-by-interview in which they exchange sharp words. Mrs. Trilling say that on Martha 's Vineyard `` anyone who entertain me be never again invite to Lillian Hellman 's house. '' Miss Hellman issue a formal statement in which she acidly deny the charge. Mary McCarthy Feud The playwright also , in 1979 , plunge into a headlong feud with the novelist Mary McCarthy after Miss McCarthy , in a television interview , characterize Miss Hellman a `` a dishonest writer '' whose every word , `` include 'and ' and 'the , ' `` be a `` lie. '' Miss Hellman sue Miss McCarthy , the Educational Television Corporation and the interviewer , Dick Cavett , for damage of $ 1.75 million for `` mental pain and anguish. '' Last May 10 , Miss Hellman win a preliminary round in the lawsuit when Justice Harold Baer Jr. of State Supreme Court deny Miss McCarthy 's motion to dismiss the suit. While Miss McCarthy have argue that her statement be expression of opinion about a public figure , Judge Baer say that the strong statement seem to fall `` on the actionable side of the line - outside what have come to be know a the 'marketplace of ideas. ' `` Many of her admirer and other observer be apprehensive about the fact that Miss Hellman have become obsess with the action and that she might squander a great deal of her energy and wealth on the lawsuit. They also fear that she might erode the freedom of critic like herself to comment. It be ironic , some say , that despite Miss Hellman 's lifelong championing of civil right , a victory in the case might seriously erode First Amendment protections. Mr. Englander say yesterday that he do not know what impact Miss Hellman 's death would have on the lawsuit. Miss Hellman 's veracity also come under attack in 1980 by Martha Gellhorn , a writer once marry to Ernest Hemingway. Miss Gellhorn accuse Miss Hellman of have pass off fiction for fact in `` An Unfinished Woman '' when she write about Mr. Hemingway. Sued for Nixon Tapes Throughout her life Miss Hellman continue to raise her voice for such cause a civil right and peace , and with others file a suit that win a court ruling that the Nixon White House tape be public property. She also sign petition seek the release of Soviet dissidents. In `` Scoundrel Time , '' she comment on her disillusionment : `` My belief in liberalism be mostly gone. I think I have substitute for it something private call , for want of something that should be more accurate , decency. . . . but it be painful for a nature that can no longer accept liberalism not to be able to accept radicalism. '' For many reviewer , Miss Hellman 's position and her dramatic art be best express in the wistful closing line of `` An Unfinished Woman '' : `` I do regret that I have spend much of my life try to find what I call 'sense. ' I never know what I mean by truth , never make the sense I hop for. All I mean be that I leave too much of me unfinished because I waste too much time. '' Miss Hellman leave no survivors. A private graveside ceremony will be hold at 2:30 P.M. Tuesday at Abel 's Hill Cemetery on Martha 's Vineyard. A memorial service in New York City will be hold at a date still to be determine .