January 22 , 1984 OBITUARY Johnny Weissmuller Dies at 79 ; Movie Tarzan and Olympic Gold Medalist By ROBERT HANLEY Associated Press Johnny Weissmuller , the Olympic swimming champion who go on to fame a Tarzan of the Jungle in the movie , die at his home here Friday night , accord to a funeral home. He be 79 year old. Luis Flores of the Gomez funeral home say Mr. Weissmuller 's wife , Maria , have not complete funeral arrangement but that burial would probably be Sunday in Acapulco. Mr. Weissmuller have be an invalid since move here in late 1979. He suffer a series of stroke in 1977 and have a history of heart disease. His home be a few mile from the lake where his last Tarzan film be shot. Man of Two Careers Few of the million of Tarzan lover who thrill to Mr. Weissmuller swoop from tree to tree or lock in lethal combat with lion or crocodile ever know him a the swimming phenomenon who win five Olympic gold medal and set 67 world record in the 1920's. Sports enthusiast then think that the record , all set before Mr. Weissmuller be 25 year old , would endure for decades. But most of them be eclipse by the time the casual , carefree Mr. Weissmuller go to Hollywood and filmmaker in 1932 begin mold his image a a brawny , monosyllabic friend of ape and elephants. He make close to 20 Tarzan film , the last one in 1949. In all of them he be something of a howl jungle Superman in loincloth , the benevolent protector of his African domain and the treetop home of his wife , Jane , and his son , Boy , and the vanquisher of villain , marauder and ivory hunters. The image have be perpetuate through the year on television rerun of the film and they lead child and adult to approach Mr. Weissmuller for a Tarzan autograph and for yet another rendition of his elephant call or his chest-thumping victory bellow. Enjoyed the Life Playing Tarzan , he say over the year , `` be right up my alley. '' `` It be like steal , '' he said. `` There be swim in it , and I do n't have much to say. How can a guy climb tree , say 'Me Tarzan , you Jane , ' and make a million ? '' `` The public forgives my act because they know I be an athlete , '' he say on another occasion. `` They know I be n't make-believe. '' As a swimmer , Mr. Weissmuller be without peer in his time. A remarkably buoyant 190-pounder , he seem to glide across the water , his broad shoulder and heavily muscle back protrude above the surface. His six-beat crawl stroke produce the speed. The style call for six beat of the leg for every two arm stroke , with absolute synchronization of foot and arms. His power come from a full arm pull , from the moment each hand strike the water until it emerged. From August 1921 , when a a 17- year-old he break his first world record , until he turn professional in January 1929 , he set and reset world and national freestyle record for distance from 50 yard to a half mile. Grew Up in Chicago Peter John Weissmuller be bear in the southwestern Pennsylvania town of Windber on June 2 , 1904 , shortly before his Vienna-born parent move to Chicago. He drop out of school in the eighth grade , shortly before the death of his father , who have become a brewmaster. The boy learn to swim at about age 9 in the city 's public pool and in Lake Michigan. As a lanky 15-year-old who outdistance rival in impromptu swimming race , the youth attract the attention of Bill Bachrach , the swim coach of the Illinois Athletic Club. A strict , formal training regimen be quickly applied. Before the 1924 Olympics in Paris , Mr. Weissmuller supplant Duke Kahanamoku of Hawaii and Perry McGillivray a champion in the 100-yard freestyle and he beat Norman Ross at long distances. At the Amateur Athletic Union national championship in 1923 , he win the freestyle event at 50 , 100 , 220 and 500 yard and then capture the 150- yard backstroke , cut six second off the world mark. He capture three of his gold medal at age 20 in the 1924 Olympics , win the 100-meter and 400-meter freestyle in Olympic record time of 59 second and 5:04.2 , and anchor the 800-meter freestyle relay team that produce a world record of 9:53.2. In the 1928 Olympics in Amsterdam , he win his fourth and fifth gold medal , in the 100-meter race and anchor the 800-meter relay team. After turn professional , Mr. Weissmuller endorse bath suit for a while. Then Hollywood hire him a the screen industry 's Tarzan , base on the character create in print by Edgar Rice Burroughs. Mixed Critical Reception Film critic be generally amuse with his antic and impressed with the photography in the first three Weissmuller film , `` Tarzan , the Ape Man , '' in 1932 ; `` Tarzan and His Mate , '' in 1934 , and `` Tarzan Escapes , '' in 1936. Maureen O'Sullivan be cast a Jane Parker , the British woman who spurn her fiance in a hunt and go to live with Tarzan after her father be killed. Later Tarzan film be box-office bonanza , but the critic weary of the repetitive plot and Tarzan 's stunted diction , and in 1949 , with Mr. Weissmuller 45 year old , his girth expand , the role be take over by Lex Barker. Mr. Weissmuller begin make new film , and later a television series , a `` Jungle Jim. '' That work last until the late 1950's. From 1965 until November 1973 , Mr. Weissmuller live in Fort Lauderdale , Fla. , with Maria , his last wife , a native of Bavaria. Earlier wife , all of whom sue for divorce , be Robbe Arnst , a musical comedy actress ; Lupe Velez , the Mexican actress ; Beryl Scott , the San Francisco socialite who bore his three child , John Scott , Wendy Ann and Heidi Elizabeth ( who die in a car crash at the age of 19 in 1962 ) , and Allene Gates , a golfer from Los Angeles .