April 24 , 1984 OBITUARY Ansel Adams , Photographer , Is Dead By JOHN RUSSELL Ansel Adams , whose majestic black- and-white landscape of the American West and whose devotion to clarity and precision make him probably the best- known photographer in the United States , die of heart disease Sunday night at Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula , near his home in Carmel , Calif. He be 82 year old. In a career that span more than 50 year , Mr. Adams combine a passion for natural landscape , meticulous craftsmanship a a printmaker and a missionary 's zeal for his medium to become the most widely exhibit and recognize photographer of his generation. His photograph have be publish in more than 35 book and portfolio , and they have be see in hundred of exhibition , include a one-man show , `` Ansel Adams and the West , '' at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 1979. That same year he be the subject of a cover story in Time magazine , and in 1980 he receive the Medal of Freedom , the nation 's high civilian honor. In addition to be acclaim for his dramatic landscape of the American West , he be hold in esteem for his contribution to photographic technology and to the recognition of photography a an art form. Trained a a Pianist Though train a a concert pianist , Mr. Adams decide in 1930 that his true vocation be photography. Two year later , he be accomplish enough to be give a one-man show at the M. H. de Young Museum in San Francisco , and the same year he join Edward Weston and Imogen Cunningham in form the short-lived `` Group f/64. '' In the word of Mr. Adams 's friend Wallace Stegner , the founding of this group be a benchmark in the establishment of photography a a distinct and legitimate art form that would be `` not a substitute brush , but a way of seeing. '' From that point onward , Mr. Adams rapidly become famous not only a a photographer but also a critic , teacher , publisher of portfolio , co-founder of the department of photography at the Museum of Modern Art , longtime consultant to the Polaroid Corporation and spokesman for a heroic and yet plainspoken approach to photography. Book Consecrated Reputation The publication by the New York Graphic Society in the 1970 's of his book `` Ansel Adams : Images 1923-1974 '' consecrate his reputation a a photographer whose work appeal to the wide possible public for it evocation of an American scene that be still without blemish. Ansel Adams be bear in San Francisco on Feb. 20 , 1902 , of New England descent. The next year , his parent move to a house overlook the Golden Gate , where he form his lifelong taste for a spectacular natural scene. In 1916 , while on a visit to the Yosemite Valley , he make his first photograph with a box Brownie. Yosemite have so fire his imagination that for four summer run he take a job a caretaker for a lodge own by the Sierra Club , of which he be later to be a director for 37 years. Acquired a Patron In 1927 , while earn his living a a professional musician , Mr. Adams acquire a patron in San Francisco by the name of Albert Bender. Mr. Bender take him to Taos , N.M. , where , during visit over the next few year , he make friend with Robinson Jeffers , John Marin and Georgia O'Keeffe. As his biographer , Nancy Newhall , say later , `` Taos be his Paris and his Rome. '' His first book , `` Taos Pueblo , '' with a text by Mary Austin , come out in 1930. Precision and sharp focus be fundamental to good photography , a Mr. Adams saw it , and a a born teacher he neglect no opportunity to make his view felt. He write for the Sierra Club Bulletin , he publish a series of book on the basic of photography , he run workshop and seminar in the Yosemite Valley , he teach and lecture at the Museum of Modern Art and college all along the Pacific Coast , and he publish his work in portfolio form. As his reputation grow , he be encourage to travel throughout the United States in order to bring his characteristic clarity and his sense of unforced grandeur to study of national park and remote place of every kind. In the 1930 's he make extend trip with his fellow photographer Mr. Weston to the High Sierra , and with O'Keeffe and David McAlpin to the Southwest. In 1933 , he meet Alfred Stieglitz , and in 1936 Stieglitz give Mr. Adams a one-man show at his New York City gallery , `` An American Place. '' This be the first one-man show of photography that Stieglitz have put on since Paul Strand be similarly honor two decade earlier. Directed a Pageant In 1940 , Mr. Adams direct `` A Pageant of Photography '' a part of the Golden Gate Exposition in San Francisco , and take part with Mr. Weston and Dorothea Lange in a photographic forum organize by U. S. Camera in the Yosemite Valley. Also in 1940 , he help Beaumont Newhall and Mr. McAlpin to find the department of photography at the Museum of Modern Art. At the outbreak of World War II , he become a consultant to the Armed Services. But , ever-sensitive to the plight of minority group , he publish in 1944 `` Born Free and Equal , '' a photographic survey of a California camp in which Japanese-Americans be intern at the outbreak of war with Japan. After the war , Mr. Adams three time receive Guggenheim Fellowships , which enable him to record national park and monument in Alaska , Hawaii and elsewhere. In many writing in the postwar period , he stress the importance of vision , a distinct from gadgetry. `` A picture , '' he like to say , `` be only a collection of brightness , '' and , he would add , `` There be nothing bad than a brilliant image of a fuzzy concept. '' Fellow of American Academy Films about Mr. Adams and his work be direct by David Myers in 1957 and by Robert Katz in 1959. In 1963 , Mrs. Newhall publish a study of him call `` The Eloquent Light , '' after the show of that name that Mr. Adams have just have at the de Young Museum in San Francisco. In 1967 he and Mrs. Newhall publish a book call `` Fiat Lux , '' to mark the centenary of the University of California , and in 1974 he be honor by a retrospective exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum in New York. In 1966 , Mr. Adams be make a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , and in 1970 he be make a Chubb Fellow at Yale University. He receive honorary doctorate from Occidental College , the University of Massachusetts and Yale University. In 1928 , Mr. Adams marry Virginia Best. After many year in Yosemite , the Adamses move in 1962 to Carmel. He be survive by his wife ; two child , Dr. Michael Adams of Fresno , Calif. , and Anne Adams Helms of Redwood City , Calif. , and five grandchildren. Funeral service will be private .