November 1 , 1984 OBITUARY Assassination in India : A Leader of Will and Force ; Indira Gandhi , Born to Politics , Left Her Own Imprint on India By LINDA CHARLTON Strong-willed , autocratic and determine to govern an almost ungovernable nation that seem always in strife , Indira Gandhi be Prime Minister four time and the dominant figure in India for almost two decades. She be bear to politics and power , the granddaughter of Motilal Nehru , an early leader of the Indian independence movement , and daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru , who lead India a Prime Minister in it first 17 year of independence from Britain. Mrs. Gandhi serve a her widow father 's official hostess , and after she move into the position he once hold , she become , behind her father and Mohandas K. Gandhi , the most commanding figure in modern Indian history. She be often accuse of try to build an Indian dynasty by plan to have her son Sanjay succeed her , and after his death in a plane crash in 1980 she be say to be arrange for her other son , Rajiv , to fill her role. As Prime Minister , Mrs. Gandhi preside over the world 's most populous democracy , a nation of 700 million people. During her tenure the Government make limited headway against such age-old Indian problem a overpopulation , hunger , caste , inadequate sanitation and chronic religious strife among the majority Hindus , Moslems and other sects. Her year in power be turbulent , come to a climax last June in a violent showdown with the minority Sikhs , when Mrs. Gandhi order Indian Army troop to attack the Golden Temple , the Sikhs ' holy place of worship , at Amritsar in the northern state of Punjab. A Decisive Leader But until her assassination yesterday in New Delhi , Mrs. Gandhi serve a a decisive - some say dictatorial - leader. She lead India into the nuclear age when , in 1974 , scientist there explode an underground nuclear device , and she also take her nation into the space age , in 1980 , when it launch it own satellite on it own rocket. This year , through her effort , an Indian astronaut fly in a Soviet spacecraft. In 1971 , Mrs. Gandhi insure that her nation would become the dominant power on the subcontinent when India defeat Pakistan in an 11- month war and insure the creation of Bangladesh from what have be East Pakistan. On the international scene , relation with the United States , which provide billion of dollar in aid from the 1950 's to the 1980 's , be sour and tense during much of her tenure. Her overall foreign policy , she maintain , be not bias in one direction or another , only `` pro-Indian , '' and she be a leader of the group of nation profess nonalignment. Indian critic say , however , that she keep India lock into a rigid position , lean toward Moscow to an extent that be clearly difficult and embarrass during the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan. Her friendship with the Soviet Union enable her Government to build a powerful , well-equipped army. In Nehru 's Shadow She grow up in the shadow of her father and stun almost everyone by her emergence a a tough , shrewd and ruthless woman of command presence and absolute will. She maintain for many year that power do not interest her. `` I like be Prime Minister , yes , but not more than I like the other job I have do in my life , '' she say in 1973. `` I be not ambitious. I do n't care for honors. '' That be two year before she briskly assume dictatorial power , in response to what seem a threat to her strength , and espouse the tenet of authoritarian rule , from suspension of civil liberty to censorship of the press. Then , demonstrate that India 's familiar label a the world 's large democracy be not just a cliche , the voter of India sweep her out of office and , 18 month later , vote her back into power again. Her critic charge that her promise to erase poverty be quixotic and that India 's chronic and severe social problem actually burgeon during her year of power. They say , too , that she tolerate corrupt minister and fostered corruption in her young son , Sanjay ; that she be hungry for power and surround herself with inept adviser rather than brook potential rivals. Empty `` sloganizing '' and indecision , they say , have breed cynicism. Reins of Autocracy Until June 1975 , it seem that Mrs. Gandhi 's central achievement be her adherence to cement democracy - an achievement that ultimately rip the rein of autocracy from her hands. She be successful in reassert , sometimes forcefully , the dominance of the central Government over state that seem to be squabble perennially with each other. She also make clear her abhorrence of the religious tension that continue in India. She repeatedly seek to blunt communalism in the nation and make clear her detestation of the Hindu nationalist who exploit anti-Moslem feelings. As a private person , Mrs. Gandhi seem aloof , chilly , complex , give no clue in her withdrawn , quiet personality a to why her public figure should appeal a it do to many million of Indians. She could be rude , sometimes open letter and sign paper when foreigner visit her in the red sandstone Indian Parliament or the nearby South Block of the secretariat. In 1967 , for example , when Richard M. Nixon , then a private citizen , visit her in New Delhi , Mrs. Gandhi barely conceal her boredom , and after 20 minute of chat she ask the Foreign Ministry official escort Mr. Nixon how much longer the visit would last. The question be in Hindi , but it purport be clear to Mr. Nixon. During interview , she would sometimes simply ignore question that she do not wish to answer , lapse into silence , doodle on a notepad and smile vaguely. At other time , she give the impression of shyness and vulnerability. She be physically frail. She have suffer from tuberculosis , low blood pressure , kidney problem and muscle spasm in the neck and have ignore doctor ' order not to have children. She work 14 hour a day and seem lonely and isolated. `` I think the only reason I 'm able to survive this with equanimity be that I 'm just myself , regardless of the situation in the country , '' she once said. `` I know the condition of the people. There 's nothing I can see that I do n't know about already. It 's not that you do n't feel it , but - it 's like a nurse and illness. You see it in perspective. '' 'A Certain Instinct' One of the most detailed and widely discuss criticism of Mrs. Gandhi in the year before her takeover of the Government come in 1974 from G. B. Verghese , a former press adviser to the Prime Minister and the widely respect editor of The Hindustan Times. Mr. Verghese call her `` strangely paralyzed , unwilling to lead , afraid of her own majority. '' `` The Prime Minister have no program , no world view , no grand design , '' he said. `` Thus , bereft of a frame , she have largely react to event and fail to shape them. This have be her tragedy. She lack economic and administrative expertise. Nevertheless , she have a certain political instinct and charisma which would have be the great asset if harness to a great purpose. She have a mandate but no mission. '' Mrs. Gandhi herself often express her goal in sweeping and inoffensive term : `` I be a politician in the sense that I want a particular kind of India , an India without poverty , without injustice , an India free of any foreign influence. '' Mr. Verghese and other critic say that , even back with a great election victory and the success of the 1971 war with Pakistan , Mrs. Gandhi lack specific goals. She fail to define `` any large , long-term objective of reconstruct India or the subcontinent , '' Mr. Verghese said. `` The great the success , the great the bewilderment over what to do. Having emblazon 'Garibi Hatao ' ( Abolish Poverty ) on her standard , she do not conceptualize it and carry it forward. She be quite unable to ride the crest of the wave. '' Nor , to be fair , have any of her critic have any great success in meet India 's chronic crisis or solve it perennial problems. Unconcealed Anger Mrs. Gandhi do not conceal her anger at these attacks. `` This be one of the country in the world where the economy , although under severe strain , be not collapse , '' she say to a journalist in 1974. `` Do you think it be easy to keep a country like India unite ? You say promise be not kept. I assert with all authority : Who in the world have keep more promise ? '' However vague her destination may have seem , Mrs. Gandhi be always clear about her conviction that she be mean to lead India. She rarely indulge in self-analysis and usually brush aside question about her failed marriage , her personal life , her possibly difficult role a the daughter of the nation 's first Prime Minister. `` Every position have advantage and disadvantage , '' she once observed. `` I have an advantage because of the education my father give me and the opportunity of meet some great people , not only politician , but also writer , artist and so on. But in politics one have to work doubly hard to show one be not merely a daughter but be also a person in her own right. '' She add , `` Of course , be a woman you have to work twice as hard a a man. '' Once , when a visit journalist ask her to describe Indira Gandhi , the woman , the Prime Minister say : `` In spite of always live in the public glare , she have remain a very private person. Her life have be hard. This have make her self-reliant but have not harden her. '' A Lonely Childhood Indira Priyadarshini ( the second name mean `` Dearly Beloved '' ) be bear Nov. 19 , 1917 , the only child of Jawaharlal Nehru and his wife , Kamala , in Allahabad in northern India. Her grandfather , Motilal Nehru , who own the house in which they live , be a brilliant lawyer who discard a lucrative practice to ally himself with Mohandas K. Gandhi and the Congress Party in the independence movement. By all account , the child 's early year be painfully lonely. The house serve a a headquarters for the freedom struggle ; her parent be frequently take off to jail ; the police be constantly there. `` My public life start at the age of 3 , '' she said. `` I have no recollection of game , child 's party or play with other children. My favorite occupation a a very small child be to deliver thunderous speech to the servant , stand on a high table. All my game be political one - I be , like Joan of Arc , perpetually be burn at the stake. `` I be very headstrong. The whole house be always in a state of tension that nobody have a normal life. There be police raid , arrest and so on , the physical and mental strain. And all the time it be in public. '' What make her childhood even more difficult be the contemptuous treatment give her mother , Kamala , by the far more Westernized and sophisticated woman of the Nehru family. Mrs. Gandhi in late life indicate that her own fluency in Hindi , far good than her father 's , and her `` Indianness , '' or ability to think and feel a a Hindu Indian , be largely a legacy of her mother. When ask once about the impact of Kamala Nehru on her personality , Mrs. Gandhi reply , `` I saw her be hurt and I be determine not to be hurt. '' Letters From Her Father In her turbulent childhood - erratic schooling in India and Switzerland , follow by involvement in the independence struggle a a courier and demonstrator - she know her father chiefly through the famous letter he write from a succession of prison cells. The letter , now collect , give a capsule history of the world from Buddha to Stanley Baldwin and forge a strong link between father and daughter. `` They be the only companionship I have with my father , '' she recalled. `` That be why I value them so much. '' Although Nehru be in and out of prison and travel constantly , his link with his daughter strengthened. `` Nehru be constantly point out to the girl the fascinating world around them , '' write the journalist Krishan Bhatia , author of `` Indira , '' a biography of Mrs. Gandhi. Her formal schooling remain sporadic ; she spend three unhappy year at a formal boarding school in Poona and in 1934 go to the university at Santiniketan ( Abode of Peace ) in West Bengal , found by Rabindranath Tagore , the Nobel Prize-winning poet and philosopher. It be a brief , almost idyllic experience for the young woman in the unconventional school , where she study poetry and the Manipuri style of classical Indian dancing. `` In a way , '' she recall , `` Tagore be the first person whom I consciously regard a a great man. '' She say that the evening spend sit at his foot , talk or watch him paint , be `` moment of serene joy , memory to cherish. '' A British Education Kamala Nehru die the follow year. In 1937 , Indira enrol at Somerville College , Oxford , where she study public and social administration , history and anthropology. Although she be in poor condition physically - she be order to spend several month in Switzerland to recover from pleurisy - Indira be active in the student wing of the British Labor Party and enrol a a Red Cross volunteer when World War II begin , even work briefly a an ambulance driver in the blitz. In 1941 , however , with the Indian independence movement near an apparent confrontation with the British , she sail home with Feroze Gandhi , a newspaperman from Allahabad , who have work in the Congress movement. He be a childhood friend of Indira , but her family be shock when she announce , on arrive home , that she and Mr. Gandhi - who be not relate to Mohandas Gandhi - plan to marry. `` Nobody want that marriage , nobody , '' she recall many year later. Mr. Gandhi be of a different religion ; she be a Hindu , he be a Parsee , which mean that `` the whole of India be against us. '' But she and Feroze Gandhi be marry in March 1942. By September of that year , they be both send to prison by the British. In fact , the only real domestic period of their troubled marriage be between 1943 and 1946 , when they live in relative quiet in Allahabad. A son , Ranjiv , be bear in 1944 , and another , Sanjay , in 1946. That year Nehru become Prime Minister of a provisional Government a a prelude to full Indian independence , and Mrs. Gandhi become his official hostess. He enjoy party and travel ; Mrs. Gandhi be dutiful , almost reluctant. Later , she recall that she have dislike socializing and make small talk. `` It take me a long time to get over this. But I have to learn to enjoy it , so I did. '' She also say later that she have `` hat '' serve a hostess and once confess that the crowd , noise , conflict and lack of privacy that mark so much of her life evoke `` considerable bitterness in me. '' She be so constantly with her father that , in the recollection of one Indian journalist , few even notice her. As she grow close to her father , and his demand on her grow with his prominence , the Gandhi marriage crumble and the couple begin to live apart. Feroze Gandhi go on to become an outspoken member of Parliament ; he die in 1960. An Inescapable Calling Despite her shyness , and the fact that most politician , diplomat and journalist view her only a Nehru 's daughter , Mrs. Gandhi felt almost obligate to play a political role in India. `` She know that politics be something she could not escape , '' a friend say in 1966 , when Mrs. Gandhi first become Prime Minister. `` As a Nehru , she felt it be her destiny. She feel her background give her a mission she must carry out. '' As her father 's confidante and companion , Mrs. Gandhi travel at his side abroad and at home and become a familiar , if somewhat diffident , figure to million of Indians. Her first step toward national stature be in 1955 , when she be elect to the 21- member Congress Party work committee. It be a small step , and she remain withdrawn and self- conscious , but it mark her first move toward an independent political identity. Four year later , she be name president of the party , obviously because she be the daughter of Nehru , then at the peak of his power. Yet she herself , then 42 year old , be begin to emerge a a favorite of the impatient young member of the party , which be dominate by age men link only by the bond of have fight together against the British during India 's long struggle for independence. Signs of Toughness During her 11 month a president , she begin to display toughness and political assertiveness. She be influential in the ouster of the Communist government in the southern state of Kerala. Six month later , in state election , she shock many moderate supporter when she successfully ally Congress with the Muslim League , a sectarian group abhor by Congress 's leaders. Despite her success , she turn down the offer of another term , partly because of concern about her father 's health and partly because she realize that she be not yet senior enough to run the party a she wanted. In May 1964 Nehru die of a stroke. Mrs. Gandhi go into a period of silent withdrawal for week , tend to burst into tear whenever a friend try to offer condolences. Lal Bahadur Shastri , the new Prime Minister , offer Mrs. Gandhi a Cabinet post ; she choose the relatively unprestigious job of Minister of Information and Broadcasting and do a lackluster job. But in 1966 , when Mr. Shastri die suddenly , the Congress Party 's leader choose Mrs. Gandhi a Prime Minister. There be two key reason : First , they felt that she would be pliable , and second , they wish to avoid the obvious choice , Morarji R. Desai , whose career would be intertwine with that of Mrs. Gandhi year later. The New Prime Minister Her first year of leadership be one of uncertainty , although she do make some strong move , such a divide Punjab and propose that the commercial bank be nationalize , which be achieve in 1969. In 1967 India 's 250 million voter return the Congress Party to power by a narrow margin ; the economy have sink into a deep recession and the failure of the monsoon for the second consecutive year threaten million in northeast India with starvation , which be avert by American grain shipments. Mrs. Gandhi be jolt by the election result , although she have find , to her surprise , that campaign buoy her. The closeness of the election make it clear to her that she be the only nationally know and accepted leader for a party that need streamlining. She promptly announce a 10-point program to bring about a socialist state with a stable economy. Congress become a divide party , with an old group form around Mr. Desai and a young , more radical faction gather around Mrs. Gandhi. As the party breach widen , India 's President , Zakir Husain , die suddenly in May 1969. Although the position be one of a figurehead , the vacancy set the stage for a struggle for control of the party. The party 's elder saw a chance to humiliate Mrs. Gandhi by support a candidate who be a know foe. Mrs. Gandhi , gather her supporter , back another candidate , thus ask member of her own party to vote with her against their leadership. With the help of nearly two- third of the Congress member , her candidate win a narrow victory. It be believe likely that she knowingly precipitate the crisis by dismiss Mr. Desai a Deputy Prime Minister. The Old Guard Reacts A few month later , the old guard leadership expel Mrs. Gandhi from the party for `` grave act of indiscipline. '' She brush aside the gesture with characteristic contempt , call it an illegal act by a group of discredit `` boss '' and `` dictator '' who want to block her socialist programs. The next morning , the Congress Party bloc in Parliament give her a vote of confidence. With the party split and Mrs. Gandhi maintain her populist stance , move to nationalize the bank and eliminate the fund give to princely state , she abruptly call for election in March 1971 , a year ahead of schedule. She hop to be able to increase her support , a the party split have leave her with the backing of only a little more than 200 in the low house of 525 members. After a 43-day campaign , Mrs. Gandhi emerge with a parliamentary victory of dimension comparable to those of her father , with her wing of the party win 350 seats. When civil war break out that year in Pakistan , India support East Pakistan in it fight against West Pakistan and be quickly victorious. East Pakistan become Bangladesh and India become indisputably the dominant power on the Subcontinent. Three month after the end of the war , Mrs. Gandhi cement her power more strongly , with the capture of 70 percent of the state assembly seat in regional elections. She have reach the peak of success. Two year later , her popularity have plummeted. Her Government face an economic crisis. Compounding the nation 's misery be two severe drought , inflation , oil-price increase in which she consistently defend the oil producer because they be `` exploit '' by Western nation , and poor planning , with development enmesh in a web of bureaucracy. Charges of Corruption Her critic charge , moreover , that she have worsen the problem by misuse of authority , corruption and an erosion of moral leadership. She begin to take step that stir uneasiness about her final intention - use emergency measure to imprison striker and dissident student without trial , take over the small Himalayan protectorate of Sikkim. `` There have never be any advice speak to me that I need much , '' she once said. `` What influence me more be the life of the people I live with - my mother and my father. That do n't need words. '' Mrs. Gandhi deny repeatedly that she be a mere politician - indeed , she be reportedly even allergic to those two staple of political campaigning in her country , the perpetual dust and the wreath of marigold - and saw herself rather a the inevitable destined leader of India. This give her an armor of disdain against the grow attack of the opposition , and , it prove in mid-June 1975 , foster the impulse of an autocrat. Roots of a Crisis The crisis begin with the decision of a high court judge in Mrs. Gandhi 's native Allahabad convict her of two count of electoral corruption - the specific charge include the use in her election campaign of the service of a Government official and of a rostrum - and declare her election to Parliament invalid. The ruling question her right to remain a Prime Minister and prohibit her from run in any election for six years. Not surprisingly , the opposition seize upon the ruling ; despite her decision to appeal to a high court , there be an immediate clamor for her to resign right away. But she say there be `` no question '' of resignation. Instead , at dawn two day later , dozen of opposition leader , include Mr. Desai , the Deputy Prime Minister , be arrest and take to jail , and Mrs. Gandhi proclaim a state of emergency. Acting under a law that be a holdover from British rule , the Maintenance of Internal Security Act , which bestow sweeping and arbitrary power on the Government , Mrs. Gandhi have first hundred and then thousand of people arrested. Soon domestic critic and foreign observer be proclaim that democracy be dead. India 's equivalent of the bill of right be suspend ; the press be sharply censor ; thousand be jail incommunicado and without the right to know the charge against them ; judicial review of Government act be severely limited. Constitutional guarantee of civil right be suspend , a be habeas corpus. As her power expand , Mrs. Gandhi serenely ignore the protest , include demonstration in which several people be killed. `` In India , '' she say , `` democracy have give too much license to people. Even today we be more democratic than any developing country in the world. '' 'Threat to Stability' Mrs. Gandhi , in this first statement after embark on her authoritarian program , say she have take the action in response to a `` threat to internal stability '' and hop that it would be only temporary. At the same time , she outline a program of economic change that she say be design to bring down price and achieve a more equitable distribution of land. Critics say that the change be in fact design primarily to distract attention from what seem to be a rapid movement toward a totalitarian state. Other critic , economist , saw the plan `` reform '' a a patchwork of dubious value. Meanwhile , Mrs. Gandhi move quickly to consolidate her hold. Her Congress Party , which have a majority in Parliament , ratify the state of emergency. Her power be expand , with amendment to the Maintenance of Internal Security Act , include one that allow the Government to seize the property of people who be detain or go into hide to avoid detention. The opposition condemn her assumption of emergency power when Parliament open , but the opposition be increasingly the minority. Less than two month after Mrs. Gandhi assume her new power , more than 50,000 people be reportedly imprison , and Parliament change the law under which she have be convict in June. Another bill be pass that prevent her election from even be consider by the judiciary. In a speech on Aug. 15 , 1975 , the anniversary of India 's independence , she say , `` Sometimes bitter medicine have to be administer to a patient only to cure him. '' A few day later , she take aim at external criticism of her action , say that unnamed `` casual critic '' apply `` special standard '' to India 's behavior. Rewriting the Law In November , the Supreme Court dismiss the charge against Mrs. Gandhi , base it ruling on the law pass about two month after her conviction that rewrite the election law so a to omit the offense of which she have be find guilty. Few be surprise when at the end of December , the Congress Party announce that the election schedule for early 1976 have be postpone for a year `` in order to insure continuity in bring about economic and political stability. ' She continue to deny that she have set the country on a course toward totalitarianism. `` Would you be here at all , if we be totalitarian ? '' she ask her opposition in Parliament early in 1976 , a rhetorical device that ignore that many member of the opposition be not there but in jail. Justifying the imposition of the state of emergency , and it broadening scope , she say : `` Democracy be a value we cherish. If we have these curb today , it be because democracy be in danger. A handful of people be try to stop the functioning of the will of the majority. '' The shrunken opposition be unconvinced. India , say one opponent , have enter `` an era of darkness. '' Mrs. Gandhi , defend the Government 's decision to postpone the election for a year , say : `` If we hold the election now , we would win. But that be not the point. The point be whether we have great unity or whether we let loose force of disruption so that the whole fabric fall apart. '' It be an argument that sound to many like nothing more than a justification for what be rapidly become a classic dictatorship. The next conference of her Congress Party , however , predictably call for the continuation of the state of emergency , and in February 1976 an obedient Parliament pass legislation give the Government the power to suppress `` objectionable material '' in the press. Changes in Foreign Policy In foreign affair , however , there be sign of change , of flexibility. The United States break off scheduled talk on the resumption of economic aid to indicate displeasure with the continue policy of repression , but by late April 1976 , American diplomat be talk of vague sign of a `` thaw '' in the Government 's attitude toward the United States. In the same year , she end 15 year of coldness between India and China when she send an Ambassador to Peking. Meanwhile , the Government announce that it be send an ambassador to China for the first time in 15 year , and a a further sign of a new amiability , propose renew talk with Pakistan with an eye to normalization of relations. Mrs. Gandhi go to the Soviet Union for a five-day visit after sign a new five- year agreement with Moscow that stress commercial tie between the two countries. Domestically , there be no thaw , and Mrs. Gandhi show no sign of qualms. In June 1976 the Government extend for one year it right to hold prisoner without trial or even formal charge , a step it say be take `` for deal with the emergency. '' India 's Supreme Court , meanwhile , have uphold the Government 's right to imprison political opponent without hearings. Not content , Mrs. Gandhi propose in August far constitutional amendment that would give the executive branch , mean herself , almost unlimited powers. Perhaps a a sign of security , the Government allow opponent to hold meeting to protest these change in the country 's Constitution , which they saw a basically codify the state of emergency. Predictably , however , the amendment be approve by Parliament. Population Control One significant domestic issue for Mrs. Gandhi be population control , particularly the question of compulsory sterilization , which be debate in Parliament throughout 1976. She announce that `` strong step which may not be like by all '' be under consideration , the sterilization program be push and the Government , in September , announce that civil servant be to be prohibit from have more than three children. This renew emphasis on population control , along with rumor of compulsory sterilization , provoke sometimes violent protest and confrontation. But India in 1976 have the best birth control record in it history. Once again , a the year near an end , the Government announce that the scheduled election have be postpone until early 1978 , But in early January 1977 , Mrs. Gandhi , in a surprise announcement , tell the country that election would be hold in March because of her `` unshakable faith '' in the power of the people. It be believe that she be motivate by a certainty that the Congress Party would win easily , a it have win every election since independence. Another strong motive be believe to be a desire to take advantage of a good economic position and to improve India 's position abroad. Shortly afterward , Mrs. Gandhi release the last of the political opponent still be held. Her campaign theme be that `` only a strong central government can build a strong India. '' She offer the close thing to an apology for the stringency she have impose , say , `` We do n't want to cause hardship to anybody but no government would have tolerate the threat , the violence , the assault on democracy that we faced. '' Her oppposition , she assert , have only one issue , herself. The rapid advancement of her beloved young son , Sanjay , also become an issue ; he have be name to the executive committee of Congress 's youth branch at the end of 1975. Rejection at the Polls The opposition to Mrs. Gandhi have a single theme , express by one banner a `` End Dictatorship , Dethrone the Queen. '' On March 20 , 1977 , the voter do just that , defeat Mrs. Gandhi and make Mr. Desai , whom she have imprison two year before , Prime Minister. Mr. Desai head the Janata Party , the dominant factor in the loose anti-Congress coalition. Not for two day after the election result be announce do Mrs. Gandhi leave her residence to go to the presidential palace and hand in her resignation. She say in her resignation speech that `` election be part of the democratic process to which we be deeply committed. '' She also pledge to continue her aim of serve the people to the `` limit of my endurance. '' The new Government announce that it victory be a clear verdict `` against executive arbitrariness '' and begin to dismantle the apparatus of legislative repression. In foreign relation , too , there be a sharp turn from Mrs. Gandhi 's tilt toward Moscow. `` We do not want any special relation with any country , '' Mr. Desai announced. The Desai Government set up an investigative commission to look into the imposition of emergency rule , but Mrs. Gandhi decline to appear before it. `` The proclamation of emergency , '' she say , `` be a constitutional step , approve by the Cabinet and duly ratify by both house of Parliament. '' She say that because of `` retrograde , communal and capitalistic force '' try to subvert her Government , she have be force to proclaim the emergency to `` stem the impending disaster. '' A Personal Triumph In October 1977 , after be rebuff in her effort to reclaim the leadership of the Congress Party , Mrs. Gandhi be arrest on charge of official corruption. After a few hour in jail - she refuse bail - she be order release by a magistrate who find no reasonable ground for her detention. Turning the episode into a personal triumph , she immediately go on a three-day tour of western India ; in Bombay , about 25,000 people turn out to greet her. Her arrest , she proclaim , be `` to prevent me from go to the people , '' add , `` It be an attempt to discredit me in their eye and the eye of the world. '' Now she openly seek a return to power. When a cyclone strike India 's east coast , she fly there , say , `` I want to share the people 's sorrow. '' She and local political official avoid each other a they race around the flooded area and through refugee camps. In early 1978 , Mrs. Gandhi and her supporter break away from the regular Congress Party and form what be know a the Congress-I ( for Indira ) Party , or to it adherent , the `` real Congress '' party. Any reunion of the two faction , Mrs. Gandhi say , must be head by her. Once again , a she campaign through February in state election campaign , huge crowd gathered. She herself win a by-election in a rural South Indian district later in the year. A Long Battle Her battle not to testify before the investigative commission , and not to be try for refuse to testify , drag through the year. `` I repeat that the commission be not legally competent to require that I should bind myself by take an oath , '' she say in refuse once again , despite two contempt charges. In May 1978 , the commission conclude that the state of emergency have be declare fraudulently and administered arbitrarily. During the summer , the Government charge her with have illegally detain opposition leader and harass official during the emergency. Her son Sanjay be charge with have engage in illegal demolition of private property. Her response be simple : `` Instead of solve the problem of the people , they be try to divert attention. '' In December 1978 , the Government act to charge her with harass four Government official who have be investiating Maruti Ltd. , the automobile company set up by Sanjay Gandhi. She deny the charge in Parliament with her usual chill serenity , say : `` Every man , woman and child in India know that if the drama of a kind of impeachment of a former Prime Minister be enact , it sole purpose be not to solve any national problem , but to silence a voice which they find inconvenient. '' As the vote in Parliament near , riot explode in several cities. After a seven-day debate , the vote on Prime Minister Desai 's motion that she be expel and jail for the remainder of the session be 279 to 138. In a typical gesture of disdain , Mrs. Gandhi refuse to leave the Parliament chamber and to go home `` to be arrest in the dead of night from my house , '' a so many of her opponent have been. A Dramatic Gesture She insist on wait to be arrest in Parliament , and it be three hour before the arrest officer arrived. As they come she get up on a heavy table to offer friends the characteristic Hindu salutation , `` namaste , '' an inclination of the head over hand place a if in prayer. Then she be lead off. Public response make it clear that she be , with all her fault , still a considerable and revered national figure. Several thousand of her supporter be arrest in clash with the police , and several people be killed. An airliner be hijack to protest her imprisonment. She be release when the parliamentary session end a few day later. `` I have a good rest , '' she said. Through the early month of 1979 , her fortune seem at an ebb , a pressure grow for investigation into various allegation make against her and Sanjay. The Congress Party be reunite , with it recently disaffect member , the Congress-I faction , merge again with the others. She say , uncharacteristically , that perhaps she have make mistake and express regret for `` hardship and inconvenience caused. '' Special court be set up for her trials. But the coalition against Mrs. Gandhi be crumble under the weight of it failure to resolve India 's chronic crisis and even more from internal politics , with Mr. Desai badly undermine by Charan Singh. Divide and Conquer In July 1979 Prime Minister Desai resigned. Repeating her brilliant 1969 divide-and-conquer victory , Mrs. Gandhi throw her vital support behind Mr. Singh , another man she have once have throw into prison , a Mr. Desai 's successor. At about the same time , a survey show her to be the single most popular political figure in India 's major cities. Just a she have more or less create the Singh Government , so she destroy it by make it clear that she and her follower would oppose a motion of confidence , possibly because Mr. Singh refuse to dismiss the charge of corruption pending against her. Shortly after his Government fell , he return a a caretaker Prime Minister until election could be hold in three months. When ask if in the interim he would be rule at her pleasure , Mrs. Gandhi reply , `` Yes , or he wo n't rule at all. '' With election ahead , she work hard making sure that she be return to power , campaign vigorously , forge alliances. In the election of January 1980 , she and her Congress-I Party win a sweeping victory , win two-thirds of the seat in Parliament. `` I do n't want to be in power , '' she say in an interview just before the election , go on to contradict herself by hint strongly that she have be run thing all along : `` Maybe ( the Janata Party ) make Government policy , but I be at the center of Indian politics. I be the main issue of discussion at every Cabinet meeting. '' And when the return be in , she say that victory have be win `` entirely on my name. '' One of the first major issue she have to deal with be the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. Her position change several time , sometimes from day to day. But by the end of January , Mrs. Gandhi be say , `` What happen in Afghanistan be an internal matter of that country. '' An official communique issue after she meet with the Soviet Foreign Minister , Andrei A. Gromyko , say only that both side agree `` to consider measure by which tension can be defuse in consultation with each other. '' The Loss of a Son Early in 1980 , two case pending against Mrs. Gandhi in special court be cancel on technical grounds. Her power seem secure , barely ruffle by grow murmur that her young son , Sanjay , be misbehaving. In June 1980 , however , Sanjay - her open favorite - be kill in the crash of a small plane. Her control do not break , but few doubt that his death be a severe blow to the Prime Minister. In the year since Sanjay 's death , his brother , Rajiv , emerge a their mother 's chief political lieutenant , culminate in his be name Prime Minister yesterday. Now 40 year old and a former airline pilot , he be the first among five general secretary of the Congress-I Party. Prickly Relations Mrs. Gandhi 's relation with opposition leader continue to be prickly at best. In the last year Congress-I try to topple several state government hostile to it and to the Prime Minister. Last July in Kashmir , Mrs. Gandhi 's force succeed in split the National Conference Party , enable a coalition of National Conference defector and Congress-I member to assume control of the state government. In Andhra Pradesh near the southern tip of the subcontinent , Mrs. Gandhi 's ally appear to have engineer the ouster in August of the state 's Chief Minister , N. T. Rama Rao , a highly popular opponent of the Prime Minister. She deny any role in Mr. Rama Rao 's removal , which be order by a Gandhi-appointed governor. After nationwide protest charge undemocratic practice , a new governor , also name by Mrs. Gandhi , reverse his predecessor 's action , and Mr. Rama Rao be permit to form a new cabinet. In yet another state , Karnataka , which border Andhra Pradesh , Congress-I official be charge with use bribe to lure opposition legislator to defect. But leader of the Janata Party quickly call for a vote of confidence and win it. As of this fall , Mrs. Gandhi could count all but four of India 's 22 state govenments in her camp , give her a strong advantage in a national election. The Sikh Rebellion Criticism of her tactic against opposition party have be balance by popular approval of her swift action last June to quell an outbreak by Sikh terrorist in the northern state of Punjab. That rebellion come to a bloody climax last June , when Mrs. Gandhi send Indian troop to storm the Golden Temple in Amritsar , the holy shrine of the Sikh religion. After 36 hour of fierce fight between militant Sikhs and the soldier , the 72- acre temple complex be strew with bodies. According to official Government figure , about 600 people be kill in the raid on the temple , include the most militant Sikh leader , Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale. Other report place the figure as high a 1,200. A Force for Unity After the rebellion , Mrs. Gandhi remain , in the mind of many voter , a strong personal force for national unity. Earlier this year a poll by The Illustrated Weekly find 94 percent of the respondent rating her a an able national leader. She be also a leader on the international level , become chairman of the movement of nation profess nonalignment after a summit meeting in New Delhi in March 1983. Her stormy political life find an echo in her family relation in the last few years. In 1982 Sanjay Gandhi 's widow , Maneka , be evict from the Prime Minister 's house , where she have be live since her marriage. Indira Gandhi , accord to family intimate , have oppose the marriage from the beginning. The feud intensify in July when Maneka announce that she would run against her brother-in-law , Rajiv , for his parliamentary seat from a constituency in Uttar Pradesh , the district that Sanjay have represent before his death. As the time near when the Prime Minister would have to set a date for the election , speculation arise that Mrs. Gandhi might seek to postpone a vote if she felt she be not assure of victory .