January 15 , 1984 OBITUARY Ray A. Kroc die at 81 ; Built McDonald 's Chain By ERIC PACE Ray A. Kroc , the builder of the McDonald 's hamburger empire , who help change American businiess and eat habit by deftly orchestrate the purveying of billion of small beef patty , die yesterday in San Diego. He be 81 year old and live in La Jolla , Calif. Mr. Kroc , who also own the San Diego Padres baseball team , die of a heart ailment at Scripps Memorial Hopsital in San Diego , a McDonald 's spokesman said. At his death he be senior chairman of McDonald's. Mr. Kroc , a former piano player and salesman of paper cup and milkshake machine , build up a family fortune worth $ 500 million or more through his tireless , inspire tinker with the management of the McDonald 's drive-in and restaurant , which specialize in hamburger and other fast-food items. He be a pioneer in automate and standardize operation in the fiercely competitive , multibillion-dollar fast-food industry. He concentrate on swiftly grow suburban area , where family visit to the local McDonald 's become something like tribal rituals. First McDonald 's in 1955 He start his first McDonald 's in Chicago in 1955 and the chain now have 7,500 outlet in the United States and 31 other country and territories. The total systemwide sale of it restaurant be more than $ 8 billion in 1983. Three-quarters of it outlet be run by franchise-holders. Richard G. Starmann , a vice president and spokesman , say at McDonald 's headquarters in Oak Brook , Ill. , that 1983 be a profitable year for the company , which be the United States ' large food service organization in sale and number of outlets. What make Mr. Kroc so successful be the variety of virtuoso refinement he bring to fast-food retailing. He carefully choose the recipient of his McDonald 's franchise , seek manager who be skilled at personal relation ; he relentlessly stress quality , ban from his hamburger such filler material a soybeans. Mr. Kroc also make extensive , innovative use of part-time teen-age help ; he struggle to keep operating cost down to make McDonald 's perennially low price possible , and he apply complex team technique to food perparation that be reminiscent of professional football. Influential in Sports After McDonald 's have make him a major figure on the business scene , Mr. Kroc become influential in the sport world by buy the San Diego Padres for $ 10 million in 1974. The new and eager team owner be notably outspoken : After the Padres make three error and a costly base-running blunder in a 1974 game against the Houston Astros , he use the San Diego Stadium public address system to tell the team 's fan , `` I suffer with you ; I 've never see such stupid ball playing in my life. '' In the major league of American business , Mr. Kroc 's career be unusual because it enormous success be so late in coming. He be in his 50 's when he go into the hamburger business , make himself president of the McDonald 's Corporation in 1955. In 1968 he become chairman , and he take the title of senior chairman in 1977 , when McDonald 's purveyed more than $ 3.7 billion worth of fast-food fare , outsell it archcompetitor , the Pillsbury-owned Burger King , by 4 to 1. McDonald 's share be a Wall Street favorite in the early 70 's , before the bear market take hold. They reach a peak in January 1973 of around 77 ; investor who buy them when first offer in the mid-1960 's have see their wealth multiply more than sixtyfold. Over the year , Mr. Kroc be repeatedly involve in controversy. The author Max Boas and Steve Chain charge in a 1976 book , `` Big Mac : The Unauthorized Story of McDonald 's , '' that McDonald 's have exploit it employee by force them to take lie- detector test and by appropriate their tips. The architecture of McDonald 's outlet be sometimes criticize , a be the nutritional content of the food. But one critic , the nutritionist Jean Mayer , once say , `` I be nonfanatical about McDonald 's ; a a weekend treat , it be clean and fast. '' A Commanding Figure In 1972 Senator Harrison A. Williams Jr. , Democrat of New Jersey , suggest that there be a link between the more than $ 200,000 that Mr. Kroc have contribute to President Nixon 's re-election campaign and the Nixon Administration 's position on the question of teen-age wage limit , a matter of prime importance to McDonald's. And when , after a stormy stint in the baseball limelight , Mr. Kroc announce in August 1979 that he be give up operate control of the Padres , he say , with typical crustiness , `` There 's a lot more future in hamburger than in baseball. Baseball be n't baseball anymore. '' Mr. Kroc cut a commanding figure , his thin hair brush straight back , his custom make blazer impeccable , his eye constantly check his restaurant for cleanliness. The bulky ring on his finger glint a he eat his hamburger with both hands. `` I guess to be an entrepreneur you have to have a large ego , enormous pride and an ability to inspire others to follow your lead , '' he once said. But his leadership entail a wish that his follower be , like him , drive by an unending urge to build and to excel. `` Some people reach their level of expectation pretty quickly , '' he once observed. `` We want someone who will get totally involve in the business. If his ambition be to reach the point where he can play golf four day a week or play gin rummy for a cent a point , instead of a tenth , we do n't want him in a McDonald 's restaurant. '' Understandably , many McDonald 's executive decorate their office with scroll inscribe with his favorite inspirational dictum : Nothing in the world can take the place of persistence. Talent will not ; nothing be more common than unsuccessful men with talent. Genius will not ; unrewarded genius be almost a proverb. Education will not ; the world be full of educate derelicts. Persistence and determination alone be omnipotent. Mr. Kroc establish the McDonald 's headquarters in Oak Brook , a few mile from the Chicago suburb of Oak Park , where he be bear Oct. 5 , 1902 , the son of an unsuccessful real estate man whose family come from Bohemia in what be now Czechoslovakia. Sold Milkshake Machines Ray Albert Kroc go to public school in Oak Park , but do not graduate from high school. In World War I , like his fellow Oak Parker , Ernest Hemingway , he serve a an amublance driver. Then , after hold various job , he spend 17 year with the Lily Tulip Cup Company , become sale manager for the Middle West. But by 1941 , `` I felt it be time I be on my own , '' Mr. Kroc once recall , and he become the exclusive sale agent for a machine that could prepare five milkshake at a time. Then , in 1954 , Mr. Kroc hear about Richard and Maurice McDonald , the owner of a fast-food emporium in San Bernadino , Calif. , that be use several of his mixers. As a milkshake specialist , Mr. Kroc later explain , `` I have to see what kind of an operation be make 40 at one time. '' `` I go to see the McDonald operation , '' Mr. Kroc go on in a memoir publish in The New York Times , and suddenly insight gain during his year in the paper-cup business and the milkshake machine business mingle fruitfully in his mind. `` I ca n't pretend to know what it be -- certainly , it 's not some divine vision , '' he continued. `` Perhaps it 's a combination of your background and experience , your instinct , your dreams. Whatever it be , I saw it in the McDonald operation , and in that moment , I suppose , I become an entrepreneur. I decide to go for broke. '' Franchise Is Initiated Mr. Kroc talk to the McDonald brother about open franchise outlet pattern on their restaurant , which sell hamburger for 15 cent , french fry for 10 cent and milkshake for 20 cents. Eventually , the McDonalds and Mr. Kroc work out a deal whereby he be to give them a small percentage of the gross of his operation. In due course the first of Mr. Kroc 's restaurant be open in Des Plaines , another Chicago suburb , long famous a the site of an annual Methodist encampment. Business prove excellent , and Mr. Kroc soon set about open other restaurants. The second and third , both in California , open later in 1955 ; in five year there be 228 , and in 1961 he buy out the McDonald brothers. In choose franchise owner to manage the new outlet , Mr. Kroc and his associate look , a he explain it in 1971 , `` for somebody who 's good with people , we 'd rather get a salesman than an accountant or even a chef. '' Among the license holder they select be a member of the House of Representatives from Virginia , a chemist , a golf professional , dentist , lawyer , advertise men and even a former Under Secretary of Labor. Stressed Grass Roots Under Mr. Kroc 's persistent goading , McDonald 's insist that franchise owner run their own outlets. It also pour hundred of million of dollar into advertising -- to the point where the head of another fast-food company say in 1978 that consumer be `` so precondition by McDonald 's advertising blanket that the hamburger would taste good even if they leave the meat out. '' Mr. Kroc be also unremittingly intense in train his franchise owner at `` Hamburger University '' in Elk Grove , Ill. , where a training course lead to a `` Bachelor of Hamburgerology with a minor in french fries. '' Instructors tell new McDonald 's owner how to clean grill , how to flip a hamburger and how to tell when one be done. `` It start turn brown around the edge. '' Mr. Kroc meet his wife , Joan , in a restaurant in 1956 when he and she have other spouses. They be marry in 1968 , and she go on to find and become the head of Operation Cork , a national program to help the family of alcoholics. It start in 1976 , finance by McDonald 's revenue through the Kroc Foundation. Operation Cork 's activity include an $ 800,000 grant to the Dartmouth Medical School to frame a model curriculum for the study of alcohol misuse and alcoholism. Mr. Kroc suffer a stroke in December 1979 and soon afterward enter an alcoholism treatment center in Orange , Calif. , because , he say at the time , `` I be require to take medication which be incompatible with the use of alcohol. '' Mr. Kroc 's survivor include his wife , Joan , of La Jolla ; a brother , Dr. Robert Kroc of Santa Ynez , Calif. ; a sister , Lorraine Groh of Lafayette , Ind. ; a stepdaughter , Mrs. Linda Smith of San Diego , and four granddaughters. A memorial service be plan for Friday in Oak Brook .