April 27 , 1984 OBITUARY Count Basie , 79 , Band Leader And Master of Swing , Dead by JOHN S. WILSON Count Basie , the jazz pianist whose spare , economic keyboard style and supple rhythmic drive make his orchestra one of the most influential group of the Big Band era , die of cancer yesterday morning at Doctors ' Hospital in Hollywood , Fla. He be 79 year old and live in Freeport , the Bahamas. Mr. Basie be , along with Duke Ellington and Benny Goodman , one of the pre-eminent bandleader of the Big Band era in the 1930 's and 40's. Mr. Basie 's band , more than any other , be the epitome of swing , of jazz that move with a built-in flowing intensity. This stem primarily from the presence in the rhythm section , from 1937 to the present , of both Mr. Basie on piano and Freddie Green on guitar. As one critic put it , they `` put wheel on all four bar of the beat , '' create a smooth rhythmic flow over which Mr. Basie 's other instrumentalist ride a though they be on a streamlined cushion. Among his band 's best-known number be `` One O'Clock Jump , '' `` Jumpin ' at the Woodside , '' `` Li'l Darlin ' '' and `` April in Paris. '' Mr. Basie , a short , stocky , taciturn but witty man who like to wear a yachting cap offstage , preside over the band at the piano with apparent utmost casualness. He flick out tightly economical , single-finger passage , direct his musician with a glance , a lift of an eyebrow or a note hit gently but positively in passing. His piano style , which often seem bare and simple , be an exquisitely realize condensation of the florid `` stride '' style of Fats Waller and James P. Johnson with whom Mr. Basie started. Unostentatious a Mr. Basie appear , his presence be a vital factor in direct his band or any group of musician with whom he might be playing. There be a memorable concert at Town Hall several year ago when a number of musician , include Mr. Basie , be schedule to perform in a variety of combinations. A group that include some Basie sidemen be on stage , play in a ragged , desultory fashion , when Mr. Basie arrived. The pianist in the combo give up his seat to Mr. Basie who sit down , tinkle a few introductory note , look up at the drummer , nod at the rest of the group and , when the combo take off , the musician be play as brilliantly and cleanly a they have be dishevel only a few moment before. Started Out a Drummer Mr. Basie be bear in Red Bank , N.J. , on Aug. 21 , 1904 , an only child who be christen William. He start out to be a drummer. But the obvious talent of another young Red Bank drummer , Sonny Greer , who be Duke Ellington 's drummer from 1919 to 1951 , discourage young Basie and he switch to piano. While he be in his late teen , he gravitate to Harlem , where he encounter Fats Waller. `` I have drop into the old Lincoln Theater in Harlem , '' Mr. Basie once recall , `` and I hear a young fellow beat it out on an organ. From that time on , I be a daily customer , hang onto every note , sit behind him all the time. He get use to see me , a though I be part of the show. One day he ask me whether I play the organ. 'No , ' I say , 'but I 'd give my right arm to learn. ' `` The next day he invite me to sit in the pit and start work the pedals. I sit on the floor watch his foot and use my hand to imitate him. Then I sit beside him and he teach me. '' Beginning in Vaudeville Through Mr. Waller , Mr. Basie get a job a an accompanist with a vaudeville act call Katie Crippen and Her Kids. He become an accompanist to the blue singer Clara Smith and Maggie Jones and he work in a 14th Street dance hall. Then he join a touring show head by one Gonzel White , play piano in a four-piece band. The Gonzel White show be strand in Kansas City , Mo. , a fateful location for Mr. Basie. For a year he play piano accompaniment to silent move and then join Walter Page 's Blue Devils in Tulsa , Okla. , a band that include -- in addition to Mr. Page , a bassist -- Jimmy Rushing , the blue signer , both of whom would be key member of Mr. Basie 's band. When the Page band break up in 1929 , Mr. Page , Mr. Basie and Mr. Rushing all join Bennie Moten 's orchestra , the lead big band in the Southwest , which become even strong with their presence. When Bennie Moten die in 1935 , the band disintegrate and Mr. Basie organize a small band to play at the Reno Club in Kansas City that become the nucleus of the band with which he gain his initial fame. Scale for the musician at the Reno Club , where beer be a nickel and whisky be 15 cent , be $ 15 a week for play from 8 P.M. to 4 A.M. , except Saturdays when it be 8 P.M. until 8 A.M. And it be a seven-day week. From Bill to Count The band broadcast from the Reno Club on an experimental radio station. It be on one of these broadcast that Bill Basie become Count Basie. `` One night the announcer call me to the microphone for those usual few word of introduction , '' Mr. Basie once recalled. `` He comment that Bill Basie be a rather ordinary name and that there be a couple of well-known bandleader name Earl Hines and Duke Ellington. Then he say , 'Bill , I think I 'll call you Count Basie from now on. Is that all right with you ? ' I think he be kid , shrug my shoulder and reply , 'O.K. ' Well , that be the last time I be ever introduce a Bill Basie. From then on , it be Count Basie. '' The broadcast be pick up one night by John Hammond , the jazz enthusiast who have discover Billie Holiday and help Benny Goodman start his band. Mr. Hammond spread the word about the Basie band , go to Kansas City to hear it and support it and bring it to the attention of book agents. As a result , the band get a date at the Grand Terrace in Chicago. To go on the road , Mr. Basie expand his nine-piece band to 13 pieces. Pop Tunes With a Kick `` I want my 13-piece band to work together just like those nine piece , '' he explained. `` I want 13 men to think and play the same way. I want those three trumpet and two trombone to bite with real guts. But I want that bite to be just a tasty and subtle a if it be the three brass I use to use. In fact , the only reason I enlarge the brass be to get a rich harmonic structure. I say the minute the brass get out of hand and blare and screech instead of make every note mean something , there 'd be some change made. `` Of course , I want to play real jazz. When we play pop tune -- and , naturally , we have to -- I want those pop to kick ! Not loud and fast , understand , but smoothly and with a definite punch. '' Fletcher Henderson 's band be play at the Grand Terrace just before the Basie band arrive there. Mr. Basie 's musician have be play `` head '' arrangement in Kansas City -- treatment of the blue or pop tune that be work out on the stand. When the band leave for Chicago it have only 12 write arrangement in it book. To help it through the Grand Terrace engagement , Fletcher Henderson , who have provide Benny Goodman with the arrangement that enable his band to break through a year earlier , lent Mr. Basie some of his arrangements. `` He be the only leader in the business who ever go out of his way to help me , '' Mr. Basie say later. Despite the presence of Lester Young and Herschel Evans in the saxophone section , Buck Clayton in the trumpet section , Jo Jones on drum , with Jimmy Rushing and , briefly , Billie Holiday a vocalist , the Basie band struggle for a year after it leave Kansas City. From the Grand Terrace , it move on to New York and Roseland Ballroom ( play opposite Woody Herman 's new , young band ) where listener complain that it be out of tune ( not a surprising reaction since many of Mr. Basie 's musician be blow patched-up horn and saxophone hold together by rubber band ) . The band flop at a Pittsburgh hotel that have never book a jazz band before. Even in Harlem , it puzzle the aware audience at the Savoy Ballroom. Breakthrough on 52d Street Finally , Willard Alexander , a booking agent , in an effort to get the band on 52d Street , then the jazz center of New York , make a deal with the Famous Door , a shoebox of a room , 25 foot wide and about 50 foot long , which be have trouble do business in the summer because it have no air-conditioning. Mr. Alexander agree to lend the club $ 2,500 to install an air-conditioner if it would book the Basie band. With Mr. Basie 's 13 men in full cry at one end of this elongated closet , the sound ricochet off the wall and rocket down from the low ceiling , no listener could escape the exhilarate power of the band. `` When they let you in the door , '' Ralph Gleason , the jazz critic , report , `` it be like jump into the center of a whirlwind. The sound be almost frightening. Even more important be the fact that the Famous Door have national and local radio wires. `` And that 's when the whole fire start , '' say Mr. Alexander. By then a series of record by the Basie band have begin appear ( under a contract with Decca Records by which Mr. Basie be pay a total of $ 750 for 24 side with no royalty -- '' probably the most expensive blunder in Basie 's history , '' say Mr. Hammond ) that include hit after hit -- '' Swingin ' the Blues , '' `` Jumpin ' at the Woodside , '' `` One O'Clock Jump '' ( his theme ) and many others now consider jazz classics. Jazz Stars in the Band The `` book '' of this early Basie band be base on blue and riff develop on a blue structure. It be a loose and swing band , build around distinctively individualistic solo by Lester Young , Hershel Evans , Buddy Tate , Buck Clayton , Harry Edison , Dickie Wells , Vic Dickenson and , primarily , Mr. Basie himself. During the 1940 's , many of the great jazz musician of the decade pass through the band , among them Illinois Jacquet , Don Byas , Wardell Gray , Paul Quinichette , Lucky Thompson , J. J. Johnson , Paul Gonsalves and Clark Terry. In 1950 , when big band be fall apart , Mr. Basie cut down to an eight-piece group but by 1952 he be lead a big band once again. This second-generation big band differ from the early one in that it depend on arranger for it basic style , a smooth , rolling , highly polished swing style for which Neal Hefti ( `` Li'l Darlin ' '' ) , Ernie Wilkins and Frank Foster ( `` Shiny Stockings '' ) be among the most notable orchestrators. One of the band 's most popular arrangement , `` April in Paris , '' be write in 1955 by Wild Bill Davis , a jazz organist who have originally develop it for his own small group. The key factor in popularize it be a series of repetition of the final few bar when , a the orchestra seemingly come to the end of the piece , Mr. Basie hold up a finger and call out , `` One mo ' time ! '' Played for Presidents Soloists be less prominent in this second edition of the Basie band although it include some of the major jazz musician of the post-50 's year , such a Thad Jones , Joe Newman , Al Grey , Eddie ( Lockjaw ) Davis , Frank Wess , Jimmy Forrest and the blue singer Joe Williams. The Basie band play at President John F. Kennedy 's inaugural ball , and in 1965 tour with Frank Sinatra. In 1981 , Mr. Basie be honor along with Cary Grant , Helen Hayes and other star a a recipient of Washington 's Kennedy Center honor for achievement in the performing arts. At a White House reception , President Reagan say that Mr. Basie be `` among the handful of musician that help change the path of American music in the 30 's and the 40 's '' and that he have `` revolutionize jazz. '' In 1976 , Mr. Basie suffer a heart attack. While he recuperate his band continue to fulfill engagement , frequently with Nat Pierce take Mr. Basie 's place at the piano and sometimes with guest conductor such a the trumpeter Clark Terry , who be a member of the Basie band in the 1940's. Within less than six month , however , Mr. Basie be back at the keyboard. During his last year , he have difficulty walking and ride out on the stage on a motorize wheelchair which he sometimes drive with joyful abandon. The Black Music Association honor Mr. Basie in 1982 with a gala at Radio City Music Hall. Lena Horne , Stevie Wonder , Joe Williams , Oscar Peterson and Quincy Jones be among the star to pay tribute. `` He certainly make a notch in musical history , '' say Benny Goodman , 75 year old , the jazz clarinetist and bandleader. `` He be a wonderful man. He be a big force in music. '' The jazz pianist George Shearing say that Mr. Basie 's great trademark be the three sweet , soft note that end many of his great swing-era compositions. `` Can you imagine a man who kind of romp around the piano , '' Mr. Shearing say , `` and those tiny tinkle things. You never get tire of that business at the end. '' The band will continue under the guidance of Aaron Woodward , an adopted son of Mr. Basie who have work closely with the orchestra leader during the last year. Mr. Basie 's wife , Catherine , die in April 1983. He be survive by a daughter , Diane Basie of Freeport. There will be a viewing at Benta 's Funeral Home , 630 St. Nicholas Avenue at 141st Street , on Sunday from 1 to 7 P.M. The funeral service will be at noon on Monday at the Abyssinian Baptist Church , 132 West 138th Street .