October 2 , 1985 OBITUARY E.B. White , Essayist and Stylist , Dies By HERBERT MITGANG E. B. White , the essayist and stylist who be one of the nation 's most precious literary resource , die yesterday at his home in North Brooklin , Me. , where he have live for half a century. He have Alzheimer 's disease and be 86 year old. Mr. White 's writing be appreciate by generation of reader of every age. His classic child 's book , `` Stuart Little , '' `` Charlotte 's Web '' and `` The Trumpet of the Swan , '' continue to sell in the hundred of thousand every year. His importance to student be immeasurable because of `` The Elements of Style , '' the slim work on English usage he revise and expand , base on Prof. William Strunk Jr. 's textbook. The book be use today in high school and college across the country. His comment , piece and poem in The New Yorker help to set the tone of sophisticated wit , irreverence and necessary candor almost since the magazine 's beginning in the 1920's. And his independent stand in the `` Talk of the Town '' column of The New Yorker and elsewhere brook no nonsense about excess in American corporate and political life. 'His Writing Was Timeless' William Shawn , editor of The New Yorker , say yesterday : `` E. B. White be a great essayist , a supreme stylist. His literary style be as pure a any in our language. It be singular , colloquial , clear , unforced , thoroughly American and utterly beautiful. Because of his quiet influence , several generation of this country 's writer write good than they might have done. He never write a mean or careless sentence. He be impervious to literary , intellectual and political fashion. He be ageless , and his writing be timeless. `` Watched over and inspirit by The New Yorker 's founding editor , Harold Ross , he and James Thurber be the writer who do most to determine the magazine 's shape , tone and direction. Even though White live much of his life on a farm in Maine , remote from the clatter of publicity and celebrity , fame overtook him , fortunately leave him untouched. His connection with nature be intimate and ardent. He love his farm , his farm animal , his neighbor , his family and words. '' Mr. White 's score of book - essay , poem , sketch , letter - include `` The Points of My Compass , '' `` The Second Tree From the Corner , '' `` Here Is New York , '' `` One Man 's Meat '' and ( with James Thurber ) `` Is Sex Necessary ? '' He could be outspoken and passionate on subject that be especially close to his heart - the freedom and integrity of the press , personal privacy and liberty , the intrusion of advertising , market survey and commercialism into everyday living , the conservation of nature , the need for some form of world government. His opponent often succumb before the force of his purity , ridicule , regret and common sense. Respect for Audiences Mr. White 's strength a a writer be root in his respect for his audience - child , adolescent and adult -regardless of what the pollster and market survey declare a scientific truth. `` No one can write decently who be distrustful of the reader 's intelligence , '' he said. `` Television have take a big bite out of the write word. But word still count with me. '' His `` Elements of Style , '' which he update from the privately print note make in 1918 by Mr. Strunk , his former professor at Cornell , and revise several time since for new edition , have sell million of copies. The White-Strunk book be ignore at peril by student ever since it first appear some three decade ago. It be consider one of the most enduring and most readable book on American English usage. The wisdom in the book be both analytical and practical. In it he say : `` Vigorous writing be concise. A sentence should contain no unnecessary word , a paragraph no unnecessary sentence , for the same reason that a drawing should have no unnecessary line and a machine no unnecessary part. This require not that the writer make all his sentence short , or that he avoid all detail and treat his subject only in outline , but that every word tell. '' Clarity and Grace In the late edition , more than before , word tell. For example , Mr. White call `` offputting '' and `` ongoing '' newfound adjectives to be avoid because they be inexact and clumsy : `` Ongoing be a mix of continue and active and be usually superfluous , and offputting might mean objectionable , disconcert or distasteful. Instead , select a word whose meaning be clear. As a simple test , transform the participle to verbs. It be possible to upset something. But to offput ? To ongo ? '' Some of the memorable advice in his `` Approach to Style '' section go : `` Place yourself in the background ; write in a way that come naturally ; work from a suitable design ; write with noun and verb ; do not overwrite ; do not overstate ; avoid the use of qualifier ; do not affect a breezy style ; use orthodox spelling ; do not explain too much ; avoid fancy word ; do not take shortcut at the cost of clarity ; prefer the standard to the offbeat ; make sure the reader know who be speak ; do not use dialect ; revise and rewrite. '' Talking about the surprising acceptance of `` The Elements of Style , '' he say : `` It 's a funny little book , and it keep go on. Occasionally I get irate letter from people who find a boo-boo in it , but many more from people who find it useful. The book be use not only in institution of learning , but also in business places. Bosses give it to their secretaries. I guess someone in the office have to know how to write English. '' About the only one who have the ability to uphold that good advice be E ( lwyn ) B ( rook ) White himself. 'She 'd Run Out of Names' Of his name , Mr. White say : `` I never like Elwyn. My mother just hang it on me because she 'd run out of names. I be her sixth child. '' From college on , to his relief , he be call Andy. He acquire the name at Cornell , after it first president , Andrew D. White. The nickname be bestow there on student name White. Mr. White be bear in Mount Vernon , N.Y. , on July 11 , 1899. His parent have move there from Brooklyn , he later surmise , `` because Mount Vernon sound tonier. '' After serve as editor in chief of The Cornell Sun , he work for the United Press in New York for a year , become a reporter for The Seattle Times for two year , try his hand in an advertising agency a a production assistant and copywriter , and then find his niche a a contributor to The New Yorker in 1927. Recalling his early tenure at the magazine , he say , `` The cast of character in those day be as shifty a the character in a floating poker game. Every week the magazine teeter on the edge of financial ruin. It be chaos but it be enjoyable. James Thurber and I share a sort of elongated closet. Harold Ross fought with Raoul Fleischmann and erect an impenetrable barrier between the advertising department and the editorial department. It be know a the Ross Barrier. '' Disguising North Brooklin A friend who visit Mr. White at home in Maine several year ago find him in good spirits. He look like his sentence : straightforward , yet elegant. `` Do n't say I live exactly in North Brooklin or bus will show up - a few have already - load with schoolchildren and their teacher look for 'Stuart Little , ' 'Charlotte's Web ' and 'The Trumpet of the Swan , ' `` he said. `` Maybe you can say 'somewhere on the Atlantic Coast. ' If you must , make the location the way the property appear on nautical map - Allen Cove. That way no one will be able to find it except by sailboat and use a chart. '' So many letter from child be address to Mr. White ( as well a to Stuart Little and Charlotte , his fictional creation ) that Harper & Row , his publisher , have a print reply of thanks and explanation from Mr. White. Part of his form letter go : `` Are my story true , you ask ? No , they be imaginary tale , contain fantastic character and events. In real life , a family do n't have a child who look like a mouse ; in real life , a spider do n't spin word in her web. In real life , a swan do n't blow a trumpet. But real life be only one kind of life -there be also the life of the imagination. And although my story be imaginary , I like to think that there be some truth in them , too - truth about the way people and animal feel and think and act. '' Sought Privacy in Maine After have live in Manhattan in the 1920 's and 1930 's , Mr. White and his wife , Katharine , seek privacy in Maine. They buy the roomy old farmhouse in 1933 and live in it almost continuously begin in 1938. Their life be link with The New Yorker , where they first meet in 1926. He say that Katharine Sergeant Angell be consider `` the intellectual soul '' of the magazine , serve a fiction editor and encourage many gift writers. They be marry in 1929. Mr. White later say , `` I soon realize that I have make no mistake in my choice of a wife. I be help her pack an overnight bag one afternoon when she say , 'Put in some tooth twine. ' I know then that a girl who call dental floss tooth twine be the girl for me. '' They be marry for 48 year , and Mr. White never quite get over her death in 1977. When her book , `` Onward and Upward in the Garden , '' base on her New Yorker piece , come out in 1978 , with an introduction by him , he write , `` Life without Katharine be no good for me. '' Until illness slow him down , Mr. White usually rise at 6 in the morning , start the wood fire in the black four-lidded kitchen stove , check the action in the birdfeeder dangle outside the living-room window of the 19th-century farmhouse and peer with a Maineman 's eye at the broken clouds. Prose Produced by Hand When the sun break through without advance notice , the pencil , pen and typewriter ( the portable one down at the boathouse , the upright Underwood in the workroom ) go into action. Mr. White turn out some of the most moral , live prose produce by hand in the country. Even in speaking , Mr. White seem to have the right phrase at hand. Fiddling with a thick log in the fireplace , he make it flare up quickly - more a countryman 's than an author 's fire. Mr. White like to sip a vermouth cassis before lunch. `` It 's a French taxi-driver 's drink , '' he said. Walking with a visitor over to the general store , he take a bottle of orange juice to the counter. `` Hi , Al , '' he say to the proprietor. `` Hi , Andy , '' the proprietor reply , and at the same time hand him a copy of the local paper , The Ellsworth American , publish by his longtime friend J. Russell Wiggins. Now and then , he would contribute a letter or essay to the paper. Driving on a few mile , he stop at the boatyard run by his son , Joel , a naval architect from M.I.T. , and study the small boat jiggle on the windy waters. In a cavernous boatshed , he climb aboard the 19-foot sloop Martha , name after his granddaughter , which his son build for him. He sail these water , with friend and family , most of his life. He point to the carved dolphin , four on each side of the bow , that he design and decorate in gold. Like Louis the trumpeter swan in his book `` who think how lucky he be to inhabit such a beautiful earth , '' E. B. White be on the side of good luck and the angels. Fondness for Geese Back at Allen Cove , he spot the goose on the pond below the farmhouse and barn. He pick up some apple and wave them aloft , invite the goose to have a snack before dinner. `` Geese be the great clown in the world , '' he said. `` I would n't be without them. '' To follower of Mr. White 's work , his Maine home be historic literary territory. The barn inspire many of the character in his story for children. In a corner of a cellar window a spider spun a web but , he say , it be a different specie from the large gray spider that live here with Wilbur the pig in `` Charlotte 's Web. '' In his small gray boathouse face the cove , he write `` One Man 's Meat , '' most of `` Charlotte 's Web '' and , he say , `` 10,000 newsbreaks. '' These be the satirical and humorous observation that round off the column in almost every issue of The New Yorker. Although uncredited , they bore the White imprint for many years. Their heading become part of the language : `` Neatest Trick of the Week '' ; `` Go Climb a Tree Department '' ; `` Letters We Never Finished Reading '' ; `` Our Forgetful Authors '' ; `` Funny Coincidence Department '' ; `` Wind on Capitol Hill. '' 'Holding Down a Job' Until recently , The New Yorker send him a package of news item every week. `` I like do the break because it give me a feeling of hold down a job and affords me a glimpse of newspaper all over the country , '' Mr. White said. `` I turn in my first one 50 year ago. Everybody in the shop use to do them. One day I get a call from Harold Ross ask where I was. I say I be home with the chicken pox. And he say , 'I finally get someone who can do these break , and he get the chicken pox. ' `` For his contribution to American letter , Mr. White be award the National Medal for Literature in 1971. In 1963 , President Kennedy present him with a Presidential Medal of Freedom. He be elect to the 50-member American Academy of Arts and Letters and , in 1973 , receive it gold medal for essay and criticism. In 1978 , he receive a special Pulitzer Prize for the body of his work. Two year ago , after he have begin to slow down , he type , with his usual good humor , a long letter to a friend : `` I have a first degree heart block , have lose the sight in my right eye because of a degenerated retina , ca n't wind my wrist watch because my finger have knuckle under to arthritis , ca n't tie my shoelace , be dependent on seven different pill to stay alive , ca n't remember whether I take the pill or didn't. `` On the other hand , I be camped alone , here at Bert Mosher 's Camps on the shore of Great Pond which I first visit in 1904 ; I have my 15-foot green Old Town canoe with me , which I bring over on the top of my car ; I sit out a New England boil dinner this noon by anticipate it with martini and cheese-and-crackers before walk up to the farmhouse , and after dinner ( or lack of same ) go fish for bass in my canoe. `` There be a certain serenity here that heals my spirit , and I can still buy Moxie in a tiny supermarket six mile away. Moxie contain gentian root , which be the path to the good life. This be know in the second century before Christ , and it be a boon to me today. '' In addition to his son , Joel , of Brooklin , Me. , Mr. White be survive by two stepchild , Roger Angell of Manhattan and Nancy Stableford of Easton , Pa. ; nine grandchild , and 12 great-grandchildren .