October 11 , 1985 OBITUARY Orson Welles be Dead at 70 ; Innovator of Film and Stage Special to The New York Times Orson Welles , the Hollywood `` boy wonder '' who create the film classic `` Citizen Kane , '' scar ten of thousand of Americans with a realistic radio report of a Martian invasion of New Jersey and change the face of film and theater with his dare new idea , die yesterday in Los Angeles , apparently of a heart attack. He be 70 year old and live in Las Vegas , Nev. An assistant coroner in Los Angeles , Donald Messerle , say Welles 's death `` appear to be natural in origin. '' He have be under treatment for diabetes as well a a heart ailment , his physician reported. Welles 's body be find by his chauffeur. Despite the feeling of many that his career - which evoke almost constant controversy over it 50 year -was one of largely unfulfilled promise , Welles eventually win the respect of his colleagues. He receive the Lifetime Achievement Award of the American Film Institute in 1975 , and last year the Directors Guild of America give him it high honor , the D. W. Griffith Award. An Unorthodox Style His unorthodox casting and staging for the theater give new meaning to the classic and to contemporary works. As the `` Wonder Boy '' of Broadway in the 1930 's , he set the stage on it ear with a `` Julius Caesar '' set in Fascist Italy , an all-black `` Macbeth '' and his presentation of Marc Blitzstein 's `` Cradle Will Rock. '' His Mercury Theater of the Air set new standard for radio drama , and in one performance panic thousand across the nation. In film , his innovation in deep-focus technology and his use of theater esthetic - long take without close-ups , make the viewer 's eye search the screen a if it be a stage - create a new vocabulary for the cinema. Frequently Used Cliche By age 24 , he be already be describe by the press a a has-been - a cliche that would dog him all his life. But at that very moment Welles be create `` Citizen Kane , '' generally consider one of the best motion picture ever made. This scenario be repeat several times. His second film , `` The Magnificent Ambersons , '' be poorly receive , but be now also regard a a classic , although the distributor re-edited it and Welles never like the result. `` Falstaff '' and `` Touch of Evil , '' two of his late film , be also change by others before their release. For his failure to realize his dream , Welles blame his critic and the financier of Hollywood. Others blame what they describe a his erratic , egotistical , self-indulgent and self-destructive temperament. But in the end , few deny his genius. He be a Falstaffian figure , 6 foot 2 inch tall , weigh well over 200 pound , with a huge appetite for good food and drink and large cigars. Loud , brash , amuse and insufferable by turn , he make friend and enemy by the score. His life be a series of adventure whose detail be fuzzy , in part because he be a bit of a fabulist , delight in pull the leg of listener , in part because the credit for his achievement be the subject of fierce controversy. George Orson Welles be bear in Kenosha , Wis. , on May 6 , 1915 , the son of Richard Head Welles , an inventor and manufacturer , and of the former Beatrice Ives. His mother be dedicate to the theater , and Welles say he make his debut at 2 a the child of `` Madame Butterfly '' in an opera performance. A Genius at 18 Months According to `` Orson Welles , '' an authorized biography by Barbara Leaming publish a few week ago , Welles 's genius be discover when he be only 18 month old , not by a Broadway producer or agent but by his doctor , Maurice Bernstein , who , pronounce the child a prodigy , begin to furnish him with a long series of educational gifts. These include a violin , paint supply , a magic kit , theatrical makeup kit and even a conductor 's baton. His parent be divorce ; Mrs. Welles die when he be 6 , and he spend several year travel around the world with his father , a bon vivant. At 10 , he enter the Todd School in Woodstock , Ill. His five year there be his only formal education. Under the guidance of Roger Hill , the headmaster , young Orson steep himself in student theater , stag and act in a series of Shakespeare productions. Together , he and Mr. Hill edit `` Everybody's Shakespeare , '' a text for school production , which sell well for many years. On his graduation , he take a brief course in paint at the Chicago Art Institute , then sail for Ireland on a sketch tour. There , smoke a cigar to disguise the fact that he be only 16 , he manage to convince the Gate Theater in Dublin that he be a Theater Guild actor on a holiday. He go on a the Duke in `` Jew Suss , '' follow it with other featured part and even achieve a featured role at the eminent Abbey Theater , all in his first professional season. Then , after a spell of travel in Spain and Morocco , he return to Chicago. Toured With Katharine Cornell Through Thornton Wilder and Alexander Woollcott , Welles be introduce to Katharine Cornell , who engage him for support role in a tour that include `` Candida , '' `` Romeo and Juliet '' and `` The Barretts of Wimpole Street. '' When Miss Cornell open `` Romeo and Juliet '' on Broadway on Dec. 20 , 1934 , Welles play Tybalt. He be then 19 year old. Like everything else he do , Welles 's acting be a subject of controversy. Some critic would always accuse him of ham , of hog the limelight - especially when he be also the director. But many professional and a large public find his presence electrifying. `` He have the manner of a giant with the look of a child , '' say Jean Cocteau , `` a lazy activeness , a mad wisdom , a solitude encompass the world. '' Early in his Broadway career , Welles pick up supplementary income a a radio actor. He become familiar to million a the sepulchral voice of `` The Shadow , '' a wizard who turn virtually invisible to foil criminals. But he keep up with the theater ; in 1935 he be engage by the producer-director John Houseman to star in Archibald MacLeish 's poetic drama of the Depression , `` Panic , '' in which he portray a tycoon. To combat unemployment , the Roosevelt Administration have set up the Works Progress Administration , one of the many project of which be the Federal Theater. With Mr. Houseman a manager and Welles a director , it mount several striking production - the black `` Macbeth , '' a starkly austere `` Dr. Faustus , '' a comic `` Horse Eats Hat '' - that excite the theater world. Even more than some other W.P.A. project , the Federal Theater also stir conservative wrath. The last straw come when a troupe feature Howard da Silva and Will Geer prepare to stage `` The Cradle Will Rock , '' a leftist musical by Marc Blitzstein , in 1937. The authority ban the production and lock the company out of the theater on open night. Welles join the cast and an audience of 2,000 in a march up Sixth Avenue to a rent theater. To evade the ban , the actor sing from seat in the auditorium , with Mr. Blitzstein conduct from a piano on stage. Co-founded the Mercury The Federal Theater soon be liquidate , but Welles and Mr. Houseman go on to find the Mercury Theater. Its first production in late 1937 , a `` Julius Caesar '' in modern dress with overtone of Fascist Italy , be a smash hit. The Mercury take in the production of `` The Cradle Will Rock '' that have be ban by Government authority ; it have success also with `` Shoemaker 's Holiday '' and `` Heartbreak House. '' Chiefly to provide it actor with steady income , the company sign up with CBS Radio a the Mercury Theater of the Air. Its acting , dramatic tension and inventive use of sound effect set new high in radio theater. On Oct. 30 , 1938 , the Mercury Theater of the Air present a dramatization of H. G. Wells 's `` War of the Worlds , '' in the form of news bulletin and field reporting from the scene of a supposed Martian invasion of New Jersey. It be an event unique in broadcast history , frequently recall in book , magazine article and repeat performances. Many thousand of listener tune in after the introduction , hear the music interrupt by flash bulletin and panicked. Some arm themselves and prepare to fight the invader ; many more seize a few belonging and flee for the hills. Police switchboard around the country be flood with calls. Welles be already famous ; a few week earlier , at age 23 , he have appear on the cover of Time magazine a the `` Wonder Boy '' of the theater. Now he be suddenly a household word -the target of some indignation , but also of amused admiration. Hollywood Contract The Mercury Theater on Broadway be nevertheless a financial failure , and end it theatrical existence in early 1939. The following season the company , include such relatively unknown actor a Agnes Moorehead , Joseph Cotten and Everett Sloane , go to Hollywood under a contract with R.K.O. that grant Welles total artistic freedom. On his first visit to a film studio , Welles be say to have marvel , `` This be the big electric-train set any boy ever had. '' The movie community , however , be not entrance by the unconventional young interloper. A Saturday Evening Post profile in 1940 reflect this view. `` Orson be an old war horse in the infant prodigy line by the time he be 10 , '' it said. `` He have already see eight year ' service a a child genius. Some see the 24-year-old boy of today a a mere shadow of the 2-year-old man they use to know. '' Welles be then direct `` Citizen Kane , '' base on a scenario by Herman J. Mankiewicz , with himself in the title role. An impressionistic biography of a newspaper publisher strongly suggestive of William Randolph Hearst , it be now fabled for it use of flashback , deep-focus photography , set with ceiling , strike camera angle and imaginative sound and cutting. Kenneth Tynan have write , `` Nobody who saw 'Citizen Kane ' at an impressionable age will ever forget the experience ; overnight , the American cinema have acquire an adult vocabulary , a dictionary instead of a phrase book for illiterates. '' Stanley Kauffmann call it `` the best serious picture ever make in this country. '' Accusations and Rebuttals The making of `` Kane '' have be the subject of fierce polemics. Pauline Kael , in a famous New Yorker article in 1971 , call it a `` shallow masterpiece '' and `` comic-strip tragic , '' and accuse Welles of try to deny credit to Mr. Mankiewicz , Mr. Houseman and the cameraman , Gregg Toland. This have be rebut in part by Mr. Houseman - who say he have be the pupil and Welles the teacher in stage creation - and in great detail by many Welles admirer , notably the director Peter Bogdanovich. It turn out that Miss Kael have not seek to question Welles. His defender concede that he have throw violent tantrum , lead to the departure of Mr. Houseman , but say he be frequently generous in praise of his collaborators. More seriously , the Hearst newspaper chain be accuse of seek to block the showing of `` Kane '' and it long bar mention of Welles and his film in it publications. `` Citizen Kane '' could neither be review nor advertise in it newspapers. An offer be make to pay R.K.O. what it have cost to make the picture plus a modest profit - well below $ 1 million in all - to destroy all print of the film. This be refused. But `` Kane '' draw a mixed reception when it open in 1941 , and it be year before it turn into a profit maker. Welles win an Academy Award for write the film , and be nominate for direct and act awards. Meanwhile , Welles be make Mercury 's second movie , `` The Magnificent Ambersons. '' At the close of shooting , Welles accede to a request by Washington that he fly to Rio de Janeiro to make a good-neighborly documentary on the Mardi Gras. On his return , he find that an impatient R.K.O. have do the final cutting of `` The Magnificent Ambersons. '' Difficulty With Financing He be deeply hurt , and he disown the film. On the movie company 's side , the assertion be make that Welles be impossible to deal with on content , and unreliable on cost and completion dates. This perception , encourage by some journalist , make it forever afterward difficult for Welles to obtain financing for his projects. Welles and his supporter retort that his budget be always low , sometimes remarkably so , and that his shoot schedule be sometimes extaordinarily tight. Some concede that , never satisfy with his work , he have an almost neurotic reluctance to view it when do , and several uncompleted work remain in storage. After `` The Magnificent Ambersons , '' the tireless Welles return to Broadway in 1941 to direct a dramatization of Richard Wright 's `` Native Son , '' which be a triumph ; do a series of wartime propaganda broadcast for the Government ; produce and act in the movie thriller `` Journey Into Fear '' ( 1942 ) , which be a failure , and star a Mr. Rochester in the highly popular `` Jane Eyre '' ( 1943 ) . Rejected by the Army because of flat foot , he take part a a magician - another of his talent - in a tour of the European Theater of Operations , in which his act be saw Marlene Dietrich in half. Back home after the war , he adapt and stag a Cole Porter musical version of `` Around the World in 80 Days '' in 1946 that be praise by critic but fail at the box office. He lose $ 350,000 of his own money in the production. He also direct and act in a Hollywood spy thriller , `` The Stranger , '' in 1946 , and produce , direct and co-starred with Rita Hayworth in `` The Lady From Shanghai , '' in 1948. Three Marriages He and Miss Hayworth , who be marry in 1943 , be divorce in 1948. They have a daughter , Rebecca. Welles have a son , Christopher , from his first marriage , to Virginia Nicholson , which also end in divorce. In 1955 , he marry the Italian actress Paola Mori , who appear with him in his `` Mr. Arkadin. '' They have a daughter , Beatrice. In part because of his loss from `` Around the World , '' which be rule nondeductible for tax purpose , Welles move to Europe , where he live most often in Spain , for many years. From time to time , he would act in a film or television show or in television commercial - he be always in demand a a performer - and from time to time would use his earnings and what financing he could raise to make a picture , or part of one. His act talent enhance such film - make by other director - a `` Tomorrow Is Forever , '' `` The Third Man , '' `` Compulsion , '' `` A Man for All Seasons '' and `` Catch-22. '' In Italy and Morocco , at interval from 1949 to 1952 , he put together and star in `` Othello '' and `` Macbeth. '' The latter film , shot in three week , have be violently criticized. In Mexico and Paris , begin in 1955 , he film the not yet complete `` Don Quixote. '' In four European country in 1954 , he make `` Mr. Arkadin , '' base on a thriller he have write himself. In Paris and Zagreb , Yugoslavia , in 1962 , he write , direct and act in `` The Trial , '' base on the Kafka novel. Many critic decry it ; some call it a masterpiece. He complete two other film in Europe and , in 1970 , begin a major project , `` The Other Side of the Wind , '' which remain unfinished. His last directorial effort to be release be `` The Immortal Story '' in 1968 ; he also perform in it. In 1958 , Welles return briefly to Hollywood to act with Charlton Heston in `` Touch of Evil. '' At Mr. Heston 's suggestion , Welles be enlist as director a well. Some admirer consider it one of his best film , and it opening scene , come to a climax in a car explosion , be a model of the genre , although Welles be to complain that it , too , have be re-edited by the studio without his permission. He also stag , and appear in , a successful run of `` Othello '' in London , and be feature in dozen of television shows. Boycotted New York Stage He refuse to appear on Broadway , however , after an unfortunate appearance in `` King Lear '' during which , have break an ankle , he act in a wheelchair. He vow that he would never return to the New York stage while Walter Kerr be still a critic there. Writing for The New York Herald Tribune , Mr. Kerr have describe Welles a `` a buffoon , '' `` an actor without talent '' and `` an international joke , possibly the world 's young has-been. '' Mr. Kerr be not the only hostile critic. In 1963 Stanley Kauffmann , although more admiring of Welles 's virtuosity , also accuse him of overact and conclude , `` After 'Kane , ' his film direct consists of sometimes glitter , often wild attempt to recapture that first fine careful rapture. '' That be the common reception give in this country to Welles 's film `` Falstaff , '' which have be hail in Europe under the title `` Chimes at Midnight. '' When it appear here in 1967 , a number of critic pan it , one call Welles `` inarticulate '' and say he make Falstaff `` a sort of Jackie Gleason. '' More recently , however , The Times 's Vincent Canby write that the picture `` may be the great Shakespearean film ever made. '' The film and television writer Stephen Farber comment : `` Looking back over American movie history - a history of wrecked career - you begin to see that the critic have a lot to answer for. The classic victim be Orson Welles. '' This be , of course , also Welles 's view. He complain , `` They do n't review my work - they review me. '' It can not be doubt that his flamboyant personality , his enormous early success , his pride and his lofty aspiration cause critic to measure him against standard they might not have apply to a more modest film maker. He be the legendary sort of figure upon whom old anecdote be rehung. Mr. Mankiewicz , for example , be report by Miss Kael to have say of Welles , `` There , but for the grace of God , go God. '' Welles inspire harsh criticism , yet most people felt that even his most unsuccessful , most self-indulgent work all have some feature , some turn that be memorable. There be no dissenter when , at the dedication of a Theater Hall of Fame in New York 1n 1972 , his name be among the first to be chosen. He be survive by his wife and three child .