December 15 , 1985 OBITUARY Roger Maris be Dead at 51 , Set Record Home Runs By JOSEPH DURSO Roger Maris , who hold the major league record for the most home run in a single season , die yesterday at M. D. Anderson Hospital and Tumor Institute in Houston after a two-year bout with cancer , hospital official said. He be 51 year old. During the early 1960 's when the New York Yankees reign for five straight pennant-winning season , Roger Maris be all thing to all people. But baseball history will remember him a the home-run twin to Mickey Mantle , and generation of fan will remember him a the man with the asterisk in the record book : *Hit 61 home run in 1961 in a 162-game season. The asterisk be insert to distinguish Maris 's home-run record from the one set in 1927 by the great Yankee of them all : Babe Ruth , who hit 60 in the day of the 154-game season. It be insert into the record book by Ford C. Frick , the commissioner of baseball , who apparently reflect the traditionalist view of many fan that the Olympian feat of Babe Ruth must be defend against long season , short fence and newly arrive slugger -even one who eventually play in seven World Series and hit 275 home run in 12 season in the big leagues. Set Mark on Final Day But , on Oct. 1. 1961 , asterisk or no asterisk , Roger Maris make history when he hit his 61st home run of the season in his 161st game on the final day of the 162-game season in Yankee Stadium against Tracy Stallard of the Boston Red Sox. It be the rouse end to a rousing season , and it end with the Yankees win the pennant race before roar sellout crowd and swarm of writer and broadcaster draw by Mantle and Maris , the power hitter on yet another great Yankee team. Mantle , who be injure in September , still manage to hit 54 home run , so the `` twin '' combine for an awesome total of 115. But Maris , an accomplished outfielder with a powerful arm and bat , be besiege a he pursue the memory and the record of Ruth. And yet , Maris be not universally embrace for his achievement. The Yankees receive 3,000 message a day during the final week of the season , many of them cheer him on. But the commissioner , a onetime colleague of Babe Ruth , announce that any record would have to be set in 154 games. And Rogers Hornsby , the Hall of Fame slugger , who also have be a contemporary of Ruth , say in the passion of the day : `` Maris have no right to break Ruth 's record. '' Maris have no `` right '' to break Ruth 's record ostensibly because he be none of the thing that have make Babe Ruth renowned a the Bambino. He be import to the Yankees from the Kansas City Athletics , a stocky figure with a blond crewcut , and he be play only his second season in the celebrated pinstripes. He be consider an upstart in the House That Ruth Built , and the house that Mantle dominated. He be dour , aloof , sometimes arch , and in no way the flamboyant bear portray by Babe Ruth. His manager in 1960 , Casey Stengel , once say : `` You ask Maris a question , and he star at you for a week before he answers. '' `` I be bear surly , '' Maris acknowledge in 1961 when the home-run race have end , `` and I 'm go to stay that way. Everything in life be tough. `` Even the Yankee clubhouse attendant think I 'm tough to live with. I guess they 're right. I 'm miffed most of the time , regardless of how I 'm doing. But , regardless of my fault , I 'll never take abuse from anybody - big or small , important or unimportant - if I think it 's undeserved. '' Star Athlete in School Roger Eugene Maris be bear in Hibbing , Minn. , on Sept. 10 , 1934 , but be still an infant when his family move to Fargo. N.D. The family name be Maras , but he change it legally in 1955 to Maris. He be an outstanding athlete at Shanley High School , a star in basketball and track and an all-state halfback in football. The school have no baseball team , but he play American Legion ball and become a star there , too. When he graduate from high school , the University of Oklahoma offer Maris a football scholarship , but a scout for the Cleveland Indians persuade him to try for a baseball career. He offer a $ 5,000 bonus and $ 10,000 more if Maris make the big league , and Maris signed. It do n't take him long to redeem the full bonus. He break into professional ball in 1954 in Keokuk , advance in 1955 to Reading , then in 1956 to Indianapolis in the American Association , one notch below the majors. One year later , in 1957 , he be play outfield for the Indians. Traded to the Yankees But on June 15 , 1958 , he be trade to the Kansas City Athletics with Dick Tomanek and Preston Ward for Vic Power and Woodie Held. And a year and a half later , on Dec. 11 , 1959 , with some recognition a a bloom power hitter , he be trade to New York with Joe DeMaestri and Kent Hadley for Don Larsen , Hank Bauer , Norm Siebern and Marv Throneberry. He be 25 year old and a Yankee. It do n't take Maris long to `` join the club. '' In his debut in 1960 , he hit a single , double and two home runs. He finish the season with 39 home run , and the Yankees win the American League pennant and begin a streak of five straight pennants. In 1961 , the season that make him both famous and controversial , he post these number : 161 game , 590 time at bat , 159 hit , 94 walk , 67 strikeout , 132 run score , 142 run bat in , a batting average of .269 -and 61 home runs. But , if 1961 be a difficult time for Maris , he soon find that 1962 be an ordeal. He be engulfed wherever he go , cheerleader ask if he could hit more than 61 home run , critic ask why not. He hit 33. Yankees ' Era Ends After 1964 , the Yankees stop win pennant after an extraordinary run of 14 in 16 years. Maris , meanwhile , endure several season of injury to his back , hand and leg , and say later that he be outrage by intimation that he have be exaggerate his ailments. On Dec. 8 , 1966 , he be trade to the St. Louis Cardinals , where he again distinguish himself a a professional with a strong right-handed throw arm from right field and a strong left-handed swing at the plate. He play in the World Series of 1967 and 1968 for the Cardinals , and then retire at the close of the 1968 season. His career line , with no asterisk , read : 12 year in the big league , 1,463 game , 5,101 time at bat , 1,325 hit , 275 home run , 826 run , 851 run bat in and an average of .260. In seven World Series , he hit six home runs. For many year , Maris live in Independence , Mo. , with his wife , the former Patricia Carvell , and their six children. After retire from baseball , he live in Gainesville , Fla. , where he own a beer distributorship. For a while , he shun old-timer ' game , because he resent the criticism and controversy from his play days. But he begin to appear at reunion later , and he remain close friend with Mantle , Whitey Ford , Yogi Berra , Tony Kubek and his other teammate from the time when the Yankees rule the day. Funeral service will be hold at noon Thursday at St. Mary 's Cathedral in Fargo , N.D .