March 31 , 1986 OBITUARY James Cagney Is Dead at 86 ; Master of Pugnacious Grace By PETER B. FLINT James Cagney , the cocky and pugnacious film star who set the standard for gangster role in `` The Public Enemy '' and win an Academy Award for his portrayal of George M. Cohan in `` Yankee Doodle Dandy , '' die yesterday at his Dutchess County farm in upstate New York. He be 86 year old. Mr. Cagney have be hospitalize earlier this month at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan. But his wife of 64 year , know a Willie , take him back to the familiar surroundings of his home just over a week ago. Mr. Cagney have an explosive energy and a two-fisted vitality that make him one of the great film personality of Hollywood 's golden age. An actor who could evoke pathos or humor , he invest score of role with a hungry intensity , punctuate by breathless slang , curl lip and spontaneous humor. A former vaudevillian and , in his youth , a formidable street fighter , the 5-foot-8 1/2-inch , chunky , red-haired actor intuitively choreograph his motion with a body language that project the image of an eager , bouncy terrier. His walk be jaunty and his manner defiant. But along with his belligerence he display a comic zest in inventive , sometimes outrageous actions. He could play a hoofer as adeptly a a gangster , and whether brutish or impish , he mold a character that personify an urban Irish-American of irrepressible spirit. Mr. Cagney 's streetwise mannerism be a favored subject for caricature by stand-up comedians. But the actor 's self-image be essentially that of a song-and-dance man. He become the screen 's top mobster in 1931 in `` The Public Enemy , '' which include a bench-mark scene. Angered by his girlfriend 's yearning for respectability , he suddenly squash half a grapefruit into Mae Clarke 's incredulous face. Audiences be at first stun , then intrigue by his brash performance , and he win instant stardom. He follow `` The Public Enemy '' with a popular series of gangster movie intersperse with musical and , in 62 film over three decade , he go on to prove his versatility in a wide range of role , later mostly within the law and include many military men , all play with conviction. Some of the movie be inferior , but he be consistently praise by reviewer , who often describe a movie a `` all '' or `` essentially '' Cagney. His favorite role be in `` Yankee Doodle Dandy '' ( 1942 ) , a patriotic wartime tribute to George M. Cohan , the showman , actor and songwriter. The performance win Mr. Cagney an Academy Award. Four year earlier , the New York Film Critics Circle vote him best actor for his portrayal of an eventually repentant killer in `` Angels With Dirty Faces. '' Reviewing `` Yankee Doodle Dandy , '' Bosley Crowther of The New York Times write : `` Mr. Cagney excel , both in characterization and jubilant song and dance '' with a `` buoyant '' performance `` that glow with energy. '' Will Rogers remark of Mr. Cagney , `` Every time I see him work , it look to me like a bunch of firecracker go off all at once. '' The actor 's `` irresistible charm '' be cite by the author Kenneth Tynan , who write in 1952 that `` Cagney , even with a submachine gun hot in hand and corps pile at his ankle , can still persuade many people that it be not his fault. '' Lauding the `` idiosyncratic verve that mark almost any Cagney film , '' Vincent Canby of The New York Times write in 1973 that Mr. Cagney be `` one of the most intelligent and graceful actor ever to be disguise a a Hollywood star. '' President Reagan pay tribute to Mr. Cagney yesterday , say : `` Nancy and I have lose a dear friend of many year today and America have lose one of her fine artists. '' Exhibitors vote the actor one of the top 10 box-office money maker in the late 1930 's and early 40's. After a series of dispute with Warner Brothers in which he charge he be overwork and underpaid , he become the studio 's highest-paid star in 1938 , earn $ 234,000. The next year he be list a one of the 10 biggest-salaried Americans , with , the Treasury Department say , an income of $ 368,333. Cagney the screen hoodlum contrast sharply with Cagney the man. Offscreen , he be amiable , self-effacing and reflective , a confirm family man who enjoy a close circle of friend and avoid the Hollywood party and nightclub circuit. He do not smoke and rarely drank liquor. He be much admire by colleague , from director to stagehands. In 1974 , he become the first actor to receive the Life Achievement Award of the American Film Institute for major contribution to film and for timeless artistry. Among his other honor be a citation for career achievement award by the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington in 1980 and the Medal of Freedom , the Government 's high civilian award , in 1984. Looked With Disdain On Method Acting The actor be self-taught and a keen observer who vary his role with mannerism and eccentricity of men he have known. He do all his own , sometimes brutal , fight scene , learn judo and occasionally used Yiddish humor he have learn in his youth. He be not impress by adulation , believing , `` One should n't aspire to stardom -one should aspire to do the job well. '' He dismiss Method act with disdain. `` You do n't psych yourself up for these thing , you do them , '' he said. `` I 'm act for the audience , not for myself , and I do it as directly a I can. '' He make these observation in his 1976 autobiography , `` Cagney by Cagney. '' He say he write it because of error in unauthorized biographies. His early characterization include a dynamic vaudeville director speed his cast from theater to theater and singing and tap-dancing with Ruby Keeler a Shanghai Lil in `` Footlight Parade '' ( 1933 ) , the comic Bottom in Shakespeare 's `` Midsummer Night 's Dream '' ( 1935 ) , a wharf-rat turn gang leader in `` Frisco Kid '' ( 1935 ) , a scenarist in a Hollywood spoof , `` Boy Meets Girl '' ( 1938 ) , a blinded boxer in `` City for Conquest '' ( 1940 ) and a naive dentist in `` The Strawberry Blonde '' ( 1941 ) . Other role include a newsman turn counterspy in `` Blood on the Sun '' ( 1945 ) , a master espionage agent in `` 13 Rue Madeleine '' ( 1947 ) , a barroom philosopher in William Saroyan 's `` Time of Your Life '' ( 1948 ) , a psychopathic murderer with a mother fixation in `` White Heat '' ( 1949 ) and a political demagogue in `` A Lion Is in the Streets '' ( 1953 ) . He also play the hoodlum husband of the singer Ruth Etting , play by Doris Day , in `` Love Me or Leave Me '' ( 1955 ) ; a quirky Navy captain in `` Mister Roberts '' ( 1955 ) ; Lon Chaney , the long-suffering silent-film star , in `` Man of a Thousand Faces '' ( 1957 ) ; an Irish rebel obsess with violence in `` Shake Hands With the Devil '' ( 1959 ) and the celebrated Adm. William F. Halsey in `` The Gallant Hours '' ( 1960 ) . In 1961 , Mr. Cagney star in Billy Wilder 's `` One , Two , Three , '' a razor-sharp satire of East-West relations. Then , though at the top of his talent , he announce his retirement from the screen. The actor be bear and raise in Manhattan , but he be smite with country live while on a childhood visit to the then pastoral Flatbush section of Brooklyn. Accordingly , he retire with his wife to their farm near Millbrook in Dutchess County , New York , and raise Morgan horses. In 1936 he have also buy a farm in Martha 's Vineyard , Mass. , where the Cagneys spend a much time a possible between films. For two decade , the actor receive many offer to return to the movie , include many from major director , but he steadfastly refuse them. However , in 1981 Mr. Cagney end his retirement. He have be increasingly trouble by several ailment , and his doctor advise him to be more active. Out of Retirement In Forman 's 'Ragtime' The director Milos Forman persuade him to play a cameo role in the movie `` Ragtime , '' base on the best-selling novel by E. L. Doctorow. The actor play a combative turn-of-the-century New York City police chief , prompt Vincent Canby of The Times to write that the Cagney `` manner and the humor be undiminished. '' The actor , the critic say , `` do a lot with very little. '' In his early 80 's Mr. Cagney suffer from diabetes and the effect of several stroke , and he mostly use a wheelchair. Nonetheless , he make his first made-for-television movie in 1984 , play the protagonist , a crotchety but generous former boxing champion , in `` Terrible Joe Moran. '' Despite the actor 's infirmity , John J. O'Connor of The Times report that `` the old Cagney magic come through. '' James Francis Cagney Jr. be bear July 17 , 1899 , on Manhattan 's Lower East Side and grow up there and in the Yorkville section. His father be of Irish descent , a bartender and , briefly , a saloon owner who die in a flu epidemic in 1918. His mother , the former Carolyn Nelson , who be of Norwegian stock , be the mainstay of the family of five children. Yorkville be then a street-brawling neighborhood , and Jimmy become a champion battler. As a catcher for a Yorkville amateur baseball team , he play a game in 1919 at Sing Sing prison , where five former schoolmate be serve terms. Eight year later , one be execute in the electric chair. The Cagneys be poor , and from the age of 14 Jimmy work simultaneously a an office boy for The New York Sun , stack book at a library and do odd job at the Lenox Hill Settlement House. On Sundays , he sell ticket for the Hudson River Day Line. After graduation from Stuyvesant High School , he enlist in the Student Army Training Corps at Columbia University. But , with money need at home , he drop out , work a a waiter and wrap package at Wanamaker 's Department Store. Needing more money , he drift into vaudeville a a dancer at 19. He have to fake it at first , study professional , steal their step and modify them to mold his own style. Unexpectedly , the street tough 's first role be a `` chorus girl '' in a female-impersonation act. In 1920 Mr. Cagney start in the chorus of a Broadway musical , `` Pitter Patter , '' and graduate to specialty dancer. A co-player be Frances Willard ( Willie ) Vernon , whom he marry in 1922. Two decade later they adopt two child , James Jr. , who die in 1984 , and Cathleen. The actor tour in vaudeville with his wife and occasionally perform in short-lived Broadway shows. Through the 1920 's , often out of work and money , he attend every cast call he could , occasionally be dismiss , he recall , `` because I have exaggerate my abilities. '' But in 1930 he play a cowardly killer in a melodrama , `` Penny Arcade , '' with Joan Blondell gamely offer comedy relief a his girlfriend. Warner Brothers take the two to Hollywood to film the play a `` Sinners ' Holiday. '' They both win contract and co-starred together in half a dozen movie over the next several years. 'Direct Gutter Quality ' In Gangster Role After play support role in three movie , Mr. Cagney get the second lead in `` The Public Enemy. '' However the keen-eyed director , William Wellman , insist that the actor switch role with the scheduled lead , Edward Woods , because Mr. Cagney could project what Mr. Wellman term the `` direct gutter quality '' of the tougher of the two street chum who turn to crime. The picture be a commercial blockbuster that open an era of realistic gangster movies. Many of the actor 's other early movie for Warner be make cheaply and quickly , within a few week , with the crew sometimes work 18 hour a day , 7 day a week. `` Talent be not nurture , it be consume , '' Mr. Cagney observed. `` We do our job. If anyone be practice art , I never saw it. '' Many of his director , he write , be `` pedestrian workman , mechanic , '' some of whom `` could n't direct you to a cheap delicatessen. '' But the young performer , lead by Mr. Cagney , vary the formula script with clever improvisation and make the lean melodrama effective and entertaining. The actor 's affectionate jab on actress ' chin be gesture his father have used. In `` The St. Louis Kid , '' weary of punching , he slam antagonist with his forehead. In `` Angels With Dirty Faces '' he imitate a hoodlum neighbor in Yorkville , hitch up his trouser , twist his neck , snap his finger and bring his hand together in a soft smack. The Cagney clan be tightly knit. The actor 's brother William be his business manager. They produce some Cagney film independently , and their sister Jeanne , who die in 1984 , act in several Cagney movies. Politically , the actor be a longtime New Deal Democrat who , in late year , become a conservative because of what he perceive a a moral confusion threaten Americans ' values. In 1940 he be accuse of Communist sympathy by a Los Angeles politician before the House Committee on Un-American Activities. He appear before the committee , which exonerate him. The issue arise from contribution he have make and his fund-raising activity for many cause , include provide food for strike California farm worker and an ambulance for the Loyalist side in the Spanish Civil War. The actor do not generally speak out on public issue , except one , ecology. In 1958 he make radio appeal for preserve the nation 's resources. `` Outside of my family , '' he say , `` the prime concern of my life have be nature and it order , and how we have be savagely alter that order. '' In World War II , Mr. Cagney be chairman of the actor ' group of the National Victory Committee , appear in many benefit to sell War Bonds and in long tour to entertain the Armed Forces in this country and overseas. At the time , he be also president of the Screen Actors Guild. In retirement , Mr. Cagney read widely , write verse , paint , play classical guitar , satisfy his longtime zest for sail and farm and limber up by dance a chorus or two to ragtime music. `` Absorption in thing other than self , '' he observe , `` be the secret of a happy life. '' Plans for funeral service be not immediately announce .