March 7 , 1986 OBITUARY Georgia O ' Keeffe Dead at 98 ; Shaper of Modern Art in U.S. By EDITH EVANS ASBURY Georgia O'Keeffe , the undisputed doyenne of American painting and a leader , with her husband , Alfred Stieglitz , of a crucial phase in the development and dissemination of American modernism , die yesterday at St. Vincent Hospital in Santa Fe , N.M. She be 98 year old , and have live in Santa Fe since 1984 , when she move from her longtime home and studio in Abiquiu , N.M. As an artist , a a reclusive but overwhelming personality and a a woman in what be for a long time a man 's world , Georgia O'Keeffe be a key figure in the American 20th century. As much a anyone since Mary Cassatt , she raise the awareness of the American public to the fact that a woman could be the equal of any man in her chosen field. As an interpreter and manipulator of natural form , a a strong and individual colorist and a the lyric poet of her beloved New Mexico landscape , she leave her mark on the history of American art and make it possible for other woman to explore a new gamut of symbolic and ambiguous imagery. Miss O'Keeffe be strong-willed , hard-working and whimsical. She would wrap herself in a blanket and wait , shiver , in the cold dark for a sunrise to paint ; would climb a ladder to see the star from a roof , and hop around in her stocking on an enormous canvas to add final touch before all the paint dried. Miss O'Keeffe burst upon the art world in 1916 , under auspex most likely to attract attention at the time : in a one-woman show of her painting at the famous `` 291 '' gallery of Alfred Stieglitz , the world-renowned pioneer in photography and sponsor of newly emerge modern art. From then on , Miss O'Keeffe be in the spotlight , shift from one audacious way of present a subject to another , and usually succeed with each new experiment. Her color dazzle , her erotic implication provoke and stimulate , her subject astonish and amused. She paint the skull of a horse with a bright pink Mexican artificial flower stick in the eye socket. She paint other animal skull , horn , pelvis and leg bone that gleam white against brilliant sky , span valley and touch mountain top , all with serene disdain for conventional notion of perspective. She also paint New York skyscraper , Canadian barn and cross and oversized flower and rocks. The artist paint a she please , and sell virtually as often a she like , for very good prices. She join the elite , avant-garde , inner circle of modern American artist around Stieglitz , whom she marry in 1924. Stieglitz take more than 500 photograph of her. `` He photograph me until I be crazy , '' Miss O'Keeffe say in late years. Others have call the picture Stieglitz take of her the great love poem in the history of photography. Her beauty age well to another kind - weather-beaten , leathery skin wrinkle over high cheekbone and around a firm mouth that speak fearlessly and tolerate no bores. And long after Stieglitz have die , in 1946 , after Miss O'Keeffe forsake New York for the mountain and desert of New Mexico , she be discover all over again and proclaim a pioneering artist of great individuality , power and historic significance. Miss O'Keeffe have never stop painting , never stop win critical acclaim , never stop be write about a an interesting `` character. '' But her painting be so diverse , so uniquely her own and so unrelated to trend or school that they have not attract much close attention from New York critics. Retrospective at Age 83 Then , in 1970 , when she be 83 year old , a retrospective exhibition of her work be hold at the Whitney Museum of American Art. The New York critic and collector and a new generation of student , artist and aficionado make an astonishing discovery. The artist who have be joyously paint a she please have be a step ahead of everyone , all the time. Strolling through the Whitney show , one could think Miss O'Keeffe have make some `` very neat adaptation of various successful style of the 1950 's and 1960 's in her own highly refine and slightly remove manner , '' write John Canaday , art critic of The New York Times. He describe apparent similarity to Clyfford Still , Helen Frankenthaler , Barnett Newman , Ad Reinhardt and Andrew Wyeth. But the painting that seem to reflect those style be do by Miss O'Keeffe in 1920 or earlier , Mr. Canaday point out , `` when her seeming model be either not yet bear or be delight their mother with their first childish scrawls. '' With no thought of rest on her laurel , the indomitable octogenarian go right on working. She paint new picture , write an autobiography illustrate with her painting that sell out immediately at $ 75 a copy and cooperate in the production of a film about herself and her work that win an award from the Directors Guild of America for Perry Miller Adato , who produce it for WNET-TV in 1977. Little European Influence Despite the affinity of Miss O'Keeffe 's work to painting of other modern American artist , her painting show surprisingly little evidence of the European influence see in other American art. `` She escape the fate of remain thrall to a European model by take possession of her American experience and making that the core of her artistic vision , '' Hilton Kramer write in The Times in 1976 in his review of her book. Nevertheless , he declare , `` her painting , though fill with vivid image of the place where she have live , be anything but a product of the provinces. '' Miss O'Keeffe 's career , Mr. Kramer write , `` be unlike almost any other in the history of modern art in America. '' It embrace virtually the whole history of modern art , from the early year of the century when Stieglitz exhibit the new art to a shocked New York , to it eventual acceptance a a part of our culture , accord to Mr. Kramer. At the age of 89 , when her book be publish , Miss O'Keeffe remain `` a vital figure first of all a a painter of remarkable originality and power but also a a precious link with the first generation of American modernist , '' he wrote. Born on Wisconsin Farm Georgia O'Keeffe be bear on a wheat farm near Sun Prairie , Wis. , on Nov. 15 , 1887. Her father , Francis Calixtus O'Keeffe , be Irish ; her mother be the former Ida Totto. Georgia be name for her maternal grandfather , Giorgio Totto , who come to the United States from Hungary , where he have go from Italy. When Miss O'Keeffe be 14 year old , the family move to Williamsburg , Va. Three year later she graduate from Chatham Protestant Episcopal Institute in Virginia. She go immediately to Chicago , where she study for a year at the Art Institute with John Vanderpoel. Both of her grandmother have dabble at painting , two of her four sister paint and one taught art. The elder of her two brother be an architect. Miss O'Keeffe have decide in Sun Prairie that she be go to be an artist when she grow up although , she write in her book , `` I have n't a desire to make anything like the picture I have see '' and she do not have a very clear idea of what an artist would be. For 10 discourage year , she study and paint , support herself by do commercial art for advertising agency and by teaching. She attend art class at the Art Students League in New York in 1907-08 , the University of Virginia Summer School in 1912 and Teachers College of Columbia University in 1916. She be supervisor of art in the public school of Amarillo , Tex. , from 1912 to 1916 , and teach summer class at Columbia College in South Carolina and the University of Virginia. In 1916 she become head of the art department of West Texas Normal College. Miss O'Keeffe 's early picture be imitative , but a she develop her technique , a ruggedly individual style begin to assert itself. The result be out of step with the popular taste and accept style of the early 1900 's , but they encourage her to concentrate boldly on express her own ideas. `` One day , '' Miss O'Keeffe recall in late year , `` I find myself say to myself , 'I ca n't live where I want to. I ca n't even say what I want to. ' I decide I be a very stupid fool not to at least paint a I want to. '' 'At Last , a Woman on Paper' A friend , Anita Pollitzer , show a group of Miss O'Keeffe 's drawing and watercolor to Stieglitz in 1916. Miss Pollitzer , later to become a champion of equal right for woman and chairman of the National Woman 's Party , have be a classmate of Miss O'Keeffe 's at Columbia. `` At last , a woman on paper ! '' Stieglitz exclaim when he saw the pictures. He hang them in his gallery , and the unknown Miss O'Keeffe create an immediate stir in the art world. `` Mabel Dodge Luhan bring string of psychiatrist to look at them , '' Stieglitz recall later. `` The critic came. There be talk , talk , talk. '' Some of the talk hint at erotic symbolism. Miss O'Keeffe storm up from Texas and upbraid Stieglitz for show her work without her permission. His answer be to persuade her to move to New York , abandon her teaching and devote herself to painting. He present one-woman show of her work almost annually thereafter until 1946 , the year of his death. He and Miss O'Keeffe have be marry 21 years. After move to New York , Miss O'Keeffe divide her time between New York City and Lake George , N.Y. After 1929 , she also spend a great deal of time in New Mexico. She make her permanent residence at Abiquiu after the death of her husband. Stieglitz 's vigilant and canny management be a major factor in her rise to fame and fortune. Miss O'Keeffe continue to wear the clothes she please and to paint a she pleased. Spare and dark-skinned , she have dark hair drawn severely back and knot into a bun in those years. No makeup soften the angularity of her face with it high cheekbone , but her large , luminous eye betray inner fires. Her clothes be usually black , loose-fitting and shapeless , functional rather than fashionable. Miss O'Keeffe 's painting hang in museum all over the United States -including , in New York , the Metropolitan , the Whitney and the Museum of Modern Art - and in most major private collections. But she retain a great deal of her prolific production. Received Many Honors Miss O'Keeffe be elect to membership in the National Institute of Arts and Letters , the American Academy of Arts and Letters and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. She be award honorary degree by several college and university , include Mount Holyoke and Columbia in 1971 and Harvard in 1973. Miss O'Keeffe interrupt the cherished tranquility of her life in Abiquiu to come East to receive the honor from Mount Holyoke , Columbia and Harvard. She don the required cap and gown , march with the faculty member and sat with them on the platform hear herself extol a a kind of artistic monument. Back in Abiquiu , the `` monument '' resume a daily routine of work , now with the help of a young protege , Juan Hamilton , a potter. He have knock at her kitchen door ask for work and make his way up from man Friday to secretary. He supervised production of her book , and assist with and appear in the television film about her in 1977. He travel with her to New York and California and manage her business affairs. Their companionship be so close there be rumor of marriage. In 1978 Mr. Hamilton , then 33 year old , come to New York alone on two missions. One be to put the finishing touch on the Metropolitan 's exhibition of Stieglitz photograph of Miss O'Keeffe. Mr. Hamilton have help her select the picture and have assist in the preparation of the book contain reproduction publish by the museum in conjunction with Viking Press. Interrupted by Process Server Mr. Hamilton 's other mission be to mount his own exhibition of the sensuously sculptured pot , evocative of the desert , that Miss O'Keeffe have prod him into producing. A gala party celebrate the opening of the show , at the Fifth Avenue Gallery of Robert Miller , be interrupt by a process server with notice that Mr. Hamilton be go to be sue for `` malicious interference '' with the business relationship of Doris Bry. Miss Bry , the longtime New York representative of Miss O'Keeffe , have be dismiss about the time Mr. Hamilton have come on the scene , and Miss Bry try to fight that dismissal with a Federal Court suit for $ 13.25 million against Mr. Hamilton charge that he induce Miss O'Keeffe to oust her. `` I do n't know why she be sue him , '' Miss O'Keeffe snap when she learn of it. `` I do n't know of anything wrong he have do ! '' The suit be later settle out of court. She travel to New York to visit friend and see art exhibition until recent year , when poor eyesight and fail health keep her at home. Miss O'Keeffe win numerous award , include the Medal of Freedom , the nation 's high civilian award , in 1977 ; an award from Radcliffe College for lifetime achievement by woman , in 1983 , and the National Medal of Arts in 1985. She be survive by a sister , Catherine Klenert .