June 14 , 1986 OBITUARY BENNY GOODMAN , KING OF SWING , IS DEAD By JOHN S. WILSON Benny Goodman , the King of Swing whose clarinet lead a generation of music fan into the Big Band era in the 1930 's , die yesterday afternoon at his Manhattan apartment , apparently of a heart attack. He be 77 year old. The death of the man who bring jazz to Carnegie Hall and enthral million with rendition of `` Sweet Georgia Brown '' and `` Stompin ' at the Savoy '' bring expression of grief and loss from his colleagues. Lionel Hampton , the vibraphonist , recall that Mr. Goodman be the first major music figure to put black and white musician together on stage in the 1930's. `` The most important thing that Benny Goodman do , '' he say , `` be to put Teddy Wilson and me in the quartet. It be instant integration. Black people do n't mix with white then. Benny introduce u a Mr. Lionel Hampton and Mr. Teddy Wilson. He open the door for Jackie Robinson. He give music character and style. '' Apple Cheeks and Horn-Rims The tall , apple-cheeked bandleader with the horn-rimmed glass have have a pacemaker implant in 1984 , but he have be active and about town in recent month , and have appear to be in good health yesterday morning , accord to Lloyd Rauch , his personal assistant. Mr. Goodman apparently die while take a nap on a guest-room couch in his apartment at 200 East 66th Street. The body be find by a housekeeper , Anna Lekander , Mr. Rauch said. Mr. Goodman become the King of Swing the night of Aug. 21 , 1935 , at the Palomar Ballroom in Hollywood. In the following year , he draw throng to nightclub and theater and introduced jazz to Carnegie Hall , tour the world a a representative of a distinctive American culture , be instrumental in break the barrier that have keep white and black musical group separate and develop a band that be a training ground for many other band leader , include Harry James , Gene Krupa , Lionel Hampton and Teddy Wilson. Last month , Mr. Goodman be award an honorary Doctor of Music degree at Columbia University 's commencement ceremony , the late in a long list of honor that include lifetime achievement award at the Grammy show in February and from the Kennedy Center in Washington in 1982. But when he arrive at the Palomar in the summer of 1935 with a 14-piece band that he have form a year before , there be no aura of success around Mr. Goodman. He be , in fact , so discourage that he be prepare to give up his band and return to freelancing. His career a a band leader have be discouraging. His orchestra have be dismiss from the only two engagement it have have in New York and , after complete a 26-week contract on a network radio program , it have set out on a cross-country trek from New York to California. The reaction to Mr. Goodman 's repertory of jazz-based arrangement range from bewilderment to antipathy. `` I think we 'd finish the engagement in California and take the train back to New York and that would be it , '' he recall many year later. `` I 'd just be a clarinetist again. '' He Might Fail , But on His Own Terms He have try to adapt to what he have be tell the audience want - pop tune and waltzes. But on this night at the Palomar , start what he think would be the band 's last engagement , Mr. Goodman decide that if he be go to fail , he would fail on his own terms. He bring out some of his favorite arrangement - by Fletcher Henderson of `` Sugar Foot Stomp , '' `` Blue Skies , '' `` Sometimes I 'm Happy '' and `` King Porter Stomp '' - which have be his reason for recruit a band that include such jazz specialist a the trumpeter Bunny Berrigan , the pianist Jess Stacy and the drummer Gene Krupa. As he beat out the tempo for `` Sugar Foot Stomp , '' the band dug into the Henderson arrangement. Then Mr. Berrigan rise up in the trumpet section , play a crackle solo. As the sound of his horn explode across the ballroom , a responsive roar go up from the listener and they surge around the bandstand , cheering. Mr. Goodman look around in amazement. He be stun by the sudden change but , he say later , that roar `` be one of the sweet sound I ever heard in my life. '' This stunning reversal in audience acceptance in Hollywood have be attribute to two factors. Although the `` Let 's Dance '' program be on the air for only three hour , the band actually play for five hour because , in those pretape day , the program have to be play a second time for the West Coast. By the time young listener in California hear the Goodman band , it be warm up and bring out it best arrangements. Calfiornia be also develop a new type of radio entertainer , the disk jockey. The first celebrity disk jockey be Al Jarvis in Los Angeles , who have a program of recording call `` The Make Believe Ballroom '' ( a title later use in New York by Martin Block ) . Mr. Jarvis have be plug the Goodman band 's record and , when the band reach the Palomar , the audience , thanks to Mr. Jarvis , know and be anxious to hear his choice Henderson arrangements. The crowd 's roar would follow him for year at precedent-setting event not only during the swing era , which last into the mid-1940 's , but also decade later when , in the 60 's , he tour the Soviet Union with his band. He hear that same sound at the `` Paramount riot , '' in March 1937 , when he play at the Paramount Theater in New York for the first time. Teenagers , who have follow the band on radio and have buy it record but could not afford the price of such place a the Manhattan Room of the Hotel Pennsylvania , where the band usually play , be line up around the theater at 6 A.M. to get into the morning show for 35 cents. During that day , more than 21,000 people jam into the theater to bounce deliriously in the seat or shag in the aisle and battle usher a they make desperate lunge toward the stage. First Jazz Concert At Carnegie Hall Mr. Goodman hear it again in January 1938 , when , look stiff and uncomfortable in white tie and tail , he lead his orchestra in the first jazz concert ever give in Carnegie Hall to an audience that show it enthusiasm by beat out the band 's rhythm with pound foot that rock the old hall 's balconies. There have be big band that play swing dance music before Mr. Goodman organize his orchestra. Fletcher Henderson lead a groundbreaking black jazz band in the mid-20 's , and in his wake come Duke Ellington , Earl Hines and Jimmie Lunceford , all black. There have also be big , jazz-oriented white band - Jean Goldkette 's Orchestra , the Casa Loma Orchestra and the band in which Mr. Goodman begin play when he be 16 year old , Ben Pollack 's Orchestra. But Mr. Goodman 's band arrive at a moment when the public 's ear have be attune by these early bands. Mr. Goodman provide a blend of jazz and contemporary popular music that fill this demand so successfully that , for a brief period , jazz and popular music be one and the same. His band also represent a blend of the freedom of jazz improvisation and the discipline that Mr. Goodman demand from his musician and , even more , from himself. He practice his clarinet , his trumpeter Harry James once say , `` 15 time more than the whole band combined. '' `` All the time I be with Goodman , he be never satisfy , '' Jess Stacy , the pianist , once said. `` With him , perfection be just around the corner. I figure Benny will die in bed with that damn clarinet. '' In rehearsal or performance , Mr. Goodman 's musician dread `` the ray '' - a long , accusatory , poker-faced glare over the top of his glass at anyone who have commit a false musical move. `` If you 're interested in music , '' Mr. Goodman once say , `` you ca n't slop around. I expect thing and they have to be done. '' This discipline and his feeling for tempo produce performance that audiences that have not be expose to much jazz find more exciting than the looser , more deeply jazz-flavored playing of Mr. Henderson 's band , in which many of Mr. Goodman 's most popular arrangement originated. `` Benny be very conscious of tempo , '' Willard Alexander , a booking agent who be one of the band 's early supporter , once said. `` His music have a kind of lilt , a feel. I remember one time we drop into the Roosevelt Grill when Guy Lombardo be play there. Benny say to me , 'You know , this Lombardo 's get something. ' I think he be put me on. But he wasn't. 'You know his secret , ' Benny said. 'He never play a song in the wrong tempo. ' `` 'No Glamour , No Sex Appeal ' `` Benny be a phenomenon , '' Mr. Alexander go on. `` He be not really the big band of the swing era. Glenn Miller was. But Benny be the big new thing in this type of presentation. He be even different physically , contrary to what everybody expect in a band leader. No glamour. No sex appeal. But a well-grounded musician. Once he hit , in come the others in the same pattern. Tommy Dorsey , Glenn Miller. Like Goodman , they be not the typical Hollywood glamour boys. They wear glasses. They have musical experience. They be not young or green. And they have a lot of background. '' Mr. Goodman 's background go back to Chicago , where he be bear on May 30 , 1909 , the eighth of 12 child in the family of an immigrant tailor who rarely earn more than $ 20 a week. He be 10 when he get a clarinet on loan from a local synagogue that also provide music lessons. His brother , Harry , the big of the Goodman boy , be give a tuba. Freddy , the next large , receive a trumpet. In late year , Benny Goodman wonder what kind of career he might have have `` if I have be 20 pound heavier and two inch taller. '' When he be 12 , the youth win $ 5 at a Chicago theater do an imitation of Ted Lewis , and by the time he be 14 he be make $ 48 a week play four night in the neighborhood band. He also play in the band at Hull House , the celebrated Chicago settlement house , and study for two year with Franz Shoepp , a clarinetist in the Chicago Symphony , a strict disciplinarian who , Mr. Goodman say , `` do more for me musically than anyone I ever knew. '' Still wear short pant , he become part of a clique of teenage jazz musician that include the cornetist Jimmy McPartland , the saxophonist Bud Freedman and the drummer Dave Tough , who be fascinate by the jazz sound that flow through Chicago in the 20's. He absorb in his own play the beautiful tone and sparkle flow of Jimmie Noone , the clarinetist. 'Kid in Short Pants ' Is Summoned Leon Rappolo , clarinetist in the New Orleans Rhythm Kings , who lean so far back in his chair when he play that he seem to be lie down , influence both Mr. Goodman 's style and his posture. When Ben Pollack , the drummer in the Rhythm Kings , form a band in California , he send back to Chicago for `` the kid in the short pant , the kid who play lie down , like Rappolo. '' Mr. Goodman be 16 when he join the Pollack band in Venice , Calif. , in 1926. He remain in the band for four year , when Glenn Miller , Jack Teagarden , Bud Freeman , Jimmy McPartland and Mr. Goodman 's brother , Harry , be in the band. For the last two year , the Pollack band be base in New York , play at the Little Club and at the Park Central Hotel ( now the Omni-Park Hotel ) and double in the pit of a musical , `` Hello , Daddy. '' In the fall of 1929 , after some disagreement with Mr. Pollack , Mr. Goodman leave the band and begin to freelance on radio and record , make as much a $ 350 to $ 400 a week in the early day of the Depression. In 1933 , he meet a young jazz fan and jazz activist , John Hammond , whose enthusiasm , insight and energy be to have a profound effect on the career of Mr. Goodman , Billie Holiday , Count Basie and Charlie Christian , the short-lived , precedent-setting electric guitarist who play in Mr. Goodman 's band for two year before his death in 1941. Mr. Hammond , who have a commission to make some jazz record for release in England , ask Mr. Goodman to lead a band for this purpose. Mr. Goodman choose some of his freelance friend , a group that Mr. Hammond augment by borrow Gene Krupa and Jack Teagarden from Mal Hallett 's orchestra in Boston. These record , release a by `` Benny Goodman and His Orchestra , '' plant a seed that take root in 1934 , when , with his freelance income reduce to $ 40 a week , Mr. Goodman hear that Billy Rose be audition band for a new club call the Music Hall. With the help of Mr. Hammond , he start put a band together. `` There be practically no hot band use white musician at the time , '' Mr. Goodman later recall , `` and there be a lot of talent around town , both in job and lay off , that have n't get the breaks. '' A Tight Group , Every Man a Soloist His concept be a jazz band make up of young musician who read well and play in tune , a group with a tight , small-band quality in which every man could be a soloist. The band he and Mr. Hammond assemble include Claude Thornhill , the pianist , who soon return to studio work , and three musician who remain with Mr. Goodman through the band 's early day of glory - Red Ballard , trombonist : Arthur Rollini ( brother of Adrian ) , saxophonist , and Hymie Schertzer. Mr. Schertzer 's alto saxophone later give the Goodman saxophone section it sheen , but he be hire because Mr. Goodman have hear he would need a violin in his band to accompany the show at the Music Hall and Mr. Schertzer could play violin as well a saxophone. Ironically , Mr. Goodman 's band be not able to play the routine accompanying music for the Music Hall 's vaudeville act - tumbler , a fire eater , a dog act - to Billy Rose 's satisfaction. They be on the verge of be release when a compromise be reach - a second band would play for the show and Mr. Goodman 's band would play for dancing. Three month later , when the Music Hall 's management change , the band be let go. But before that happen , the band audition for a prospective three-hour weekly radio program to be divide between Latin music , `` sweet '' music and `` hot '' music. Xavier Cugat have already be sign a the Latin band. Murray Kellner ( a Kel Murray ) lead the `` sweet '' band. The sponsor , the National Biscuit Company , line up several `` hot '' band and have some of it employes vote on them. Benny Goodman win by one vote. During the 26 week that Mr. Goodman play on this `` Let 's Dance '' program , he have a budget with which to buy eight arrangement a week at $ 37.50 each. Edgar Sampson 's $ 37.50 arrangement of `` Stompin ' at the Savoy , '' play on the first `` Let 's Dance '' broadcast , become one of Mr. Goodman 's classics. Another arranger , Gordon Jenkins , write `` Goodbye , '' which become Mr. Goodman 's closing theme. He also get his opening signature , `` Let 's Dance , '' from the show - a `` hot '' arrangement of Carl Maria Von Weber 's `` Invitation to the Dance '' write by George Bassman , who also provide a Latin version for Mr. Cugat and a `` sweet '' version for Mr. Kellner. Paying $ 37.50 For 'Killer-Dillers' But the most important collection of arrangement that Mr. Goodman get for his $ 37.50 come from Fletcher Henderson who , in 1934 , have give up the big band he have lead for 11 years. Some of these arrangement have originally be play by the Henderson band. `` King Porter Stomp '' and `` Big John Special '' be the first two , provide Mr. Goodman with the basis for the library of what become know a `` killer-dillers. '' But , at Mr. Goodman 's urging , Mr. Henderson also write arrangement of popular song that establish the melodic and swing style of the Goodman band. `` Fletcher 's idea be far ahead of anybody else 's at the time , '' Mr. Goodman said. `` Without Fletcher , I probably would have have a pretty good band , but it would have be something quite different from what it eventually turn out to be. '' Mr. Henderson 's insistently swing score typify the Goodman band 's style. George Simon , in his book `` The Big Bands , '' describe them a `` simple , swing arrangement in which complete section play with the feeling of a single jazz soloist. '' `` In addition , '' Mr. Simon write , `` Henderson would set off one section against another , roll sax vs. crisp brass , an approach quite different from the less rhythmic , more lethargic-sounding ensemble of most dance bands. '' After the `` Let 's Dance '' program go off the air , Mr. Goodman 's band be , inexplicably , book into the Roosevelt Grill a a summer replacement for Guy Lombardo 's `` Sweetest Music This Side of Heaven. '' Mr. Goodman 's musician have scarcely let out their first `` hot '' blast on open night at the Roosevelt when they be give their two week ' notice. The trail of discouragement continue a the band head west toward California and the sudden turnaround at the Palomar Ballroom. First Billing As a 'Swing ' Band So , instead of take the train back to New York , Mr. Goodman stay at the Palomar for two months. Then the band go to Chicago , where , book into the Joseph Urban Room of the Congress Hotel , it stay for six months. In Chicago it be bill for the first time a a `` swing '' band , with the word in quote - `` a if , '' Mr. Goodman remark , `` it be something in a foreign language. '' The word have be use for year by musician - Duke Ellington write `` It Do n't Mean a Thing if It Ai n't Got That Swing '' in 1932. But the general public seize on `` swing '' a a trendy catchword. However , reference to Mr. Goodman a `` the King of Swing '' make him nervous. `` I do n't know how long it be go to last , '' he explain , `` and I do n't want to be tie down to something people might say be old-fashioned just because they tire of the name in a year or so. '' But swing fever be on the rise , and in December 1935 , some of Mr. Goodman 's fan organize what may have be the first jazz concert. It be advertise a a `` Tea Dance '' and it be hold in the Joseph Urban Room. But it be a sit-down-and-listen affair and a few people who instinctively try to dance be boo off the floor. The response be so enthusiastic that another concert be organize for Easter Sunday in 1936. This time Mr. Goodman fly Teddy Wilson , the pianist , out to Chicago from New York. Less than a year before , Mr. Goodman have jam with Mr. Wilson at the home of Mildred Bailey , the singer , accompany on drum by Miss Bailey 's cousin , Carl Bellinger. This lead to some recording by a trio make up of Mr. Goodman , Mr. Wilson and Gene Krupa , the Goodman band 's drummer , make just before Mr. Goodman 's fateful trip to the West Coast. This Chicago concert be the first time the trio perform in public. The performance be so successful that Mr. Goodman decide to keep Mr. Wilson and the trio a a regular part of his troupe. A Breakthrough In the Color Barrier This create a precedent , quickly copy by other swing band , of have a small group within the big band. And by make Mr. Wilson , a black , a part of his entourage , Mr. Goodman break through the color barrier that , until then , have keep white band white and black band black. A few month later , while the band be in Hollywood make it first movie , `` The Big Broadcast of 1937 , '' Mr. Goodman hear Lionel Hampton lead a band at the Paradise Cafe and , after enjoy an after-hours jam session with him , persuade Mr. Hampton to add his vibraphone to the trio , make it a quartet that be 50 percent black. For the next four year the Goodman band rode on the crest of the Swing Era popularity , despite a brief challenge from another clarinet-playing leader , Artie Shaw. The cheer and shout of approval be seemingly endless. In 1938 , when the band 's second film , `` Hollywood Hotel , '' open in New York , The New York Times film critic , Frank Nugent , report : `` You could n't hear anything but the audience except when the picture work it volume to a storm-warning level. It would have take more than that , though , to override their howling when Mr. Goodman 's clarinet come into camera range. '' Not long after appear in the film , Mr. Goodman perform with other jazz musician in the Broadway musical `` Swingin ' the Dream , '' which open in 1939. The eye of the Goodman whirwind be the Hotel Pennsylvania in New York , where the band spend several month each year. When Mr. Goodman 's mother come to hear his band for the first time , she look around in amazement. `` This be the way he make a living ? '' she asked. In the summer of 1940 , despite a steady load of engagement , Mr. Goodman break up his band to take three month off to undergo surgery for a painful case of sciatica. When he reorganize his band in October of that year , the bulk of the arranging be take over by Eddie Sauter , a trumpet player who have play and arrange for Red Norvo and who , in the 1950 's , would be co-leader of an adventurous band with Bill Finegan. Mr. Finegan be make his reputation a an arranger with Glenn Miller at the very time that Mr. Sauter begin arrange for the new Goodman band. The New Band Of the 1940's For this 1940 's band , Mr. Goodman lure away Duke Ellington 's trumpet star , Cootie Williams. He have a brilliant 18-year-old pianist , Mel Powell , and such veteran a Charlie Christian , Dave Tough , Billy Butterfield , Lou McGarity and Georgie Auld. In the opinion of many Goodman fancier , this band of the early 40 's , less publicize than his band of the 30 's but with Mr. Sauter 's provocative arrangement , be the fine of the Benny Goodman bands. It be during the 40 's also that Mr. Goodman appear in another Brodway musical , this time with a small group. The show be `` Seven Lively Arts , '' which open in December 1944. Mr. Goodman continue to lead a big band until 1950. After World War II , he try , briefly , to adapt to the new jazz style - be-bop - but soon give it up , to the relief of proponent of both be-bop and swing. Meanwhile , Mr. Goodman carry on a dalliance with classical music. In 1935 John Hammond , who , despite his devotion to jazz , express himself musically by play viola in classical string quartet , entice Mr. Goodman to join his quartet in play the Mozart Clarinet Quintet. It be an intoxicating whiff for the clarinetist. He subsequently play , and record , with the Budapest Quartet , with Joseph Szigeti and with symphony orchestras. He commission work by Bela Bartok , Aaron Copland and Paul Hindemith. During the 1940 's , he study with Reginald Kell , a renowned classical clarinetist , learn a new embouchure that require the use of a new set of facial muscle and a change in finger for which he have his finger callous surgically removed. Goodman Sidemen Played in Film In 1955 , `` The Benny Goodman Story , '' a biographical film , be make in which Steve Allen play Mr. Goodman , and the producer assemble a band stud with former Goodman sidemen to play the sound track. Through the 50 's , 60 's and 70 's , he form small group and big band sporadically for concert and tour , concentrate on the hit he have establish in the Swing Era. Mr. Goodman take his music around the world , play duet with the King of Thailand , a fellow clarinetist. At the 1958 World 's Fair in Brussels , his band be regard a one of the best American exhibits. He take a band to the Soviet Union in 1962 a part of a cultural exchange arrangement , produce a mixture of adulation and controversy , include an impromptu debate on jazz with Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev. In 1941 , Mr. Goodman marry Alice Duckworth , the sister of his friend John Hammond. She die in 1979. Mr. Goodman be survive by two daughter , Rachel Edelson and Benjie Lasseau ; four brother , Harry , Freddy , Irving and Gene ; two sister , Ethel Goodman and Ida Winsberg , and three stepdaughters. The police say Mr. Goodman 's body have be take to the Metropolitan Funeral Home in Manhattan and be to be transfer to the Bouton & Reynolds Funeral Home in Stamford , Conn. Funeral arrangement be incomplete last night. Some Rememberances `` Working with Benny Goodman be n't a job , it be an experience. Benny mean a whole lot to me , not only a a teacher but a a friend. I love the man. '' - Frank Sinatra. `` You think of clarinet and Benny Goodman simultaneously. He have an innate dignity about him , couple with his integrity in music. He be a step in the refinement of jazz. He uphold standard that be never less than the Carnegie Hall type of thing. He teach me the value of rehearse and discipline , and that 's a great value in any craft. '' - Peggy Lee. `` The world 's great artist on the classical clarinet , and his orchestra be one of the best of all time. '' - Steve Allen. `` He prove that good music could reach the general public. He be the most popular figure in the history of jazz to reach a non-jazz public. He be the Beatles of his day. And he do it with pure , uncompromising music. He never compromised. '' - George Wein .