June 15 , 1986 OBITUARY Jorge Luis Borges , A Master of Fantasy and Fable , be Dead By EDWARD A. GARGAN Jorge Luis Borges , the Argentine short-story writer , poet and essayist who be consider one of Latin America 's great writer , die yesterday in Geneva , where he have be live for three months. He be 86 year old. Mr. Borges die of liver cancer , the executor of his estate , Osvaldo Luis Vidaurre , say in Buenos Aires. While almost unknown outside Argentina before 1961 , his story , punctilious in their language and mysterious in their opaque parodoxes , later attain a modest following in the United States , a following that grow steadily to international proportions. His writing explore the cranny of the human psyche , the fantastic within the apparently mundane , imaginary bestiary and fable of obscure library and arcane scholarship. His prose provoke the literary imagination of general reader , scholar and critic , and many hail him a the most important Latin American writer of this century. Among his work of fiction that have appear in the United States be `` Ficciones , '' `` The Aleph and Other Stories '' and `` Labyrinths , '' all publish in 1962 , and `` A Universal History of Infamy , '' in 1971. Among his collection of essay available in English be `` The Book of Imaginary Beings '' ( 1969 ) and `` An Introduction to American Literature '' ( 1971 ) . `` Selected Poems , 1923-1967 '' be publish in 1972 and `` In Praise of Darkness , '' which consist of poetry and short piece , in 1974. In 1975 John Updike write that Mr. Borges 's `` dry paragraph be somehow compelling. '' `` His fable be write from a height of intelligence le rare in philosophy and physic than in fiction , '' he said. `` Furthermore , he be , at least for anyone whose taste run to puzzle or pure speculation , delightfully entertaining. '' Moreover , Mr. Updike insist , `` For all his modesty and reasonableness of tone , he propose some sort of essential revision in literature itself. '' It be , the historian and philosopher George Steiner write , perhaps something even more : `` Borges 's universalism be a deeply felt imaginative strategy , a maneuver to be in touch with the great wind that blow from the heart of things. 'Turning the Kaleidoscope ' `` When he cite fictitious title , imaginary cross-reference , folio and writer that have never exist , Borges be simply regroup counter of reality into the shape of possible other worlds. When he move , by wordplay and echo , from language to language , he be turn the kaleidoscope , throw the light on another patch of the wall. '' One of his early short story , `` Pierre Menard , Author of the Quixote , '' compress this embrace of language and illusion , foreshadow the tenor of his late work. In the story , write in 1938 , Mr. Borges propose , in short , an extreme examination of T. S. Eliot 's dictum that each new work of art alters the perception of previously exist work of art. For Mr. Borges , the short story - a literary form `` whose indispensable element be economy and a clearly state beginning , middle and end '' -was the most compelling form. Once he write : `` In the course of a lifetime devote chiefly to book , I have read but few novel and , in most case , only a sense of duty have enable me to find my way to their last page. I have always be a reader and rereader of short stories. '' 'Slow , Summer Twilight' Beginning in 1927 , when he have a series of operation on his eye , Mr. Borges be increasingly afflict by blindness , which run in his family. While he call it a `` slow , summer twilight , '' it do not impede his work. Jorge Luis Borges be bear in Buenos Aires , in the house of his maternal grandparent , on Aug. 24 , 1899. His father , of Italian , Jewish and English heritage , profess the law but , a Mr. Borges once write , `` be a philosophical anarchist - a disciple of Spencer -and also a teacher of psychology. '' His mother , of Argentine and Uruguayan stock , live far into her 90 's and translate William Saroyan , Nathaniel Hawthorne , Virginia Woolf and Herman Melville into Spanish. While he be very young , his parent move to the northern suburb of the capital , to Palermo , a place he later describe a a slum. But it be not , he write , a slum in the American sense. It be , rather , a district where `` shabby-genteel people as well a more undesirable sort '' lived. At the age of 6 or 7 , the young Borges begin to write. `` I be expect to be a writer , '' he recall much later in life. He confess that his first writing be model on classic Spanish writer , mostly Cervantes. The young man 's first effort , `` The Fatal Helmet , '' be avowedly romantic - `` nonsensical , '' he later call it - and very much a stylistic derivative of Cervantes. In 1914 the family move to Europe so that Jorge and his sister could attend school in Geneva. Jorge enrol at the College of Geneva. In school , the young man be immerse in Latin , and outside it he tackle German. He learn to love the language through Heine and find his way to Schopenhauer , who be to be his favorite. First Poem Published in Spain `` Were I to choose a single philosopher , I would choose him , '' Mr. Borges wrote. `` If the riddle of the universe can be state in word , I think these word would be in his writings. '' After Mr. Borges receive his degree in Geneva , his family move to Spain for a year , and it be there that his first poem be published. Called `` Hymn to the Sea , '' it be deliberately fashion in the style of Walt Whitman. In 1921 , he return with his family to Buenos Aires , where he continue to write , experiment with style of prose that be either artificially Latinate or sodden with Argentine colloquialisms. Of his early work , he be relentlessly scornful. The `` real beginning '' of his career come , Mr. Borges write , in the early 1930 's with a series of sketch call `` A Universal History of Infamy. '' In these , which `` be in the nature of hoax and pseudo-essays , '' Mr. Borges chronicle the life of Lazarus Morell , who at once free and imprisoned slave ; of Tom Castro , an implausible prodigal son ; of the widow Ching , a pirate who terrorize the sea of Asia ; of Monk Eastman , a New York gunman and `` purveyor of iniquity '' ; of Kotsuke no Suke , who refuse to commit hara-kiri , `` which a a nobleman be his duty. '' Stories ' Shape Established With his next story , `` The Approach to al-Mu'tasim , '' write in 1935 , the shape of many of his late story be established. The story be a fictive review of a book purportedly publish in Bombay. Mr. Borges invest the mythical volume with a genuine publisher and reviewer but , a he write later , `` the author and the book be entirely my own invention. '' In this early story , many of the basic literary element that come to characterize Mr. Borges 's style be apparent : a concern for history and identity ; the central role of an obscure scholarly work ; a maze of discourse laden with elaborate and Byzantine detail ; footnote ; meticulous reference to remote academic journal , and the presence of deliberately translucent paradox. Mr. Borges take his first full-time job in 1937 a the first assistant in the Miguel Cane branch of the Buenos Aires Municipal Library ; he be pay about $ 70 a month , and be to remain there for nine year , complete his work each day in an hour or so and devote the rest of his time to reading and writing. In this period , he write `` Pierre Menard , Author of the Quixote '' - a `` halfway house between the essay and true tale , '' he wrote. `` Pierre Menard '' lead to a story of a strange world that displace our planet - `` Tlon , Uqbar , Orbis Tertius '' - and then quickly to another and then the next , story concern with labyrinth and mirror and encyclopedia that come to form the foundation of Mr. Borges 's oeuvre. `` The Garden of Forking Paths , '' an anthology of short story , be publish in 1941 , and three year later `` Ficciones , '' perhaps his most celebrated collection of short story , go into print. Baffling Appointment by Peron In 1946 , Juan Domingo Peron - `` a President , '' Mr. Borges write , `` whose name I do not want to remember '' -came to power. Not long afterward , Mr. Borges be name inspector of poultry and rabbit in the public markets. He find his selection for this new position baffling , and he resigned. By then , his reputation a a writer be secure , and he be ask to lecture on English literature at the Free College of Higher Studies and the Argentine Association of English Culture. After the Peron Government be overthrow in September 1955 , Mr. Borges be appoint director of the National Library in Buenos Aires. The next year he become a professor of English and American literature at the University of Buenos Aires. With Adolfo Bioy-Casares , whom he meet in the 1940 's , he collaborate in write a collection of short story under the name H. Bustos Domecq. Mr. Borges once describe the `` Chronicles '' of Bustos in 1967 : `` These be article write on imaginary , extravagantly modern artist - architect , sculptor , painter , chef , poet , novelist , couturier - by a devotedly modern critic. But both the author and his subject be fool , and it be hard to tell who be take in whom. '' Blindness and Poetry By the late 1950 's , Mr. Borges be completely blind. `` One salient consequence of my blindness be my gradual abandonment of free verse in favor of classical metric , '' he write later. `` In fact , blindness make me take up the writing of poetry again. Since rough draft be deny me , I have to fall back on memory. It be obviously easy to remember verse than prose and to remember regular verse form rather than free ones. '' After he share the Formentor Prize with Samuel Beckett in 1961 , Mr. Borges 's book begin to sell increasingly well internationally , and he be invite abroad to lecture and to take up visit professorships. Over the following year he travel extensively in the United States and Europe , lecturing and receive bouquet of literary awards. And though he be perennially a candidate for the Nobel Prize in Literature , it be deny him. It be perhaps less a concern to him than to others. After win the prize in 1982 , the Colombian novelist Gabriel Garcia Marquez say of Mr. Borges , `` I hope he receive it , and I still do n't understand why they have n't give it to him. '' Some have insist that it be Mr. Borges 's aversion to politics , his unwillingness to criticize the repression of post-Peronist regime - `` I suppose they be a necessary evil , for the next 50 year , or so , '' he say - that keep him from become a Nobel laureate. He be , however , sympathetic to the plight of mother whose child be victim of death squad that be tacitly or actively support by Argentina 's military Government. `` I have my say about the disappeared , '' he tell an interviewer. `` But what can I do ? I 'm an old man. What can they do to me ? Torture me , eh ? '' An Unworldly Life Mr. Borges lead a hermetic , unworldly life. Seemingly fragile in his last year , a he lean on a vertebral wooden cane , he be gentlemanly in manner and locution. With blindness he rely increasingly on assistant to read to him and to write what he dictated. Always Mr. Borges write and read , and perhaps it be , in the end , the latter that be paramount. `` To me , read have be a way of living , '' he once said. `` I think the only possible fate for me be a literary life. I ca n't think of myself in a bookless world. I need books. They mean everything to me. '' During his lecture tour , he have a particular fondness for New Orleans. When he be not write in his hotel room there , he be listen to jazz , invariably distinguish in his suit and tie from other jazz club patrons. `` My father tell me a gentleman never go in public in his shirt sleeve , '' he say , `` but I think these people be right to dress comfortably when it be hot. '' At the age of 68 , Mr. Borges be marry for the first time , to a childhood sweetheart , Elsa Astete Millan , the widow of a friend. It prove to be an unhappy episode , and they divorce three year later. He marry Maria Kodama , his 41-year-old secretary and longtime travel companion , a few week ago. 'Dreary ' Buenos Aires In late life , Mr. Borges be not so happy a he have once be with Argentina and it capital. `` Buenos Aires be a dreary city now , '' he tell an interviewer during the war with Britain over the Falkland Islands in the spring of 1982 , a war he term `` atrocious. '' `` I do n't understand my own country. But the world be not mean to be understand by men. Every night , I dream. I have nightmare - of be lose , of be in an unknown city. I do n't remember the name of the hotel , or I ca n't find my way home in Buenos Aires. Maybe I feel very lost because the world be meaningless. '' Yet Mr. Borges find mean in his own work. At the end of his publish conversation with the literary scholar Richard Burgin , Mr. Borges write : `` Through the year , a man people a space with image of province , kingdom , mountain , bay , ship , island , fish , room , tool , star , horse , and people. Shortly before his death , he discover that the patient labyrinth of line trace the image of his own face . ''