June 18 , 1986 OBITUARY Kate Smith , All-American Singer , Dies At 79 By FRANK G. PRIAL Kate Smith , whose vibrant voice make `` God Bless America '' an unofficial national anthem and be one of the most popular singer of the century , die yesterday afternoon at Raleigh ( N.C. ) Community Hospital. She be 79 year old and live in Raleigh. President Reagan express sorrow over her death , say : `` Kate Smith be a patriot in every sense of the word. She thrill u all with her stir rendition of 'God Bless America ' and sang with a passion which leave few eye dry. '' Miss Smith have be in poor health since 1976 , when she suffer brain damage a a result of a diabetic coma. In January , her right leg be amputate because of circulatory problem associate with her diabetes , and on May 9 , she undergo a mastectomy. But it be the robust and joyful young singer who never take a formal music lesson whose voice become one of the most listened-to by a nation struggle through the Great Depression and World War , still hold fast to an optimism for the future. Everything about Kate Smith be outsized , include Miss Smith herself. She record almost 3,000 song -more than any other popular performer. She introduce more song than any other performer - over a thousand , of which 600 or so make the hit parade. She make more than 15,000 radio broadcast and , over the year , receive more than 25 million fan letters. At the height of her career , during World War II , she repeatedly be name one of the three or four most popular woman in America. No single show-business figure even approach her a a seller of War Bonds during World War II. In one 18-hour stint on the CBS radio network , Miss Smith sell $ 107 million worth of War Bonds , which be issue by the United States Government to finance the war effort. Her total for a series of marathon broadcast be over $ 600 million. President Roosevelt once introduce her to King George VI of England , say : `` This be Kate Smith. Miss Smith be America. '' Kate Smith have be a national singing star almost from the outset of her broadcast career in 1931. But her identification with patriotism and patriotic theme date from the night of Nov. 11 , 1938 , when , on her regular radio program , she introduce a new song write expressly for her by Irving Berlin - `` God Bless America. '' In a short time , the song supplant `` The Star-Spangled Banner '' a the nation 's most popular patriotic song. There be attempt - all unsuccessful - to adopt it formally a the national anthem. For a time , Kate Smith have exclusive right to perform `` God Bless America '' in public. She relinquish that right when it become apparent the song have achieve a significance beyond that of just another new pop tune. Mr. Berlin and Miss Smith waive all royalty from performance of `` God Bless America. '' The royalty continue to be turn over to the Boy and Girl Scouts of America. `` God Bless America '' become a standard in the repertory but both the song and Miss Smith experience a curious resurgence of popularity beginning in 1969 when the Philadelphia Flyers professional hockey team begin to substitute her recording of the song for `` The Star-Spangled Banner '' before games. The team begin to win on night the song be played. As the team improve , the record be reserve for crucial game and , at the end of the 1975-76 playing season the Flyers ' record be 41 win , 5 loss and 1 tie on night Kate Smith sing `` God Bless America , '' either on record or in person. The first three of the five or so times she appear in person , the Flyers ' opponent be scoreless. Sang for Troops During World War II Kathryn Elizabeth Smith be bear May 1 , 1909 , in Greenville , Va. , and grow up in Washington , D.C. Her father be a wholesale magazine distributor. As a baby , she fail to talk until she be 4 year old. But a year later she be sing in church social and by the time she be 8 she be sing for the troop at Army camp in the Washington area during World War I. Alarmed by his daughter 's evident penchant for the stage , William Smith make her take up nursing at George Washington University Hospital. She stick it out a few month , quit and get herself on the bill at Keith 's Theater a a singer. Heading the bill be the actor and producer Eddie Dowling who sign up the young singer for a revue he be preparing. It be call `` Honeymoon Lane , '' and it open in Atlantic City on Aug. 29 , 1926. A month later it move to Broadway. A review in The New York Times on Oct. 31 , 1926 , under the heading `` A Sophie Tucker Rival , '' say : `` A 19-year-old girl , weigh in the immediate neighborhood of 200 pound , be one of the discovery of the season for those whose interest run to syncopator and singer of what in the variety and nightclub be know a 'hot ' songs. Kate Smith be the newcomer 's not uncommon name. '' She be actually only 17 at the time. From `` Honeymoon Lane , '' Miss Smith go into the road company of Vincent Youmans 's `` Hit the Deck , '' where she win acclaim sing `` Hallelujah ! '' Back in New York she take the company lead in George White 's `` Flying High , '' which open at the Apollo Theater on March 3 , 1930 , and run for 122 performances. As Pansy Sparks , Miss Smith 's role be to be the butt of Bert Lahr 's often cruel jibe about her girth. She say later that she often weep with humiliation in her dressing room after the show. One evening , Ted Collins , a representative for Columbia Records , saw the show and heard Kate Smith sing for the first time. He send a note backstage and ask her to see him in his office. When she appear a few day later , it mark the beginning of a show-business association that last 34 year , end with Mr. Collins 's death in 1964. Made Radio Debut On 22d Birthday Mr. Collins advise the successful but unhappy girl to take advantage of her good voice and to forget about comedy. The first booking he get for her be the Palace , where she last 11 week , set a new record for a single performer. In 1931 , radio have overcome it early self-consciousness and be come into it own a an entertainment medium. Mr. Collins arrange for a 15-minute nightly show for his client and she make her radio debut on May 1 , her 22d birthday. The young singer , bill a Kate Smith and her Swanee Music , make her debut one week after another singer , the coloratura soprano Lily Pons , begin her radio career. For her first show , Miss Smith choose a her theme the song that be to become her trademark , `` When the Moon Comes Over the Mountain. '' She also use for the first time her opening , `` Hello , everybody ! '' and her closing , `` Thanks for listening. '' Within six month , the young star have a sponsor , La Palina cigar , a long-term contract and a four-figure salary. In 1938 , the year she introduce `` God Bless America , '' Miss Smith begin a daytime radio program of down-home philosophy , comment on current event and woman 's affairs. The show be an immediate success , but it do prompt some of the harsh criticism Miss Smith ever received. The barb come from The Daily Worker , the newspaper of the American Communist Party , in 1949. After note that most of the program be devote to inconsequential pap , The Daily Worker say Miss Smith and Mr. Collins devote a few minute to the problem of the Roman Catholic Church under a repressive Government in Czechoslovakia. The Worker go on to call Miss Smith `` Kate , the red-baiter , Kate the distorter of Communist policy , Kate the apologist for interventionists in Eastern Europe. '' The article conclude : `` This be the real Kate. '' The Worker 's criticism have no noticeable effect on her career , which branch into television the following year , 1950 , with `` The Kate Smith Variety Hour. '' The show last five years. When it be drop in May 1955 , the network receive 400,000 protest letters. Later that year , she return a a guest on the Ed Sullivan show. The public response lead to a contract for five more appearance , but Mr. Collins suffer a heart attack and Miss Smith cancel all her activity until he have recovered. In January , 1960 , she return with a new television variety show on CBS. It receive high critical acclaim but low rating and be drop after six months. Lived in New York And Virginia The death of her mother , Charlotte Yarnell Smith , in 1962 , follow by the death of Mr. Collins two year later , throw Miss Smith into a period of depression that end in July 1965 , when she announce she would return to television that fall. Over the next decade she perform regularly on variety show host by Ed Sullivan , Dean Martin , Andy Williams and others. During her long career , Miss Smith rent various apartment in New York , most recently a three-bedroom suite in the Sheraton Motor Inn at 42nd Street and the Hudson River. She once tell an interviewer that she have no interest in travel abroad but love to watch the ocean liner come in and out from the motel roof. For 40 year , she keep a summer home on a small island in Lake Placid , N.Y. She also have a home in Arlington , Va. She live modestly but be estimate at one time to have amass some $ 35 million during her work life. Two autobiographical book be publish under her name : `` Living in a Great Big Way '' in 1938 , and `` Upon My Lips a Song '' in 1960. She also write the `` Company's Coming Cookbook , '' in 1958. Miss Smith be , not surprisingly , a prodigious eater and a good cook. She give her weight variously a 215 , 225 or 235 pound , but usually with a wink or a booming laugh because it obviously be higher. Under Mr. Collins ' tutelage she have come to term with her figure. At one point in the 1960 's , she shed 90 pound over a four-year period , bleach her hair , and discard the dignified dark dress she have wear for years. But , she later declare , she be uncomfortable that way and go back happily to `` real chocolate fudge sundaes. '' Because of their long and close business relationship , Miss Smith and Mr. Collins be think to be married. They be not , and a form letter be send to anyone who inquired. It read : `` Miss Smith be not married. Mr. Collins be marry , have one daughter and two grandchildren. '' In 1965 , after attend Roman Catholic service for 25 year , Miss Smith be baptize into that religion at the local church in Lake Placid. She be baptize by the same priest who have administer the last rite to Mr. Collins .