January 29 , 1986 OBITUARY The Shuttle Explosion , The Seven Who Perished in The Explosion of The Challenger By THE NEW YORK TIMES Christa McAuliffe , a high-school social study teacher from New Hampshire , be the winner of a nationwide competition to be the first private citizen to fly aboard a space shuttle. She be 37 year old. Students always pack Mrs. McAuliffe 's class at Concord High School because of her enthusiasm and ability to make dry subject come alive. And so last July , when she be select a the primary candidate to be the first teacher in space , broadcast lesson to million of people across the country , her student break into applause. `` She 's perfect , '' say Ann Tousignant , 18 , one of her student last year. `` She bring lesson down to earth. '' Today Mrs. McAuliffe and six crewmates be aboard the space shuttle Challenger when it explode shortly after launch from the Kennedy Space Center here. 'Just Opening Up the Door' Mrs. McAuliffe have look forward to the mission with enthusiasm. `` I think just open up the door , have this ordinary person fly , say a lot for the future , '' she say at a recent news conference. `` You can always equate astronaut with explorer who be subsidized. Now you be get someone go just to observe. '' `` And then you 'll have the settler , '' she continued. `` The space station be not too far down the road. '' Although interested in the space program in her youth , Mrs. McAuliffe spoke of have no female role models. `` It fascinate me that rocket ship be go up and that something could escape gravity or get into orbit , '' she say recently. `` But it be never anything that I aspire to. When I be young , woman do not fly in space. '' Energetic and Goal-Oriented Sharon Christa Corrigan be bear in Boston on Sept. 2 , 1948 , to Grace G. and Edward C. Corrigan , and grow up in Framingham , Mass. , a suburb of Boston. According to her father , a retired accountant who work for General Telephone and Electronics , Christa be always energetic and goal-oriented. She attend Marion High School , a small Roman Catholic school in Framingham , and be an all-star softball player. She earn a bachelor 's degree in American history and secondary education from Framingham State College in 1970 , marry Steven James McAuliffe , whom she have meet in their sophomore year , and move to Maryland , where she teach high school English and American history. In 1978 , she receive a master 's degree in education from Bowie State College in Maryland and move with her husband to Concord , where he establish a law firm. At Concord High School , Mrs. McAuliffe teach law , economics , American history and a course she develop entitle `` The American Woman. '' In her history course she emphasize the impact of ordinary people on history , say they be as important to the historical record a king , politician or generals. 'A Pioneer Space Traveler' After President Reagan announce plan for a citizen-participant space program in August 1984 with a teacher a it first passenger , Mrs. McAuliffe be one of 11,000 applicants. `` Just a the pioneer traveler of the Conestoga wagon day keep personal journal , I , a a pioneer space traveler , would do the same , '' she write , describe her propose space project. `` My perception a a non-astronaut would help complete and humanize the technology of the space age , '' she added. `` Future historian would use my eyewitness account to help in their study of the impact of the space age on the general population. '' As do all astronaut , Mrs. McAuliffe study emergency procedure for deal with space accident and emergency landings. She also have to study a stack of training manual and learn the intricacy of life in orbit , and experience weightlessness in a space agency training jet. Through it all , she keep her sense of humor and enthusiasm. For good luck on the Challenger 's flight , she take with her a stuffed frog , `` Fleegle , '' that belong to her 9-year-old son Scott. Science Lessons on Television In the flight , Mrs. McAuliffe be to have teach science lesson on television over the Public Broadcasting Service to school child across the country. After the flight , she be to have stay with the space agency until September , speak to student and civic group around the country about her experiences. `` I feel a great responsibility and excitement this year that I 'm represent my profession , '' she said. `` I 'm hop that it 's go to elevate the teaching profession in the eye of the public and potential teacher out there. One of the secondary objective of all this be that student be go to be look at me and perhaps thinking of go into teach a a profession. '' Besides her husband , parent and son , she be survive by her daughter Caroline , 6 ; two sister , Betsy Corrigan of Venice , Calif. , and Lisa Bristol of Marlborough , Mass. , and two brother , Steven Corrigan of Salinas , Calif. , and Christopher Corrigan of Framingham .