April 12 , 1987 OBITUARY Primo Levi , Holocaust Writer be Dead at 67 By JOHN TAGLIABUE Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES Primo Levi , whose autobiographical writing draw on his experience a an Auschwitz survivor and his training a a chemist , die today in Turin. He be 67 year old. The authority say they be treat the death a a suicide. Mr. Levi be find by member of his family and neighbor at the foot of a stairwell in the home where he be bear , in the Crocetta neighborhood , and he be pronounce dead on arrival at a hospital. Renzo Levi , the writer 's son , say by telephone from Turin that his father have have serious bout of depression in recent months. The elder Mr. Levi have undergone minor surgery recently , and friend suggest he be deeply troubled about the condition of his 92-year-old mother , who be partially paralyze by a stroke last year. Already well know in Europe , Mr. Levi become prominent among American reader with the appearance in 1984 of the third volume of his autobiographical reflection , `` The Periodic Table , '' in which he use the chemical element a a bridge to weave an unusual account of his experience in the Nazi death camps. Pseudonym Sometimes Used His other book include `` Survival in Auschwitz , '' the first volume of his autobiographical trilogy ; `` The Reawakening , '' the second volume ; `` Moments of Reprieve , '' a series of sketch of the author 's acquaintance from the camp , and , most recently , `` The Damned and the Saved. '' He also write work of fiction , some of it under the pseudonym Damiano Malabaila. Primo Levi be bear in Turin on July 31 , 1919 , a descendant of Jews who have settle in the Piedmont , in northern Italy , after the expulsion of Jews from Spain. He study chemistry at the University of Turin , even after the Mussolini regime bar Jews from institute of high learning in 1938 , and receive a degree in 1941. In 1943 , he quit his job at a Milan pharmaceutical laboratory to join Italian Partisans fighting German and Italian Fascist forces. `` I be not a very good Partisan , '' Mr. Levi tell Herbert Mitgang in The New York Times in 1985. `` When my unit be betray by an informer , I be interrogate by Italian Fascists and hand over to the Germans. I be put on a train with hundred of other Jews and send to Monowitz-Auschwitz , the factory part of the camp that use slave labor. '' Number Tattooed on Arm It be his experience there , a No. 174517 - the number be tattoo on his left arm , a few inch above the wrist - that be to shape his life and work. His 1947 account , `` Survival in Auschwitz '' - also publish under the title `` If This Is a Man '' - describe daily life in the death camp in rich detail , create a monument to the triumph of lucid intelligence over Nazi barbarism. He attribute his survival in the camp to luck , to the Germans ' need for chemist - he be give a job in a synthetic-rubber factory - and to an acquaintanceship with a fellow inmate , an Italian bricklayer who be not Jewish , who bring him bread and soup. In `` The Reawakening , '' publish in 1963 , the author describe his long and bizarre journey home to Turin after be liberate from the camp by Soviet soldiers. He also draw on his Partisan day in a novel , `` If Not Now , When ? '' The novel , publish in Italy in 1982 , chronicle the exploit in the closing month of the war of a band of Eastern European Jewish Partisans who dream of find freedom in Palestine. A Turn to Fiction In recent year , Mr. Levi turn increasingly to work of fiction , include novel and short story , and be a regular contributor of poetry to the Turin newspaper La Stampa. He be the winner of several literary prize , include the Strega Prize , a prestigious Italian award , in 1979. In 1985 he and Saul Bellow share the Kenneth B. Smilen fiction award , sponsor by the Jewish Museum in New York. While devote to his writing , Mr. Levi continue his career a a chemist , work for a Turin paint factory , SIVA , for almost 30 years. From 1961 to 1974 , he be the plant 's general manager. In an interview with The New York Times in December 1984 , Mr. Levi describe himself a `` a chemist by conviction , '' but add , `` After Auschwitz , I have an absolute need to write. '' `` Not only a a moral duty , '' he say , `` but a a psychological need. '' That need be reflect in a Yiddish proverb he use a an epigraph for `` The Periodic Table '' : `` Troubles overcome be good to tell. '' Mr. Levi write in an Italian enrich by snatch of the disappear jargon of the Piedmontese Jews , which combine Hebrew root with local ending and inflections. Middle-Class Origins Mr. Levi , who come from a middle-class family of assimilated Jews , once write that `` a Jew be someone who at Christmas do not have a tree , who should n't eat salami but do , who have learn a little bit of Hebrew at 13 and then forget it. '' But he remain close to the Italian Jewish community and two year ago he contribute an introduction to the catalogue of a newly open Jewish museum in Turin. The novelist Philip Roth , whose account of a conversation with the Italian appear last October in The New York Times Book Review , say of Mr. Levi today : `` With the moral stamen and intellectual poise of a 20th-century titan , this slightly build , dutiful , unassuming chemist set out systematically to remember the German hell on earth , steadfastly to think it through , and then to render it comprehensible in lucid , unpretentious prose. He be profoundly in touch with the minute working of the most endearing human event and with the most contemptible. '' Mr. Roth call Mr. Levi `` a magically endear man , the most delicately forceful enchanter I 've ever known. '' Mr. Levi be survive by his wife , Lucia ; a daughter , Lisa , and a son , Renzo .