October 10 , 1987 OBITUARY Clare Boothe Luce Dies at 84 : Playwright , Politician , Envoy By ALBIN KREBS Clare Booth Luce , whose richly varied career encompass the editorship of Vanity Fair magazine , the writing of hit Broadway play and service in Congress and as Ambassador to Rome , die yesterday morning at her home in Washington. Mrs. Luce , who be 84 year old , have be gravely ill with cancer for some time. Clare Booth Luce , whose richly varied career encompass the editorship of Vanity Fair magazine , the writing of hit Broadway play and service in Congress and as Ambassador to Rome , die yesterday morning at her home in Washington. Mrs. Luce , who be 84 year old , have be gravely ill with cancer for some time. She be widely know a the sharp-tongued wife of one of the nation 's most influential publisher , Henry R. Luce , whose magazine include Time , Life and Sports Illustrated. But she win fame on her own a magazine writer and editor , author of `` The Women '' and other hit play , controversial Republican member of the House of Representatives from Connecticut , and , finally , in the Eisenhower Administration , a hardworking and often praised Ambassador to Italy. She have enough career to satisfy the ambition of several woman , but none tie her down for long. She be often on list of the world 's 10 most admired woman , but her glamorous existence and tart tongue draw criticism , sometimes partisan , sometimes envious. Clare Boothe be bear in New York City on April 10 , 1903 , the daughter of William Franklin Boothe , a pit orchestra violinist and sometime businessman , and the former Anna Clara Snyder , who have be a chorus girl. The child be christen Ann Clare , but she never use the Ann. When Parents Separated Her parent separate when Clare be 8 year old. She be bring up in genteel poverty by her mother , who still manage to take her to France for a year and send her to the Cathedral School of St. Mary in Garden City , L.I. , and the Castle School at Tarrytown-on-Hudson , N.Y. In 1919 , her mother marry Dr. Albert Elmer Austin , a prominent physician in Greenwich , Conn. On a trip to Europe in 1920 , the 18-year-old Clare meet Elsa Maxwell among other social figures. `` I 'll have her to one of my party , '' Miss Maxwell said. `` Whatever happen then , she 'll get a rich husband. '' That happen , but not because of a Maxwell party. Clare Boothe meet her future husband in church : George Tuttle Brokaw , millionaire-playboy son of a clothing manufacturer. They marry in 1923 in a wedding call `` the most important social event of the season. '' It be not to last. Mr. Brokaw , 23 year old than his bride , be a heavy drinker , accord to one of his biographer , and be prone to abuse his wife. After six year of marriage she win a divorce on ground of mental cruelty and be award $ 425,000 plus education expense for her daughter , Ann Clare Brokaw. The Job at Vanity Fair Declining to rest on her money , Clare Boothe importune a society friend , Conde Nast , publisher of Vogue and Vanity Fair , for a job. After prove she be not another idle society matron whiling away her time between husband , she do a stint write photo caption for Vogue. Vanity Fair 's editor , Frank Crowninshield , hire her after demand that she draw up a list of 100 ideas. She rise quickly to assistant editor and write satirical piece about society that be later collect in a book , `` Stuffed Shirts. '' Her penthouse apartment on East 57th Street , Manhattan , draw the social , artistic and political type who people Vanity Fair 's pages. She become manage editor , inject more political material in an effort to revive the magazine. She leave in 1934. She have write three play , none produced. She once say read the play of George Bernard Shaw be the impetus for her interest in the theater. Much later she meet Shaw and be say to have gush , `` Except for you , I would n't be here. '' Shaw supposedly reply , `` And now , let me see , dear child , what be your mother 's name ? '' Her first produce play , `` Abide with Me , '' in 1935 , be unanimously deem a disaster. It concern a drunken , sadistic husband who be shoot in the last act. Several critic comment on how quickly she respond to almost indiscernible cry of `` Author. '' She never go to another opening night. Sparks at First Sight of Luce Two day after the opening , the author become the wife of Henry R. Luce , publisher of Time and Fortune. The two independent personality have strike spark on their first meeting , when they be seat together at a dinner party and Mr. Luce ignore her. The next time they meet , at a party at the Waldorf-Astoria , his future wife resolve to pay Mr. Luce back by ask rude questions. This time he be enthral by her. He order her to accompany him to the Waldorf 's lobby , where he say , `` You be the great love of my life , and some day I 'm go to marry you. '' The marriage last , although there be rumor difficulty - perhaps inevitable in a marriage between two such strongminded personalities. She have her separate career and Mr. Luce have his magazine - Life , the picture magazine , be reportedly her idea. The Successful Plays Mrs. Luce return to write play and with `` The Women , '' in 1936 , recover admirably from her maiden flop on Broadway. The play be an apotheosis of feminine bitchiness , concern a devoted wife , the only sympathetic character , try to win back her husband , who have be poach by a saleswoman. It earn her $ 2 million. In 1938 , Mrs. Luce be represent by `` Kiss the Boys Goodbye , '' a satire on the hoopla surround the search for the feminine lead in the movie of `` Gone With the Wind. '' It be a box-office success , a be her next play , `` Margin for Error , '' which purvey a modish anti-Nazism. With World War II , Mrs. Luce seek to involve herself on a large stage. In February 1940 , she sail for Europe a an accredited correspondent for Life for a firsthand look at the war. One result be a book , `` Europe in the Spring. '' Dorothy Parker call it `` All Clare on the Western Front. '' In 1943 Mrs. Luce decide to run for the House of Representatives from Fairfield County , Conn. Criticism of Roosevelt Despite her friendship with early New Dealers , she be by now a Republican and make speech critical of the Roosevelt Administration 's handling of the war effort. Riding an off-year tide of anti-Administration sentiment , she defeat a Democratic incumbent by 7,000 votes. In her first speech in the House , she attack a proposal by Vice President Henry A. Wallace call for postwar freedom of the air. Mrs. Luce wrap up the Wallace proposal in a single word , `` globaloney. '' In Congress she frequently speak out on foreign policy as well a for racial equality in the armed force and war production. Despite her own brief infatuation with Communism in the 1930 's , Mrs. Luce emerge a an early hardline anti-Communist ( although as early a 1964 she be call for more normal relation with China ) . She win re-election in 1944 , campaign with fire but conceal sorrow. Her 19-year-old daughter be kill in an automobile accident that year. A Jesuit priest put her in touch with the Rev. Fulton J. Sheen , who be become know for his broadcasts. Before Sheen have talk three minute , she demand , `` Listen , if God be good , why do He take my daughter ? '' `` In order that you might be here in the faith , '' Sheen replied. Became a Catholic Their session , with Mrs. Luce argue and Sheen explain , result in her conversion to Roman Catholicism in 1946. After that a friend notice a gradual change in her : `` Twenty year ago she be like a diamond - beautiful , brilliant and cold. Now she be beautiful , brilliant and compassionate. She have become a kind and remarkably unselfish woman. '' Because of personal problem and long separation from her husband that her duty entail , Mrs. Luce do not seek re-election in 1946. She remain politically active , in addition to write a column for McCall 's , and in 1952 she campaign for Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower. He offer her the post of Secretary of Labor , but she demurred. He then name her Ambassador to Italy , stir controversy because of Mrs. Luce 's Catholicism , her lack of diplomatic experience and because she be a woman. But she wad into her job with customary energy and contempt for obstacles. She help lay the diplomatic groundwork for an international conference that work out a compromise on the status of Trieste , a dispute that threaten war between Yugoslavia and Italy. Effective Diplomacy She make strongly anti-Communist speech and warn of cutoff of American aid to Italian industry : Communists dominate the labor unions. She draw fire from leftists. Once her chauffeur misunderstood her direction and take her to the residence of President Giovanni Gronchi. Unable to back out , Mrs. Luce , whose relation with the President have be somewhat strained , take the occasion to persuade him to permit the stationing of American troop on Italian soil. In Italy she catch a mysterious illness finally diagnose a arsenic poisoning. The Central Intelligence Agency be call in. The cause be paint dust from her bedroom ceiling. A Controversy Over Brazil In 1959 she be nominate Ambassador to Brazil. A determined one-man opposition to her appointment be mount in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee by Senator Wayne Morse of Oregon. Mrs. Luce be confirm both by the committee and the Senate , but she could not resist a final jab at Morse. `` My difficulty , of course , go back some year , '' she say , `` when Senator Morse be kick in the head by a horse. '' ( He be once kick by a horse , but not in the head. ) In the resultant furor , Eisenhower defend her while Mr. Luce publicly urge her to resign , which she did. In 1964 she announce that she be run for the Senate in New York State a a Conservative Party candidate and supporter of Senator Barry Goldwater , whose nomination for President she have second at the Republican convention. Under pressure from the party 's liberal wing and finally Senator Goldwater himself , she withdraw from the race on the eve of the Conservative convention. Moved to Honolulu In later year she devote herself to social life in Phoenix , where the Luces have a house - skindiving , do mosaic and needlepoint , painting and writing. After Mr. Luce die in 1967 , she move to Honolulu , where she live until 1983 , when she move into an apartment at the Watergate complex in Washington. '' It 's a city of human proportion , '' she said. In recent year Mrs. Luce serve on President Reagan 's unpaid Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board. Of her write she once say , `` I have be too involved with living to write much - or well - about life. '' A biographer , Alden Hatch , sum her up this way : `` Brilliant , yet often foolish ; idealistic , yet realistic to the verge of cynicism ; tough a a Marine sergeant , but almost quixotically kind to unfortunate ; with the mind and courage of a man and exceedingly feminine instinct ; the complexity of her character be as numerous a the facet of her career. Probably the reason no one understand her completely be because she do not even understand herself. '' Mrs. Luce be survive by two stepson , Henry Luce 3d and Peter Paul Luce. Interment will be private , A High Mass will be offer at noon Tuesday in St. Patrick 's Cathedral in New York and a memorial service Wednesday at 11 A. M. at the Church of St. Stephen Martyr in Washington .