May 16 , 1987 OBITUARY Rita Hayworth , Movie Legend , Dies By ALBIN KREBS Rita Hayworth , the legendary Hollywood beauty who rise to international fame in the 1940 's and 1950 's , die Thursday night , of Alzheimer 's disease , in her Central Park West apartment in Manhattan. She be 68 year old. Since 1981 the actress have be under the care of her second daughter , Princess Yasmin Aga Khan , who by publicize her mother 's tragic illness have draw national and international attention to Alzheimer 's disease , about which little be know until recent years. According to Princess Yasmin , Miss Hayworth 's health have steadily deteriorate over the year and she lapse into a semicoma in February. The `` courage and candor '' of Miss Hayworth and her family in bring attention to Alzheimer 's disease be praise by President Reagan in a statement yesterday. `` Rita Hayworth be one of our country 's most beloved star , '' he said. `` Glamorous and talented , she give u many wonderful moment on the stage and screen and delighted audience from the time she be a young girl. `` Nancy and I be sadden by Rita 's death. She be a friend whom we will miss. '' The Epitome of Glamour Rita Hayworth be the epitome of Hollywood glamour and allure , a stunningly beautiful actress and dancer. During World War II , her pinup picture decorate barrack wall and ship ' bulkhead wherever serviceman go , and over two decade her often tempestuous romantic life thrust her into the headlines. Fred Astaire , who co-starred with her in two movie , say in his autobiography that she be his favorite dancing partner , and dancing be , indeed , one of her genuine talents. As a singer , however , she be not similarly gift , even though she be cast in many musicals. Anita Ellis dub Miss Hayworth 's song in four movie , include `` Pal Joey '' and `` The Loves of Carmen , '' and other `` ghost '' do the singing for her in other films. But that matter little to Hayworth fan , who admire her chiefly for the sensuality she exude , play temptress in movie such a `` Blood and Sand '' and `` The Lady From Shanghai. '' The Temptress of 'Gilda' A particularly memorable temptress role be the title one in `` Gilda , '' in 1946 , in which she do a striptease , demure by today 's standard , inasmuch a it be limit to remove her arm-length gloves. While the controversial strip scene dazzle ten of thousand of young male , it upset more conservative people across the nation. So do Miss Hayworth 's open affair , in the late 1940 's , when such behavior be far less commonplace than it be today , with Prince Aly Khan , the playboy son of the spiritual leader of million of Ismaili Moslems. They be marry in 1949 , but she divorce him , a she do four other husband , include Orson Welles. As Miss Hayworth grow old , she successfully shift from her glamour image and take on mature role in movie such a `` Separate Tables '' in 1958 and `` They Came to Cordura '' in 1959. But by the late 1960 's she be appear in minor movie , most of them make in Europe. And ultimately , the once-idolized star 's health be ravage by Alzheimer 's disease - senile dementia , a devastating mental illness that affect the brain , bring on loss of memory , and ravage bodily function - which leave her `` utterly helpless , '' accord to Princess Yasmin. Miss Hayworth be truly born to show business , in New York City , on Oct. 17 , 19l8. Her father , Eduardo Cansino , be a Spanish-born dancer and her mother , the former Volga Haworth , have be a Ziegfeld Follies showgirl. They name their daughter Margarita Carmen Cansino , but she shorten the name to Rita Cansino when she begin dance professionally at the age of 12 , and keep that name for her first 10 movies. Spotted by a Fox Producer Mr. Cansino 's career take the family to Los Angeles , where his daughter attend school through the ninth grade. Then she join her father 's act and perform in club in Tijuana and Agua Caliente , Mexico , where , when she be 16 year old , she be spot by a Fox Film Company producer , who sign her to a contract. Making her film debut in 1935 in `` Under the Pampas Moon , '' Rita Cansino appear in a succession of less role , such a that of a dance hall girl in a Spencer Tracy movie call `` Dante 's Inferno. '' Other film in her Cansino period include `` Charlie Chan in Egypt , '' `` Human Cargo '' and `` Meet Nero Wolfe. '' The Fox company 's merger with 20th-Century Pictures leave the young dancer without a contract , but in 1937 she meet and marry the man who be to become her Svengali and dramatically change her career fortunes. He be Edward Judson , a shrewd businessman 22 year her senior , under whose guidance she have her eyebrow and hairline alter by electrolysis and transform herself from a raven-haired Latin to an auburn-haired cosmopolitan. As her manager , Mr. Judson also change his wife 's professional name , choose her mother 's maiden name of Haworth and add a `` y '' to clarify the pronunciation. He hire press agent to get the name and picture of Rita Hayworth into newspaper and fan magazine , and ultimately win her a seven-year contract at Columbia Pictures. But low-budget B movie continue to be Miss Hayworth 's lot , except for the 1939 `` Only Angels Have Wings , '' with Cary Grant , in which the director , Howard Hawks , cast her a an unfaithful wife. It be the secondary female role , but one that get the actress her first good critical notices. A 'Love Goddess ' Emerges Beginning in 1941 , Miss Hayworth rapidly develop into one of Hollywood 's most glamorous star , inspire Winthrop Sargent , a Life magazine writer , to dub her `` The Great American Love Goddess , '' a sobriquet that she welcome and that catch the public 's fancy. On loan to Warner Brothers , Miss Hayworth appear opposite James Cagney in `` Strawberry Blonde '' in 1941 and , back at Columbia , she achieve full star status when she be cast a Mr. Astaire 's dance partner in `` You 'll Never Get Rich , '' a 1941 hit that get her a Time magazine cover article and instant celebrity. In 1942 , she appear in three hit movie , `` My Gal Sal , '' `` Tales of Manhattan '' and `` You Were Never Lovelier , '' the last again a Mr. Astaire 's co-star. Her performance in `` Cover Girl , '' with Gene Kelly in 1944 , earn Miss Hayworth the attention of Life magazine , which print a photograph of her , pose seductively in black lace , that become famous around the world a an American serviceman 's pinup. In what be intend , no doubt , a the ultimate compliment , the picture be even paste to a test atomic bomb that be drop on Bikini atoll in 1946. Miss Hayworth , unlike star who claim to deplore their own publicity , revel in hers. `` Why should I mind ? '' she said. `` I like have my picture take and be a glamorous person. Sometimes when I find myself get impatient , I just remember the time I cry my eye out because nobody want to take my picture at the Trocadero. '' A great boost to Miss Hayworth 's career be `` Gilda , '' which run into censorship trouble in some area because of the so-called strip scene. In it , she wear a clinging black satin strapless gown and , while coyly peel off long black glove , sing a mildly suggestive song call `` Put the Blame on Mame. '' Actually , the voice be that of Anita Ellis. Marriage to Orson Welles Miss Hayworth , who have divorce her first husband , marry Orson Welles in 1943 , and they have a daughter , Rebecca. While Mr. Welles be direct her in one of her best film , `` The Lady From Shanghai '' ( 1949 ) , she file for divorce from him. Miss Hayworth have meet and fall in love with Prince Aly Khan and , since neither be divorce at the time , their travel together through Europe provoke some public indignation. When they be marry in 1949 , the fact that Miss Hayworth be visibly pregnant be widely reported. She divorce Aly Khan two year later and be subsequently marry to and divorce from the singer Dick Haymes and then James Hill , a movie producer. Miss Hayworth 's more than 40 film also include `` Affair in Trinidad '' ( 1952 ) , `` Salome '' and `` Miss Sadie Thompson '' ( 1953 ) , `` Fire Down Below '' ( 1957 ) , `` The Story on Page One '' ( 1960 ) , `` The Poppy Is Also a Flower '' ( 1967 ) , and `` The Wrath of God '' ( 1972 ) . She attempt a stage career in 1971 , but it end abruptly because she be unable to remember her lines. Six year later , a court in Santa Ana , Calif. , name an administrator for her affair on the recommendation of a physician who say she be disable by chronic alcoholism. Despite her heavy drinking , however , it later appear that the diagnosis of alcoholism might have be erroneous and that Miss Hayworth be actually suffer from the first stage of Alzheimer 's disease. In June 1981 , a court in Los Angeles declare the actress legally unable to care for herself and she be put in the care of Princess Yasmin , who take her to New York to live. In 1985 the Princess marry a Greek shipping executive , Basil Embiricos , but the marriage be short-lived. They have a son , Andrew. Miss Hayworth 's other daughter , Rebecca Welles , live in Tacoma , Wash. Princess Yasmin , testify in 1983 before a Congressional committee concern with appropriate fund for Alzheimer 's disease research , say that the disease have reduce her mother to `` a state of utter helplessness. '' The Princess 's appearance be among her many effort in recent year to draw attention to Alzheimer 's disease. She have take a major role in the growth of the Alzheimer 's Disease and Related Disorders Association Inc. , which have headquarters in Chicago and more than 130 chapter and affiliate , back some 500 family-support groups. She be vice president of that organization and president of Alzheimer 's Disease International , which she help organize in 1985. A funeral service for Miss Hayworth will be hold Monday at 10 A.M. in the Church of the Good Shepherd , Beverly Hills , Calif .