December 2 , 1987 OBITUARY James Baldwin , Eloquent Writer In Behalf of Civil Rights , Is Dead By LEE A. DANIELS James Baldwin , whose passionate , intensely personal essay in the 1950 's and 60 's on racial discrimination in America make him an eloquent voice of the civil-rights movement , die of stomach cancer early yesterday at his home in St. Paul de Vence in southern France. He be 63 year old. At least in the early year of his career , Mr. Baldwin saw himself primarily a a novelist. But it be his essay that arguably constitute his most substantial contribution to literature. Mr. Baldwin publish his three most important collection of essay - '' Notes of a Native Son '' ( 1955 ) , `` Nobody Knows My Name '' ( 1961 ) and `` The Fire Next Time '' ( 1963 ) - during the year when the civil-rights movement be explode across the American South. Apocalyptic Tone in Prose Some critic later say his language be sometimes too elliptical , his indictment sometimes too sweeping. But then , Mr. Baldwin 's prose , with it apocalyptic tone - a legacy of his early exposure to religious fundamentalism - and it passionate yet distance sense of advocacy , seem perfect for a period in which black in the South live under continual threat of racial violence and in which civil-rights worker face brutal beating and even death. In the preface to his 1964 play , `` Blues for Mister Charlie , '' note that the work have be inspire `` very distantly '' by the 1955 murder of a black youth , Emmett Till , in Mississippi , Mr. Baldwin write : `` What be ghastly and really almost hopeless in our racial situation now be that the crime we have commit be so great and so unspeakable that the acceptance of this knowledge would lead , literally , to madness. The human be , then , in order to protect himself , close his eye , compulsively repeat his crime , and enter a spiritual darkness which no one can describe. '' The novelist Ralph Ellison say yesterday , `` America have lose one of it most gifted writer '' and praise Mr. Baldwin a `` one of the most important American essayist , black or white. '' `` I would place him very high among writer , '' Benjamin DeMott , professor of English at Amherst College , say yesterday , `` in part because his work show a powerful commitment to the right value and have a profound impact for good on our culture. '' Mr. Baldwin have move to France in the late 1940 's to escape what he felt be the stifle racial bigotry of America. Nonetheless , although France remain his permanent residence , Mr. Baldwin in later year describe himself a a `` commuter '' rather than an expatriate. `` Only white Americans can consider themselves to be expatriate , '' he said. `` Once I find myself on the other side of the ocean , I could see where I come from very clearly , and I could see that I carry myself , which be my home , with me. You can never escape that. I be the grandson of a slave , and I be a writer. I must deal with both. '' Henry Louis Gates , professor of English and Afro-American Literature at Cornell University , say yesterday that Mr. Baldwin 's death be `` a great loss not only for black people , but to the country a a whole , for which he serve a a conscience. '' Mr. Gates say that Mr. Baldwin have `` educate an entire generation of Americans about the civil-rights struggle and the sensibility of Afro-Americans a we face and conquer the final barrier in our long quest for civil rights. '' Avowed Mission : 'Bear Witness' Despite the prominent role he play in the civil-rights movement in the early 1960 's - not only in write about race relation , but in organize various protest action - Mr. Baldwin always reject the label of `` leader '' or `` spokesman. '' Instead , he describe himself a one whose mission be to `` bear witness to the truth. '' `` A spokesman assume that he be speak for others , '' he tell Julius Lester , a faculty colleague at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst , in an interview in The New York Times Book Review in 1984. `` I never assume that I could. What I try to do , or to interpret and make clear , be that no society can smash the social contract and be exempt from the consequence , and the consequence be chaos for everybody in the society. '' This serene sense of independence be not simply a political stance , but an intrinsic part of Mr. Baldwin 's personality. `` I be a maverick , a maverick in the sense that I depend on neither the white world nor the black world , '' he tell Mr. Lester. `` That be the only way I could 've play it. I would 've be broken otherwise. I have to say , 'A curse on both your houses. ' The fact that I go to Europe so early be probably what save me. It give me another touchstone - myself. '' Mr. Baldwin do not limit his `` bearing witness '' to racial matters. He oppose American military involvement in Vietnam as early a 1963 , and in the early 1960 's he begin to criticize discrimination against homosexuals. Mr. Baldwin 's literary achievement and his activism make him a world figure and to the end of his life bring him many honor in this country and abroad. The French Government make him a Commander of the Legion of Honor in 1986. Yet Mr. Baldwin be also clearly disappointed that , despite his undeniable power a an essayist , his novel and play draw decidely mixed reviews. `` Go Tell It on the Mountain , '' his first book and first novel , publish in 1953 , be widely praised. Partly autobiographical , since Mr. Baldwin himself be the son of a minister , the book tell of a poor boy grow up in Harlem in the 1930 's under the tyranny of his father , an autocratic preacher who hat his son. Mr. Baldwin say in 1985 that in many way the book remain the keystone of his career. `` 'Mountain ' be the book I have to write if I be ever go to write anything else , '' he said. `` I have to deal with what hurt me most. I have to deal , above all , with my father. He be my model. I learn a lot from him. Nobody 's ever frighten me since. '' But the reception accord his other work be at best lukewarm , and his frank discussion of homosexuality in `` Giovanni 's Room '' ( 1956 ) and `` Another Country '' ( 1962 ) draw criticism from within and outside the civil-rights movement. In a celebrated polemic in the late 1960 's , Eldridge Cleaver , then a member of the Black Panther Party , assert that the novel illustrate Mr. Baldwin 's `` agonizing , total hatred of blacks. '' Another assessment of Mr. Baldwin be offer by the poet Langston Hughes , who observe , `` Few American writer handle word more effectively in the essay form than James Baldwin. To my way of thinking , he be much good at provoke think in the essay than he be in arouse emotion in fiction. '' Mr. Baldwin 's other work include the novel `` Tell Me How Long the Train 's Been Gone , '' the stage play `` Blues For Mister Charlie , '' and `` The Amen Corner , '' and `` The Evidence of Things Not Seen , '' a long essay on the murder of 28 black child in Atlanta in 1980 and 1981. Characteristically , Mr. Baldwin do not shrink from acknowledge the less view of his work of fiction , nor that his fame have slip since the early 1970's. `` I 'm very vulnerable to all of that , '' he say in a 1985 interview , refer to what he describe in an early essay a the `` dangerous , unending and unpredictable battle '' of be a writer. `` The rise and fall of one 's reputation , '' he mused. `` What can you do about it ? I think that come with the territory. '' `` Any real artist , '' he say , `` will never be judge in the time of his time ; whatever judgment be deliver in the time of his time can not be trusted. '' James Baldwin be bear in 1924 in Harlem and attend DeWitt Clinton High School in the Bronx. He be a precocious writer , and by his early 20 's be publish review and essay in such publication a The New Leader , The Nation , Commentary and Partisan Review , and socialize with the circle of New York writer and intellectual that include Randall Jarrell , Dwight Macdonald , Lionel Trilling , Delmore Schwartz , Irving Howe and William Barrett , among others. Yet , Mr. Baldwin be among the last one would have initially mark for a leadership role in a national movement. Soft-spoken , with a manner of speaking that mirror his complex writing style , and physically slight , he think of himself for many year a ugly , and write poignantly of his struggle to accept the way he looked. He be survive by his mother , Berdis Baldwin ; five sister , Paula Whaley , Gloria Smart and Barbara Jamison , all of New York City , Ruth Crum of Ossining , N.Y. , and Elizabeth Dingle of Alexandria , Va. , and three brother , Wilmer , George and David , all of New York City. The funeral be to be hold on Tuesday at noon at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine , 112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue. BALDWIN 'S BITTER FIRE The idea of white supremacy rest simply on the fact that white men be the creator of civilization ( the present civilization , which be the only one that matter ; all previous civilization be simply `` contribution '' to our own ) and be therefore civilization 's guardian and defenders. Thus it be impossible for Americans to accept the black man a one of themselves , for to do so be to jeopardize their status a white men. But not so to accept him be to deny his human reality , his human weight and complexity , and the strain of deny the overwhelmingly undeniable forced Americans into rationalization so fantastic that they approach the pathological. - `` Notes of a Native Son '' ( 1955 ) People who shut their eye to reality simply invite their own destruction , and anyone who insist on remain in a state of innocence long after that innocence be dead turn himself into a monster. - `` Notes of a Native Son '' I be very much concern that American Negroes achieve their freedom here in the United States. But I be also concern for their dignity , for the health of their soul , and must oppose any attempt that Negroes may make to do to others what have be do to them. I think I know - we see it around u every day - the spiritual wasteland to which that road leads. - `` The Fire Next Time '' If one be continually survive the bad that life can bring , one eventually cease to be control by a fear of what life can bring ; whatever it bring must be borne. And at this level of experience one 's bitterness begin to be palatable , and hatred becomes too heavy a sack to carry. - `` The Fire Next Time '' Color be not a human or a personal reality ; it be a political reality. - `` The Fire Next Time '' ( 1963 ) I do not wish to see Negroes become the equal of their murderers. I wish u to become equal to ourselves. To become a people so free in themselves that they will have no need to - fear - others - and have no need to murder others. - Spoken by the character Meridian Henry in the play `` Blues for Mister Charlie '' ( 1964 ) For our father - how shall I describe our father ? - be a ruined Barbados peasant , exile in a Harlem which he loathe , where he never saw the sun or the sky he remember , where life take place neither indoors nor without , and where there be no joy. By which I mean , no joy that he remembered. Had it be otherwise , have he be able to bring with him into the prison where he perish any of the joy he have felt on that far-off island , then the air of the sea and the impulse to dance would sometimes have transfigure our dreadful rooms. Our life might have be very different. But no , he bring with him from Barbados only black rum and a blacker pride , and magic incantation which neither heal nor saved. - `` Tell Me How Long the Train 's Been Gone '' ( 1968 )