October 13 , 1987 OBITUARY Alf Landon , G.O.P. Stand-Bearer , Dies at 100 By THE NEW YORK TIMES Alfred M. Landon , the former Governor of Kansas who gain lasting fame for his landslide defeat by Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1936 Presidential election , die at his home in Topeka yesterday , 34 day after his 100th birthday. Mr. Landon be release on Saturday from Stormont-Vail Regional Medical Center , where he have be treat for a gallstone and a mild case of bronchitis. He have enter the medical center on Sept. 28. A man of endure good spirit , he be undaunted by his overwhelming defeat for the Presidency and continue to exert influence in the Republican party. On Sept. 6 , three day before he turn 100 , President Reagan and his wife , Nancy , stop off in Topeka to pay tribute to the man who have become know a the G.O.P. 's `` grand old man. '' `` In a hundred year , '' Mr. Reagan say , `` Alf Landon have chase many dream and catch most of them. '' Won Only Maine and Vermont Mr. Landon , whose daughter Nancy Landon Kassebaum , be a Republican Senator from Kansas , be more modest , describe himself in an interview four year ago a `` an oilman who never make a million , a lawyer who never have a case and a politician who carry only Maine and Vermont. '' Not until 1984 do a Presidential candidate win few state than Mr. Landon do in 1936. Walter F. Mondale win only Minnesota and the District of Columbia. With Mr. Landon at the time of his death be his wife of 57 year , Theo , and a housekeeper , Rita Dwight. Ms. Dwight say Mr. Landon simply stop breathe at 5:25 P.M. He have be alert earlier in the day. Mrs. Landon , who be 11 year young than her husband , say : `` I think we would have him a little while longer. But he have accomplish everything a person can accomplish. He be very proud he make it to 100 , and he be so pleased that the President come to see him. '' Active to the End Mr. Landon remain active until his hospitalization last month. Each morning , it be his custom to walk nearly a quarter of a mile , aid by his cane and with Ms. Dwight at his side. He encourage friend to visit , and one day this summer 11 friend drop in at the Landon home. Mrs. Kassebaum , who have a speaking engagement last night in Hartford , Conn. , go to Topeka after learn of her father 's death. In a statement from the White House last night , President Reagan say : `` Alf Landon exemplify the very best in public service. He deeply love his country and he be motivate by a genuine desire to help his fellow man. '' The Senate Republican leader , Bob Dole , a fellow Kansan , say last night that Mr. Landon be `` a legendary Republican who teach generation of politician what integrity and leadership be all about. '' Took Loss With Humor Mr. Landon leaven the disappointment of his loss in 1936 with humor. Assessing his two-state victory , Mr. Landon say , `` As Maine go , so go Vermont. '' He display the same sense of humor a month after the election , when , a the outgo Governor of Kansas , he address the Gridiron Club , an organization of Washington newspapermen. `` If there be one state that prepare a man for anything , it be Kansas , '' he said. `` The Kansas tornado be an old story. But let me tell you of one. It sweep first the barn , then the outbuildings. Then it pick up the dwelling and scatter it all over the landscape. `` As the funnel-shape cloud go twist it way out of sight , leave nothing but splinter behind , the wife come to , to find her husband laughing. `` She angrily ask him , 'What be you laugh at , you darn old fool ? ' `` And the husband reply , 'At the completeness of it. ' `` 523 Electoral Votes to 8 Roosevelt , run for his second term , win 27,747,636 vote to 16,679,543 for his Republican rival. Mr. Landon receive 8 electoral vote to Roosevelt 's 523. The plurality of 11,068,093 in the popular vote stand a a record until 1964 , when with 30 million more voter President Johnson defeat Barry Goldwater by 15,948,746 votes. Even so , the Arizona Republican carry six state with 52 electoral votes. The plurality mark be break again in 1972 when President Nixon win re-election by 17,998,388 more vote than George McGovern. The South Dakota Democrat carry only Massachusetts and the District of Columbia , for 17 electoral votes. But Mr. Landon 's 36.5 percent of the popular vote remain below Mr. Mondale 's 40.5 percent , Mr. Goldwater 's 38.5 percent and Mr. McGovern 's 37.5 percent in tally gather by Congressional Quarterly. Did Not Fear Roosevelt Mr. Landon could bear his defeat with equanimity partly because he have have no real hope of win and partly because he do not fear for the future of the nation , a many of his fellow Republicans do , if Roosevelt be re-elected. Throughout his life Mr. Landon be a member of his party 's liberal wing. As Governor of Kansas he endorse many of the most controversial aspect of the New Deal. He respect and admire Roosevelt. Despite all this , Mr. Landon come to be think of in late year a the prototype of Middle Western provincialism and conservatism. After his 1936 defeat , Mr. Landon do not seek public office again. He become a genial , unassuming pillar of the business community in Topeka , which be the headquarters of the oil-well business that have make him a millionaire by the late 1920's. But he be often ask his opinion , and he do not hesitate to take strong stands. In the 1930 's he disagree with Republicans who support the Neutrality Act ; he fear it would mislead Nazi Germany into think the United States be unwilling to fight. In World War II he argue against lend-leasing military equipment , urge instead that Britain be give $ 5 billion outright. Backed Marshall Plan He support President Truman on aid to Greece and Turkey against Communist threat and back his Marshall Plan for reconstruction of Europe even while oppose high domestic spending and a `` welfare state. '' He argue that the United States should join Europe 's Common Market in 1961 , when President Kennedy urge only cooperation. In President Johnson 's Administration , Mr. Landon support Medicare and other Great Society programs. In November 1962 , when he be ask to describe his political philosophy , Mr. Landon say : `` I would say practical progressive , which mean that the Republican Party or any political party have get to recognize the problem of a grow and complex industrial civilization. And I do n't think the Republican Party be really wide awake to that. '' Alfred Mossman Landon , who prefer to be know a Alf , be bear Sept. 9 , 1887 , in his maternal grandfather 's Methodist parsonage in West Middlesex , Pa. His father , John Manuel Landon , be an oil prospector and promoter in the Pennsylvania fields. The family live for a time in Marietta , Ohio. In 1904 , when Alf Landon be 17 , the Landons follow the search for oil westward to the field of southwestern Kansas. From his home in Independence , Kan. , Mr. Landon go to the University of Kansas. At his father 's insistence , Mr. Landon attend the university 's law school , but after his graduation in 1908 he go to work for an Independence bank a a bookkeeper. On a salary that range from $ 75 to $ 90 a month , he save money and invest in oil ventures. Four year later he form his own oil business. Met Progressive Republicans In the same year , 1912 , he attend the Bull Moose convention in Chicago that nominate Theodore Roosevelt for the Presidency. The elder Mr. Landon be a delegate. The young Mr. Landon meet the leader of progressive Republicanism , include William Allen White , editor of The Emporia Gazette in his home state , and the experience shape his political thinking for the rest of his life. The young businessman enlist in the Army in World War I. He receive a commission in the chemical warfare corp but be still in train at Lakewood , N.J. , when the Armistice be signed. Mr. Landon become head of the Republican state organization in 1928 and deliver the large percentage of any state in the nation for Herbert Hoover 's election victory. Campaigned in Depression In 1932 Mr. Landon run for Governor himself. Wearing his oilfield workclothes , lace boot , a leather jacket and the battered brown fedora that be to become a trademark , he campaign in crossroad village across the state. He defeat the Democratic incumbent , Harry H. Woodring , who be later appoint Secretary of War by President Roosevelt , by 5,637 votes. With the Depression on , he be the only Republican gubernatorial candidate west of the Mississippi to survive the New Deal avalanche. In 1934 , Mr. Landon increase his margin of victory to 60,000 votes. That year , he be the only Republican gubernatorial candidate in the country to be elected. Republican national leader , desperate for a candidate to oppose Roosevelt in 1936 , begin turn up in Topeka to confer with Mr. Landon , even though the New Deal echo in his two inaugural address might have give them pause. While the Governor criticize Roosevelt 's `` slapdash , jazzy method , '' he endorse the goal of the Roosevelt Administration and most of it new laws. But the Republican leader prefer to note that Mr. Landon have reduce his state 's operating expense , include his own salary , and have balance the budget. And , they note , he have be elect twice. Under the guidance of his campaign manager , John D. M. Hamilton , the Governor decline to enter any Presidential primary , or even to stir off his front porch , to seek the nomination , but he be choose by acclamation on the first ballot when the Republicans convene in Cleveland. The picture of Mr. Landon that begin to appear on billboard and in newspaper show a smiling , round-faced man with thinning , sandy hair whose gray eye view the world shrewdly through rimless glasses. Millions of sunflower , his state 's flower , blossom in button and posters. The Governor 's theme be , at the start , that a Republican administration could carry out the necessary reform in the country 's social and economic structure more efficiently and honestly than the New Deal. Coined 'New Frontier ' `` America at the Crossroads , '' a slim volume publish in 1936 , outline his `` program for American government. '' The first chapter be title `` The New Frontier , '' a phrase that President Kennedy be to make a good deal well known. When the President begin his campaign , it soon become apparent that the election would be no contest. Roosevelt seldom mention Mr. Landon , or for that matter the Republicans. He cite the country 's recovery from the 1932 depth of the Depression and assert that the force of reaction be seek to undo these gains. Mr. Landon be marry to Theo Cobb in 1930. His first wife , Margaret Fleming , whom he have wed in 1915 , have died. He have three child : Margaret Anne of Topeka by the first marriage , and Nancy and John of Colorado Springs by the second. Also survive be 10 grandchild and nine great-grandchildren .