June 4 , 1987 OBITUARY Andres Segovie Is Dead at 94 ; His Crusade Elevated Guitar By DONAL HENAHAN Andres Segovia , the master guitarist who be one of the paramount concert artist of this century , die of a heart attack Tuesday in Madrid. He be 94 year old. On April 8 , three day before a scheduled recital at Carnegie Hall , the Spanish musician be admit to Cabrini Hospital in New York City because of `` heart irregularities. '' The remainder of his United States tour be cancel , a pacemaker be implant and he be fly home to Spain. Segovia be a pivotal figure whose crusade in behalf of the classic guitar leave an imprint on musical history. Parental Objections When he take up the guitar over bitter parental objection in his native village of Linares in southern Spain , the instrument have fall into neglect and disrepute. Long before his death , the Spanish musician have see the guitar place on the curriculum of the major music school and conservatory and have become an idol to million who take up the instrument a performer , concertgoers or record collectors. In his furtherance of his chosen instrument , Segovia can be fairly compare to such similarly influential performer a Paganini ( violin ) , Liszt ( piano ) , Casals ( cello ) and Landowska ( harpsichord ) . As they do , Segovia leave his instrument richer in technique , in repertory and in public esteem. His Life Goals The guitarist himself sum up his life 's goal in an interview with The New York Times when he be 75 year old : `` First , to redeem my guitar from the flamenco and all those other things. Second , to create a repertory - you know that almost all the good composer of our time have write work for the guitar through me and even for my pupils. Third , I want to create a public for the guitar. Now , I fill the big hall in all the country , and at least a third of the audience be young - I be very glad to steal them from the Beatles. Fourth , I be determine to win the guitar a respected place in the great music school along with the piano , the violin and other concert instruments. '' Although reference book differ a to his birthdate , Segovia give it a Feb. 21 , 1893. His father , a lawyer , want the boy to follow a career in law and be horrify to find that at an early age his son have fall in love with the guitar. Piano and cello lesson be unsuccessful in divert him from the traditional Spanish instrument. His father , the musician like to recall in late year , break `` two or three '' guitar before give up the attempt to discourage his son 's affection for an instrument regard at that time a fit to be play only in cafe by gypsies. The guitar , however , have a little-recognized tradition that be separate from flamenco and other popular and folk idioms. Segovia , over the objection of teacher at the Granada Institute of Music , where he be send to study , set out to rediscover the guitar 's classic past. Unable to find a teacher , he guide himself and would say in late year with a smile , `` To this day , teacher and pupil have never have a serious quarrel. '' Basing his technical study chiefly on his own intuition and what he could learn of the method of the 19th-century guitar virtuoso and teacher Francisco Tarrega , Segovia quickly develop into a dazzling technician and consummate musician. He make his debut in Granada in 1909 at age 16 and soon become know throughout Spain. At the age of 22 , he appear in a recital at the Paris Conservatory , and his success result in a concert tour of South America. By the time he return to Europe in 1923 , there be a public wait eagerly to hear him. His official Paris debut in 1924 , attend by the city 's musical elite , create a sensation. At that time , few have hear Bach play on the guitar , and Segovia 's performance of his own Bach transcription be revelation of his talent and the instrument 's potential. Expanding the Repertory Leading 20th-century composer , most of them close friend of Segovia , write for his instrument. Roussel , Ibert , Falla , Villa-Lobos , Casella , Castelnuovo-Tedesco , Poulenc , Britten , Ponce , Turina , Rodrigo , Moreno Torroba , Berkeley , Arnold , Henze , Martin , Walton , Hindemith , Rawsthorne and Bennett be some who write piece either for Segovia or for his disciple , such a the Englishman Julian Bream and the Australian John Williams. Segovia encourage the writing of concerto for guitar as well a solo work and perform these concerto with many of the world 's great symphony orchestras. His own transcription flesh out the solo repertory and today constitute a large part of the music available to the classic guitarist. New York first hear Segovia on Jan. 8 , 1928 , when he give a recital at Town Hall that include music by Bach , Haydn , Sor and Tarrega. In a review of the debut in The New York Times , Olin Downes describe the already famous 34-year-old guitarist this way : `` The appearance of Mr. Segovia be not that of the trumpeted virtuoso. He be rather the dreamer or scholar in bearing , long hair , eyeglasses , a black frock coat and neckwear of an early generation. '' The reviewer , astonish by the variety of tone color and the expressive effect that Segovia could call out of his soft-voiced instrument , add this judgment : `` He belong to the very small group of musician who by transcendental power of execution , by imagination and intuition create an art of their own that sometimes seem to transform the very nature of their medium. '' The 'Segovia Hush' Although his New York recital be give for year in such relatively intimate place a Town Hall , Segovia move in the 1960 's to Carnegie Hall and to Philharmonic Hall ( now Avery Fisher Hall ) . Some of his dedicated follower deplore this decision , but Segovia 's art prove able to communicate to audience of several thousand. The phenomenon know a the `` Segovia hush '' fell over any hall in which the age artist appear , and he be proud of his ability to hold large audience in breathless silence. He also could grow impatient when , on occasion , a few persistent coughers and program-rustlers prove immune to his magic. At such time he would frown over his thick glass ( he undergo detached-retina surgery in the late 1960 's ) or take out his handkerchief , cover his mouth and cough soundlessly into it to offer a hint to the insensitive. Recordings play a large role in Segovia 's success. He say late in life that his first record , make in London for HMV `` sometime around 1926 , '' still pay him an occasional small royalty. In fact , few Segovia record stay out of print : more than a dozen could be find in the catalogue at any time during the last 20 year of his life. In this country his record appear chiefly on the Decca label for year and more recently under the imprint of MCA , Decca 's successor , and RCA. An Invariable Triumph Among the dozen of memorable work in his recorded repertory be his transcription of Bach 's lute music and work for violin and cello ; his transcription of lute suite by Sylvius Leopold Weiss ; concerto by Castelnuovo-Tedesco , Villa-Lobos and Ponce ; transcription of piano piece by Granados and Albeniz , and guitar work by Sor , Tarrega , Moreno-Torroba , Roussel , Castelnuovo-Tedesco , Tansman and Turina. One of his invariable triumph over the year be Bach 's Chaconne , which he contend have originally be write for lute or guitar rather than unaccompanied violin. Many musician who disagree with that idea still find his performance amazingly persuasive in their harmonic richness and contrapuntal clarity. Segovia 's American career have be start in 1928 when Fritz Kreisler , the Viennese violinist , urge F. C. Coppicus of the Metropolitan Musical Bureau to present the guitarist in New York. After more than a decade of success , Segovia break off his tour in the United States because of the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936. He leave his home in Spain and live for a time in Genoa , Italy , and in Montevideo , Uruguay. He tour Central and South America during this period but do not return to the United States until 1943 , when the impresario Sol Hurok undertook to rebuild his popularity , often by guarantee local manager against loss. Before long the name Andres Segovia be in an elite bracket along with such box-office star a Rubinstein , Heifetz and Horowitz. Casals Arranged Paris Debut Unlike his countryman Pablo Casals , who refuse for many year to return to Spain in protest against the Franco regime , Segovia adopt an aloofness from politics. For some year he live in New York City in an Upper East Side apartment as well a in Switzerland , but he regularly return to play in Spain. `` I need to touch the earth of my homeland periodically to receive new energy , '' he said. Segovia 's relation with Casals be once warm : it be the cellist , already a renowned musician , who arrange for the young guitarist 's formal debut in Paris in April 1924 , a famous event whose audience include such artist a Manuel de Falla and Paul Dukas. They come to hear the unknown Spaniard largely at the insistence of Casals. However , Segovia lose the friendship of the Catalan cellist during the Spanish Civil War by refuse to cut himself off from his native country , which he continue to visit throughout the Franco regime. Unlike Casals , he return there to live after World War II , his rationale be that he love his country too much to abandon it for the sake of a political gesture. Teaching to the End In recent decade Segovia conduct master class in the guitar at Santiago de Compostela in Spain , as well a in music school and university all over the world. This March he conduct such class at the Manhattan School of Music and at Carnegie Hall. He also teach for many year in Siena , Italy , at the Accademia Chigiana , a music school house in a villa own by his friend , Prince Chigi. Study with Segovia become a virtual necessity for aspire guitar virtuoso and come to be regard a a seal of approval internationally. His student include Julian Bream , John Williams , Christopher Parkening , Alirio Diaz , Oscar Ghiglia and dozen more. Segovia 's first marriage end in divorce in 1951. In 1961 he marry a 22-year-old guitarist , Emilia Corral Sancho , a student of his. Their son , Carlos Andres , now 17 , be bear when Segovia be 77 year old. A son , Andres , and a daughter , Beatrice , by his first wife be bear more than half a century before Carlos Andres. He once tell an interviewer , `` I be more celebrated for be a father than an artist. '' Segovia build a home for his new family on a hilltop in southern Spain , between Malaga and Granada , and in his last active year severely reduce his concert activity , cut back to some two dozen recital a season from the 100-odd appearance he make each year until he be well into his 70's. He be survive by his wife and two son , Andres and Carlos Andres. ARTIST WITH WORDS , TOO A gracious , Old Worldly man with a liking for poetic language , Andres Segovia be a fount of picturesquely phrase wisdom and comment. Here be some examples. On the value of hard work : I practice only five hour a day , no more. Work be necessary and a pleasure. It be like those old painting of Jacob 's Ladder with angel climb up and down , rung by rung - although they have wings. On young conductor : For most of them the academy have be the mirror and the gramophone. On the power of the guitar to be hear in large hall : > My friend who be a philosopher be speak to student in a great hall and one say he could not hear. 'Very well , ' say the philosopher , `` I will speak lower. '' On the cost of his guitar : A guitar have value but no price. On modern music : Unfortunately , I think music be declining. All art be in need of redemption. On flamenco guitarist : I like very much the true flamenco , which be play with heavy finger , roughly but from the soul. But flamenco have depart from the good simple tradition. The flamenco should not be professionals. On his hatred of routine playing : I have to be present at every note I play. On his wife , Emilia : She be my pupil for 12 year before she become my master. On continue a heavy schedule into old age : I will have an eternity to rest .