June 13 , 1988 OBITUARY Louis L'Amour , Writer , Is Dead ; Famed Chronicler of West Was 80 By JAMES BARRON Louis L'Amour , who turn out novel after best-selling novel about plain-speaking , straight-shooting hero of the old West , die Friday at his home in Los Angeles. He be 80 year old. Mr. L'Amour 's editor at Bantam Books , Stuart S. Applebaum , say Mr. L'Amour , a nonsmoker , have die of lung cancer. Mr. Applebaum say the L'Amour family delay the announcement of Mr. L'Amour 's death by one day so that they could personally inform his friend of his passing , All 101 of Mr. L'Amour 's book - 86 novel , 14 short-story collection and one full-length work of nonfiction - be in print , and with almost 200 million copy in circulation , he be one of the world 's most popular writers. Former President Jimmy Carter be read `` The Lonesome Gods '' on an airplane trip last week , and President Reagan read `` Jubal Sackett '' while recover from cancer surgery in 1985. `` I guess I 'm an industry , '' he say a decade ago. He be the first novelist to be award a Congressional gold medal , an award give to Charles A. Lindbergh , Thomas A. Edison , Marian Anderson and Dr. Jonas Salk , among others. A Vast Array of Experiences On his way to the best-seller list , Mr. L'Amour work at almost everything but writing. Before he hand in his first western - `` Hondo , '' in 1953 - he have be a longshoreman , a lumberjack , an elephant handler , a fruit picker and an officer on a tank destroyer in World War II. He have also circle the world on a freighter , sail a dhow on the Red Sea , be shipwreck in the West Indies and be strand in the Mojave Desert , and have win 51 of 59 fight a a professional boxer. But he be certain that someday he would make his living a a writer. Since 1816 , 33 member of his family have do so ; and Mr. L'Amour , who have want to be a writer `` almost from the time I could walk , '' be confident of his talent. `` I could sit in the middle of Sunset Boulevard and write with my typewriter on my knee , '' he once said. `` Temperamental I be not. '' But at time he do seem annoyed that critic pay little attention to westerns. He attribute this to the literary world 's `` pure snobbishness. '' A Sense of Time and Place `` If you write a book about a bygone period that lie east of the Mississippi River , then it 's a historical novel , '' he say in 1975. `` If it 's west of the Mississippi , it 's a western , a different category. There 's no sense to it. '' For his part , Mr. L'Amour consider himself something of a latter-day Chaucer. `` I do n't travel and tell story , because that 's not the way these day , '' he said. `` But I write my book to be read aloud and I think of myself in that oral tradition. '' The result be a strong sense of time and place , the result of L'Amour 's meticulous attention to details. When he write about mountain , he be geologically correct. When he write about gun , he write for the gun specialist. He check what food people eat in a give time and place , he memorize architectural detail and often take camp trip to familiarize himself with the landscape he be write about. Law Triumphs Over Chaos In the typical L'Amour book , law triumps over lawlessness and order over chaos. But he be less concerned with stereotype of good guy and bad guy than with his character ' spunkiness. The typical L'Amour hero be a strapping young man in his late teen or early 20 's , a resilient and somewhat romantic fighter bent on self-improvement. Tell Sackett carry law book in his saddlebag ; Bendigo Shafter read Montaigne , Plutarch and Thoreau ; and Drake Morrel , a one-time riverboat gambler , read Juvenal in the original Latin. Mr. L'Amour write five page a day , include Sundays and holidays. He work in a study cram with more than 8,000 book , diary , map and explorer ' notebooks. He also have biographical material on 2,000 old gunfighters. From Texas to Tibet A big man who come close to fit the description of one of his hero , Louis Dearborn L'Amour be bear on March 22 , 1908 , in Jamestown , N.D. He be a son of a veterinarian who double a a farm-machinery salesman , grandson of a Civil War veteran and great-grandson of a settler who have be scalp by Sioux warriors. Quitting school at 15 , he roam the West working a a miner , rancher and lumberjack , then take off for the Far East a a seaman. By the time he be 20 , he have skin cattle in Texas , live with bandit in Tibet and work on an East African schooner. For a time he hang around the University of Oklahoma , where faculty member widen his reading list. `` I read Balzac , Victor Hugo and Dumas before I ever read Zane Grey , '' he said. A small Oklahoma publisher issue Mr. L'Amour 's first book , not a shoot-'em-up but a collection of poem , in 1939. Editing Hours Before He Died After World War II , he write under the name Tex Burns because , he insist , `` no editor believe that the name L'Amour could ever appear on a Western story. '' Only after `` Hondo '' have be publish and make into a successful John Wayne movie do Mr. L'Amour write under his own name. Mr. L'Amour have recently complete two book : `` Lonigan , '' a collection of short story that Bantam will publish in September , and `` The Sackett Companion , '' in which he explain the research behind his 17 novel about the Sackett family. In the hour before he die , he have be proofreding the manuscript for `` Education of a Wandering Man , '' an autobiography. Mr. L'Amour 's most recent novel be `` The Haunted Mesa. '' `` A Trail of Memories : The Quotations of Louis L'Amour '' be publish last month , and be compile by his daughter , Angelique. Mr. L'Amour be also survive by his wife , Kathy , and a son , Beau , both of Los Angeles , a be his daughter .