August 14 , 1989 OBITUARY William B. Shockley , 79 , Creator of Transistor and Theory on Race By WOLFGANG SAXON William Bradford Shockley , who share a Nobel Prize in physic for his role in the creation of the transistor and earn the enmity of many for his view on the genetic difference between the race , die of cancer of the prostate at his home in California on Saturday. He be 79 year old and live on the campus of Stanford University. He be a professor emeritus of electrical engineering at Stanford. In addition , he lecture and write extensively. Many of his early endeavor become cloud by controversy , however , because of his pronouncement on race. He preach a philosophy of `` retrogressive evolution. '' Stipulating that intelligence be genetically transmit , he deem black genetically inferior to white and unable to achieve their intellectual level. As a corollary , he suggest that black be reproduce fast than white - hence , the retrogression in human evolution. Start of Electronic Age In 1947 , he and two colleague from Bell Telephone Laboratories , the research arm of American Telephone & Telegraph Company , produce their first semiconductor device. And in 1956 he share the Nobel Prize with the two , John Bardeen and Walter H. Brattain. The invention of the transistor become the basis for the electronic age. From it flow virtually every one of today 's device instal in airliner and car , calculator and computer , wristwatch and wash machines. Dr. Shockley leave Bell Laboratories in 1954 and found a semiconductor factory. A rebellion among his employee , who set up their own company , begin the phenomenon near Stanford University know a Silicon Valley. Dr. Shockley go on to lecture at Stanford in 1958 and serve a Alexander M. Poniatoff professor of electrical engineering and applied science from 1963 to 1975. Debate on I.Q. Tests His theory on racial difference set off a national argument over the use and applicability of I.Q. tests. Evidence that black tend to score low than white be discount by most expert who saw the explanation in cultural and social rather than genetic terms. Stanford University , which announce the death late yesterday , say Dr. Shockley regard his work on race more important than his discovery of the transistor. Quoting his wife , the announcement say he continue to sift data and prepare paper on it until a few day before he died. Dr. Shockley have alienate many of his fellow scientist by stray far beyond his ken. He draw far scorn when he propose financial reward for the `` genetically disadvantage '' if they volunteer for sterilization. He sue The Atlanta Constitution for a 1980 column liken that suggestion to Nazi experiment in genetic engineering. In 1984 a Federal jury in Atlanta find that he have be libel but award him just $ 1 in actual damages. Dr. Shockley have also raise some eyebrow when , at the age of 68 , he contribute `` more than once '' to a California sperm bank mire in controversy for a project offering to pass along the gene of `` geniuses. '' William Bradford Shockley be bear in London on Feb. 13 , 1910 , the grandson of a whaling captain and son of a consult mining engineer. He grow up in Palo Alto , not far from the Stanford campus. He receive his bachelor 's degree from the California Institute of Technology and earn a Ph.D. in physic from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1936. He then go to work for Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill , N.J. In World War II , Dr. Shockley direct the Navy 's research on antisubmarine operation and return to Bell Laboratories in 1945 a director of solid-state physic research. His mission be to find a more reliable and small semiconductor to replace the classic vacuum-tube amplifier introduce by Lee De Forest in Palo Alto in 1907. The amplifier be the basic tool in radio and most other electronics. Trial and Error The team of Dr. Shockley , Dr. Brattain and Dr. Bardeen start out with the concept of the tubeless radio and proceed from there by trial and error or , a Dr. Shockley later put it , by `` creative-failure methodology. '' `` A basic truth that the history of the creation of the transistor reveals , '' he say , `` be that the foundation of transistor electronics be create by make error and follow hunch that fail to give what be expected. '' The team eventually chose silicon and germanium for their semiconductor and , in a rush of discovery , reach the breakthrough and success that produce Dr. Shockley 's `` magic month '' of 1947. The device , call transistor because they transfer current across a resistor , be build into a telephone , a radio and a television unit that Bell use in make the public introduction at a press conference in June 1948. In addition to his wife , the former Emmy Lanning , Dr. Shockley be survive by three child from a previous marriage , William , Richard and Alison Ianelli , and one granddaughter. Stanford University say no service be plan .