September 16 , 1989 OBITUARY Robert Penn Warren , Poet and Author , Dies BY THE NEW YORK TIMES Robert Penn Warren , whose complex poetry and novel draw from Southern life form an intricate mirror of the human experience , die of cancer yesterday at his summer home in Stratton , Vt. He be 84 year old and live in Fairfield , Conn. Mr. Warren , the nation 's first Poet Laureate , win the first of three Pulitzer Prizes in 1947 for `` All the King 's Men , '' a richly detail study of the life and time of a populist politician name Willie Stark , who begin his career a a champion of the people but becomes corrupt by the power they vest in him. The character be inspire by the Louisiana Governor Huey P. Long. Mr. Warren be also a respect critic and teacher who be on the faculty of Yale , Louisiana State University and the University of Minnesota , among others. Two textbook he write begin a pamphlet for his first class and become widely use in college across the country. Popularity and Respect After the publication of `` All the King 's Men '' in 1946 , Sinclair Lewis hail Mr. Warren a `` the most talented writer of the South and one of the most important writer of the country. '' In 1949 the novel be make into a movie , which win the Academy Award for best picture of the year. Mr. Warren 's work enjoy wide popularity , appear on best-seller list and a book-club selection , and they never lose the respect of the American Academy of Arts and Letters. In a 1953 essay , the writer recall grow up in a house with a grandfather who quote Byron 's poetry and a father who read history aloud to his child whenever he could. 'Only One Cockleburr ' `` Everybody know a thousand story , '' Mr. Warren tell an interviewer in 1981. `` But only one cockleburr catch in your fur and that subject be your question. You live with that question. You may not even know what that question is. It hang around a long time. I 've carry a novel as long a 20 year , and some poem long than that. '' He be a poet of complex work dot with philosophical reflection -poetry he know would appeal to a small group of readers. He be award the Pulitzer Prize for poetry twice , in 1957 and 1979. His longtime friend , the educator and writer Cleanth Brooks , say yesterday , `` He be a gentle and fine spirit , a valiant warrior for the truth , and one of our very fine poets. '' Mr. Warren be name Poet Laureate in 1986 and hold the post for two years. During his long career , he write learned article for magazine - one of which , The Southern Review , he co-edited - on such writer a William Faulkner and Katherine Anne Porter , and he make a textual analysis of Coleridge 's `` Rime of the Ancient Mariner. '' Mr. Warren be an influential figure in the teaching of English literature. His book `` Understanding Poetry '' and `` Understanding Fiction , '' which he write with Mr. Brooks , teach an entire generation how to read a work of literature and help make the New Criticism dominant in the decade surround World War II. It be an approach to criticism that regard the work at hand a autonomous , a an artifact whose structure and substance could be analyze without respect to social , biographical and political details. History a Springboard In an essay on John Crowe Ransom , who be his most important influence , Mr. Warren write , `` The problem at the center of Ransom 's work be especially modern - but it imply some history. '' The same sentence could be apply to Mr. Warren himself , for in his fiction , a in a good deal of his poetry , historical element serve a the imaginative springboard for the work. The current laureate , Howard Nemerov , say yesterday : `` 'All the King 's Men ' be certainly one of the great American novels. '' He also praise Mr. Warren 's poetry. `` He be reticent , ironic , reserve and perfectly charm , '' Mr. Nemerov say , `` and I love and respect him quite apart from his work. '' Ransom once point out the impoverishment of modern life and the handicap cause to a writer by the destruction of commonly hold myth that have be the heritage of the Western world. Mr. Warren make up for that by search out and find historical incident , folk tale and community anecdote that he exploit and expand in his fiction. Uprisings and Murders `` Night Rider , '' an early novel , use the tobacco war of 1906 in his native Kentucky , when farmer fight the tobacco trust. `` World Enough and Time '' center on the 19th-century murder trial of Jeremy Beauchamp , whose case Mr. Warren have read about in a penny pamphlet. The heart of `` Brother to Dragons , '' a lengthy narrative poem , be build around the brutal killing of a slave by the nephew of Thomas Jefferson for what they consider a slight to the family. And for `` Audubon : A Vision '' he find a threatening and sinister incident that he put to his own use. As for `` All the King 's Men , '' he once say : `` Without Huey Long , I would n't have write it. '' All these work , sometimes melodramatic in character , serve a large purpose : Mr. Warren 's investigation of the nature of honor and justice , of truth and freedom , responsibility and guilt. But because these inquiry impede the flow of the story , some reader be critical of the `` underdone philosophizing '' that they felt mar his books. 'Miraculous ' Rhetoric Even those who admire him complain of the obduracy of his style. Reviewing `` Brother to Dragons , '' Randall Jarrell write that Mr. Warren 's `` florid , massive , rather oratorical rhetoric be sometimes miraculous , often effective and sometimes too noticeable to bear. '' Arthur Mizener praise him for bring to the telling of a story `` the most penetrating and most beautifully disciplined historical imagination we have. '' But in review `` Band of Angels , '' Mr. Mizener write that the author 's `` brilliant and subtle argument spread speculation . . . over the imaginative life of 'Band of Angels ' like a blight. '' Many critic felt that these characteristic of his work have a more natural place in his poetry. In `` The Ballad of Billie Potts , '' for example , many say that the apostrophe slow down the story , but that the delay add to the suspense of the poem. Born in Kentucky Robert Penn Warren be bear on April 24 , 1905 , in Guthrie , a small southern Kentucky town that be part of the Cumberland Valley. It be a beautiful spot , Mr. Warren recall , `` a country well adapt to the proper pursuit of boyhood. '' He come from a literate family ; his grandfather , a Confederate veteran , be fond of quote from Scott and Byron and such verse a `` The Turk Lay in the Garden Tent. '' As a youth , Mr. Warren go to school in Guthrie and then enter Vanderbilt University. It be the decisive act of his life. There he encounter Ransom , Tate , Donald Davidson , Merrill Moore and others - `` poet and arguer , '' he call them - who turn him from the study of engineering to the study of literature. He later do graduate work at the University of California and at Yale , and go to Oxford a a Rhodes Scholar. On his return to the United States , Mr. Warren teach for a while at Southwestern College in Memphis and at Vanderbilt , then move on to Louisiana State University at Baton Rouge. Unprovincial Provincial Review There , in 1935 , he found and edit , with Mr. Brooks and Charles W. Pipkin , The Southern Review , one of the noteworthy and substantive magazine of it time. Though it claim to express `` the regional and sectional piety '' of the editor , it be far from a provincial effort and be read eagerly throughout the country. The magazine publish story and poem by Eudora Welty , Mary McCarthy , Ford Madox Ford and W.H. Auden , among others. It be disband in 1942 , after university official declare the magazine 's success should be define by whether or not it be self-supporting. The same year , Mr. Warren accept a professorship at the University of Minnesota. In 1950 he move to Yale , where he be name professor of playwriting. He leave in 1956 to write full time , but return to Yale a a professor of English in 1961. Although he never again live in the South , he remain the essential Southerner , with a keen sense of history and life 's web of tragedy , triumph , upheaval and peace. His attitude toward the region change over the course of his life. Early in his career he have contribute to `` I 'll Take My Stand , '' a volume that oppose the come of industrialism to the South and argue for an almost antebellum structure of society. Mr. Warren 's essay , `` The Briar Patch , '' defend segregation a the best hope for black to have a decent life. Later , Mr. Warren say he have be wrong. `` I remember the jangle and wrangle of write it , some kind of discomfort , some sense of evasion , '' he say in a 1968 interview. But in the 1950 's and 60 's he publish two book , `` Segregation '' and `` Who Speaks for the Negro ? '' that describe visit he make to the South to interview official and black leader about the civil right movement. And he acknowledge that he could not really return home again. Fierce Demeanor , Soft Voice Mr. Warren make his Connecticut home in a pair of converted barn surround by field he love to walk. He and his wife , the writer Eleanor Clark , work from 9 A.M. to 2 P.M. every day in their studies. To his friend he be `` Red , '' from the color of his hair. He be a burly man with a face that seem carve from stone. It be say he look like a man who be about to throw you off his land. But his voice , soft with pronounced Southern intonation , belie his fierce demeanor. As the year pass , Mr. Warren keep on writing. A collection , `` New and Selected Poetry , '' come out in 1985. New work take up roughly one-fourth of the book 's 322 page , and win particular praise from William H. Pritchard of Amherst College , who write in The New York Times Book Review that Mr. Warren be `` no one-note dweller on remembrance. '' Professor Pritchard write that his favorite poem in all of Mr. Warren 's oeuvre be one of the new one , `` After the Dinner Party , '' about a couple tarrying at the dinner table after the guest have go , drink the last of the wine and hold hands. It end with these line : The last log be black , white ash beneath display No last glow. You snuff candles. Soon the old stair Will creak with your grave and synchronize tread a each mount To a briefness of light , then true weight of darkness , and then That heart-dimness in which neither joy nor sorrow counts. Even so , one hand grope out for another , again. Mr. Warren 's first marriage , to Emma Brescia , end in divorce. He be survive by his wife ; a sister , Mary Barber of Maysville , Ky. ; a daughter , Rosanna Scully of Needham , Mass. ; a son , Gabriel , of Washington County , R.I. , and three grandchild .