September 29 , 1989 OBITUARY Ferdinand Marcos , Ousted Leader Of Philippines , Dies at 72 in Exile By JANE GROSSSpecial to THE NEW YORK TIMES Ferdinand E. Marcos , who rule the Philippines for 20 year until he be oust in 1986 , die in exile here today at St. Francis Medical Center after a long battle with heart , lung and kidney ailments. He be 72 year old. A hospital spokesman , Eugene Tiwanak , say Mr. Marcos die of cardiac arrest shortly after midnight. The former Philippine President have be hospitalize for nearly 10 month , often comatose. His wife , Imelda , be at his bedside. Mr. Marcos , an autocratic leader who impose martial law in his homeland from 1972 to 1981 , die without face trial on United States criminal charge that he plunder the Philippine Treasury of more than $ 100 million in his two decade in power. Barred From Returning Home In a statement issue in Manila , President Corazon C. Aquino , Mr. Marcos 's successor , offer condolence to the Marcos family. Mrs. Aquino announce that she would not allow Mr. Marcos 's body to be bring to the Philippines for burial , say she be act for `` the safety of those who would take the death of Mr. Marcos in widely and passionately conflict ways. '' The assassination in 1983 of Mrs. Aquino 's husband , the oppostion leader Benigno S. Aquino Jr. , be a pivotal event in Mr. Marcos 's downfall. President Aquino say Mr. Marcos 's death `` close a chapter in the history of our nation , a chapter uniquely his own. '' In deference to the Marcos family , Mrs. Aquino say she would leave it `` to others , and ultimately to history , '' to assess Mr. Marcos 's rule , which `` touch the life of every Filipino who be his contemporary. '' President Bush , in a statement issue at an education summit conference in Charlottesville , Va. , commend Mr. Marcos for his exit from power in 1986 amid a popular uprising and pressure from the United States Government after a disputed presidential election. By leave the Philippines at `` a critical juncture in his nation 's history , '' the White House statement say , Mr. Marcos `` permit the peaceful transition to popular , democratic rule. '' Mr. Marcos 's death be announce early this morning by his son , Ferdinand Jr. , who emerge from the medical center 's intensive care unit after recite a rosary at his father 's bedside , along with his mother and his sister , Irene Araneta. `` God have take this great man from our midst to a good place , '' say the young Marcos , 31 year old. `` Hopefully , friend and detractor alike will look beyond the man to see what he stand for his vision , his compassion and his total love of country. '' Mr. Marcos have be on the brink of death many time in his long hospitalization. A family spokesman , Roger Peyuan , say Mrs. Marcos have instruct doctor to take every possible step to save her husband 's life. Mr. Tiwanak say Mr. Marcos 's condition begin deteriorate 36 hour before his death. He say a pacemaker be implant about midday on Wednesday , `` and it appear his function be come back to some normalcy. '' Mr. Tiwanak say the pacemaker be need to keep Mr. Marcos 's heart pumping but he also note that because Mr. Marcos have `` multiple organ problem , any one of those could have go completely. '' Mr. Marcos have spend most of the time since he enter the hospital in intensive care. According to Mr. Tiwanak , doctor have say that `` if any one of the machine be pull off he would have died. '' Mr. Tiwanak say Mr. Marcos be semicomatose most of the time before the late crisis. Mr. Peyuan , the family spokesman , say Mr. Marcos open his eye and recognize his son , who have fly here from California , shortly before he died. Liver and Kidney Failure There be several phase in Mr. Marcos 's hospital stay when he appear near death. In mid-May , he have surgery to prepare him for kidney dialysis. In early June , emergency exploratory surgery be perform after an abscess be find in his pancreas. In mid-June , more surgery be perform to correct a bleeding stomach ulcer. In late June , his liver fail and he have a 104-degree fever , but survive to undergo removal of his only functional kidney , which have be transplant in 1984. Mr. Marcos become dependent on kidney dialysis for survival. His prognosis be poor , but doctor treat him with a new antibiotic. On Sept. 3 his blood pressure drop sharply. A Marcos aide , Col. Arturo Aruiza , say funeral plan be pending at the Nuuanu Memorial Park Mortuary. A family spokesman say the body would be on view at the family compound in Makiki Heights until Sunday. There be no plan for burial of the body elsewhere , Colonel Aruiza said. Mrs. Marcos have say in the past that she intend to embalm her husband 's body and display it in Hawaii while she await permission to return to the Philippines. F.A.A. Issues Order In Washington , the Federal Aviation Administration issue an order at the request of the State Department bar any aircraft with the body of Mr. Marcos from leave Hawaii or any other point in the United States for the Philippines. The F.A.A. say that `` such a return , or the attempt to do so , would create a danger to the safety of the aircraft and person involved. '' Mr. Marcos 's mother , Josefa , die last May at the age of 91. Her body have not bury , because her son have insist on preside at the funeral. Her body be on display at a museum in the Marcos 's home province of Ilocos Norte. After Mr. Marcos 's ouster from the Presidency , an inventory at Malacanang Palace in Manila find more than a thousand pair of shoe belong to Mrs. Marcos , 888 handbag , 71 pair of sunglass and 65 parasol - part of a lavish inventory that shock and offend the world more than any past estimate of the Marcos 's enormous wealth. Here in Honolulu , first in guest quarter at the Hickam Air Force Base and then in a hillside villa , Mrs. Marcos have entertain visitor with piano recital , video of her husband 's presidential speech and photograph of the couple in the embrace of world leaders. She recently record an album of ballad and be report to have sung at her husband 's bedside when he be alert. Mr. Marcos , his wife and eight others be indict in New York last year by a Federal grand jury on racketeering charges. In April , the judge separate Mr. Marcos from the other defendant because he be too ill to stand trial. Mr. Marcos and nearly 100 member of his family and entourage arrive here in February 1986 aboard two United States Air Force jets. One carry passenger and the second have luggage and other personal property that be seize by the United States Customs Service. The seized property be value then at $ 8.2 million and a bitter fight over custody of the item still be be wag in the Federal courts. The Marcoses have be live in a villa overlook Honolulu that be provide for them by friend , accord to Colonel Aruiza. The hospital bill for Mr. Marcos exceed $ 500,000 but Mr. Tiwanak say the initial payment be make through the family 's lawyer several week ago. Mr. Tiwanak say the hospital have be in touch with the lawyer `` to make sure they keep a current payment . ''