December 15 , 1989 OBITUARY Andrei Sakharov , 68 , Soviet 'Conscience , ' Dies By FRANCIS X. CLINES , Special to The New York Times Andrei D. Sakharov , the indomitable human-rights campaigner who prevail in official exile to become a relentless prod to the Soviet Union 's new congress , die apparently of a heart attack late Thursday after a long and weary legislative day. He be 68 year old and live in Moscow. The nuclear physicist and Nobel laureate be respect worldwide a this nation 's dissident `` voice of conscience '' through more than a decade of flinty resistance and of protest the Soviet regime 's human-rights abuse of it own people. `` I be very tired , '' Mr. Sakharov say Thursday in the midst of another characteristic personal battle , that time to see the creation of a genuine opposition movement in the Congress of Peoples Deputies. 'A Historical Figure' There , the brilliant scientist who lead this nation 's anti-war movement have sit in a sixth-row aisle seat , the good to arise in protest of some of the more imperious announcement of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev , the Soviet leader who free Dr. Sakharov from year of internal exile in the closed city of Gorky in 1987 , thus establish in a single stroke the credibility of the Gorbachev era in the Kremlin. [ A White House spokesman , Roman Popadiuk , read a statement praise Dr. Sakharov : `` Andrei Sakharov be a historical figure who will be long remember for his human-rights effort in the Soviet Union. His voice be an important dimension in the contemporary change under way in Soviet society. '' ] Work on Soviet Hydrogen Bomb `` I be go to live a I live before and pursue all of my activity , '' Dr. Sakharov say on his release from exile almost three year ago. He do so with a vehemence that reach far beyond the health warning of his physicians. He immediately demand further democratization of Soviet society from Mr. Gorbachev , ran for the new congress and begin a mixed relationship with the Soviet leader , support his overall program of change while complain regularly that too much power remain center in the Kremlin. Dr. Sakharov reach the pinnacle of scientific prestige three decade ago a a lead theoretical physicist and key member of the team that develop the Soviet Union 's hydrogen bomb. But in 1968 , he be remove from secret defense work after circulate an essay title , `` Thoughts on Progress , Peaceful Co-Existence and Intellectual Freedom. '' After year of similar protest over Soviet living condition and Kremlin political strategy , Dr. Sakharov be exile to the closed city of Gorky on Jan. 22 , 1980. The immediate cause be anger in the Government of the Soviet leader , Leonid I. Brezhnev , over his continued denunciation of the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan. 'There Are No Guarantees' That solidify his role a a moral individualist , because from Gorky he manage to issue continue criticism of the Kremlin. His release by Mr. Gorbachev be a landmark event in the era of gradual democratization still under way and still far from complete , an era for which Dr. Sakharov style himself part shephard , part hector. `` The slogan , 'Do n't hamper Gorbachev 's effort ' seem to be very popular with intellectual and our friend abroad , '' he say in an interview last year. `` But I think it be a dangerous slogan , dangerous for Gorbachev as well , '' he say , warn against the concentration of power the Soviet leader felt he need to bring about change. `` Today it will be Gorbachev , '' he said. `` Tomorrow , it may be somebody else , and there be no guarantee - we must be frank about this - no guarantees. '' It be just such anxiety about the lack of each day 's guarantee in this hard-pressed nation that drive him to his foot in the congress , ignore the jeer at time from the chamber 's majority of Communist Party stalwart , move to the rostrum to demand to be heard. There , Mr. Gorbachev felt oblige to yield the microphone. In the last such encounter on Tuesday , Mr. Gorbachev lose patience and cut short Dr. Sakharov. He wave a pile of protest telegram at the Soviet leader and go back to his seat warn Mr. Gorbachev about the need to end the Communist Party 's continue monopoly on political power. Sought East-West Collaboration Dr. Sakharov argue for decade that the East and West could collaborate on a good system combine economic justice idealize by Socialism with the liberty of real democracy. Once restore to his two-room apartment here on Chkalova with his wife and partner in civil protest , Yelena G. Bonner , Dr. Sakharov immediately turn to the case of dissident still in labor camp and psychiatric hospitals. He spend more than 12 hour a day in the current uphill fight to legitimize the principle of formal political opposition in this one-party nation. He also find time to draw up a model Soviet constitution , to call throughout the world to keep in touch with the human-rights cause , to look out into the nation for fresh arrest of civil-rights protester and keep some of their name before the public. Taking Gorbachev at His Word Mr. Gorbachev , realize how important Dr. Sakharov be for his own credibility , turn to him often , sometimes find qualified support that enrage more monolithic-minded Soviet emigre , more often elicit fresh complaint. `` Dr. Sakharov can still be count on to quietly terrorize his host with his integrity , '' an expert on the Soviet Union conclude when Dr. Sakharov begin his new role a an elected official. Upon his release from exile in Gorky on the Volga River , Dr. Sakharov say he would take Mr. Gorbachev at his word. `` He tell me to work for the public good - that be the formula he use , '' say Dr. Sakharov , who follow the request to the letter. In that he be often dissatisfied but usually optimistic. `` The time be change slowly and , in some way not at all , '' he say two year ago , before Mr. Gorbachev begin open the Communist political system to competitive election and limit democratization. `` But the change be real. '' -- -- Reaction From Relatives Word of Dr. Sakharov 's death reach the United States on Thursday night when Mrs. Bonner call member of her family in a suburb of Boston from Moscow. Liza Semyonov , Mrs. Bonner 's daughter-in-law who live in Westwood , Mass. , say Mrs. Bonner call about 6 P.M. Thursday to notify the family. Ms. Semyonov be marry to Alexey Semyonov , Mrs. Bonner 's son. `` I do n't know what more to say , '' Ms. Semyonov said. `` She do n't give any more details. '' Mrs. Bonner 's daughter , Tatiana Yankelevich , live in nearby Newton. Her husband , Yefrem Yankelevich , say family member plan to fly to Moscow today. Mr. Yankelevich say that Mrs. Bonner say Dr. Sakharov appear to be fine when he return home earlier in the everning. `` We believe it be his heart , '' he said. Dr. Sakharov suffer from angina , but during a visit to the United States in December 1988 , doctor at Massachusetts General Hospital perform cardiovascular test and determine that he do not need heart surgery or a pacemaker. Andrei Sakharov , 68 , Nuclear Inventor and Mainspring of the Soviet Conscience By RAYMOND H. ANDERSON Andrei Dmitriyevich Sakharov be one of those rare figure who appear at turn point in history , a man whose courage in fight for intellectual and political freedom impress much of the world but put him in long and dangerous conflict with his own country. Dr. Sakharov , a nuclear physicist who be haunt by the weapon he have help create , leave the prestige and orderly life of his top-secret research laboratory for the dangerous spotlight of a struggle against oppression , censorship , and threat to civilization from war and society 's destruction of the environment. In an early age , he might have be a Socrates or a Roger Bacon , challenge the establish order in a search for truth or secret of the universe. In the Soviet age , he be to be know a a dissident. For year after he turn his back on the Soviet establishment , Dr. Sakharov be criticize , threaten , insult , ostracize and then , in January 1980 , exile to the remote and close Volga city of Gorky. Call From Gorbachev Seven year later , when he be ail in body and seemingly break in spirit , he receive a telephone call from Mikhail S. Gorbachev , the Soviet leader bent on modernize the Soviet Union. Mr. Gorbachev tell the physicist he could return to Moscow and take his place in a change society. It be an appropriate decision , consider that Dr. Sakharov 's program for social , political and economic justice have become a key part of Mr. Gorbachev 's campaign of glasnost and perestroika. While he be in nuclear weapon research , Dr. Sakharov be virtually unknown outside the small circle of scientific and political leaders. In 1968 , he emerge dramatically in the human right struggle and become the movement 's inspiration and standard-bearer. After his return from the Gorky exile , Dr. Sakharov be widely refer to a the conscience of Soviet society , a man who have hold true to his dream and principle when others capitulated. He be allow for the first time to travel abroad. This year , he even get a seat in the new Congress of People 's Deputies , a legislative body for rebuild the nation. With usual bluntness , he give his view from the podium and win cheer from young , liberal deputy and jeer from the old conservatives. Patriotic Scientist In early year , in his nuclear weapon research , Dr. Sakharov collaborate with Igor Y. Tamm in a priority project after World War II to develop a fission bomb. The weapon be detonate in 1949 to the terror of the West. Dr. Sakharov then go on to play a principal role in the breakthrough to the even more deadly hydrogen weapons. The physicist look upon his work then a a patriotic endeavor , necessary to help his homeland build a deterrent shield against the grow nuclear arsenal of the United States. In recognition of his achievement , the Soviet Academy of Sciences elect him a full member in 1953 , when he be only 32 year old. His status bring esteem , a fabulous income for a Soviet citizen , a car and driver always at call , a large apartment in the city and a luxurious cottage in the countryside. Dr. Sakharov be also honor with many of the high award that the Soviet state bestow upon it distinguished citizen , include the Stalin Prize , the Order of Lenin and the unusual distinction of be a three-time Hero of Socialist Labor. He give it all up and for year alienate his own child , Dmitri , Tatyana and Lyubov when he rebel against both the nuclear peril and the Kremlin 's politics. Dr. Sakharov 's first know step to dissent begin in 1957 over the issue of radioactive hazard pose by nuclear test explosion in the atmosphere. Treated a an Eccentric In later year , he be to denounce social injustice , political arrest , censorship , distortion in the economy , weaknesses in science and education , alcoholism , poor health care and low salary that keep most people on the edge of poverty. At first , the Kremlin leader listen to Dr. Sakharov 's concern with attention and a degree of respect. Later , they begin to treat him a an eccentric but invaluable scientist whose whim have to be indulged. Even when he infuriate the leader with sting public criticism in 1968 , they refrain from open reply for four year , hop to persuade him to return to the nuclear laboratory. Vexed by his sharpen defiance and criticism of Soviet policy , include the December 1979 invasion of Afghanistan , and worry by his many contact with Westerners , the Soviet security police seize Dr. Sakharov on a Moscow street on Jan. 22 , 1980 , strip him of right , award and privilege and fly him to Gorky. That Volga city be a top-secret center of military industry , off limit to foreigners. There , he live in an isolated apartment , mostly without a telephone and under constant security police surveillance , harassment and threats. He be confine to Gorky for seven years. Support for the scientist in his lonely struggle come mainly from abroad. It take the form of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1975 , high tribute from world leader , scholar and scientist , and the emergence of a virtual Sakharov cult at Western universities. No Word for Two Years As time pass in his exile , apprehension abroad about Dr. Sakharov begin to fade. But it flare again in 1984 , when the physicist go on a hunger strike to support his wife 's demand that she be allow to go abroad for heart and eye treatment. Dr. Sakharov disappear in May that year , and no word be receive from or about him for two years. The outside world seem bewilder about what to do on behalf of Dr. Sakharov and his wife , Yelena G. Bonner. In July 1984 , for example , the European Parliament vote to send a delegation to the Soviet Union to try to visit him. But it turn down a proposal that a seat in it hall be leave permanently empty in tribute to him. As early a 1958 , Dr. Sakharov attract attention outside the Soviet Union when he and a colleague , Yakov B. Zeldovich , publish an article in the Communist Party newspaper Pravda criticize a plan by Nikita S. Khrushchev , the impulsive party chief , to compel high school graduate to work for a year in factory or elsewhere before be allow to go on to university or technical institutes. The two scientist insist that such an interruption would be particularly harmful to student gift in the sciences. What such student need , they insist , be accelerate study. Many of Dr. Sakharov 's proposal for emphasis on the scientific method and new mathematics be adopt by the Soviet educational system , although he get no credit. Shortcut to Forefront In 1963 , he be embroil in a controversy over the harm cause to Soviet science by Lysenkoism , the primitive teaching of Trofim D. Lysenko , the agronomist who maintain that acquire characteristic could be transmit to the next generation. This doctrine be , in the party 's view , a shortcut that could take the Soviet Union and it people into the world 's forefront , produce a new Soviet man and wondrous farm crop and animals. Dr. Sakharov support classical geneticist , irritate Mr. Khrushchev but help to break the hold of Lysenkoism on Soviet biological science. Perhaps the turning point for Dr. Sakharov come in 1966 , when he and other intellectual begin to worry about a move to revive Stalin a an authority figure. Their apprehension be arouse by the trial and imprisonment of two writer , Andrei D. Sinyavsky and Yuli M. Daniel , on charge of slander the Soviet Union through publication abroad of satirical and critical manuscript under pseudonyms. In October 1964 , Mr. Khrushchev be depose , and his successor , Leonid I. Brezhnev , Aleksei N. Kosygin and Nikolai V. Podgorny , be edge toward rehabilitation of Stalin. Heeded the Warning Dr. Sakharov and 24 other prominent figure , include Maya Plisetskaya , the ballerina , and Konstantin Paustovsky , the writer , send a letter to Mr. Brezhnev , the party leader , warn that `` the people would never understand or accept '' restoration of Stalin to a place of honor. The party heed the warning , decide on a more gradual approach to ease the stigma and shame evoke by Stalin 's name. In 1968 , a wave of dissident protest , repression and trial cause severe tension in the Soviet Union. A bitter conflict with China be take on menace form. Czechoslovakia be stir against remnant of Stalinism and be move fast along the road of liberalism toward `` Socialism with a human face. '' In 1968 , the Soviet nuclear-weapons program lose Dr. Sakharov. The high point of his fight against repression come in the summer , when tension be high in Moscow a the Soviet army and it ally prepare to invade Czechoslovakia. Look at the Perils In a 10,000-word typewritten essay circulate clandestinely hand to hand in the intellectual community , `` Progress , Coexistence and Intellectual Freedom , '' Dr. Sakharov take a long-range look at the peril confront the world - `` war , hunger , environmental pollution , stultify mass culture and demagogic myths. '' The only hope for the future of civilization , Dr. Sakharov write , be cooperation between the Soviet Union and the United States and an ultimate convergence of their opposing systems. `` Profound thought arise only in debate , with a possibility of counterargument , only when there be a possibility of express not only correct idea but also dubious idea , '' he wrote. `` The philosopher of ancient Greece understood this , and it be unlikely that anyone would challenge this today. But , after 50 year of full control over the mind of the entire country , our leadership seem to be afraid of even a hint at such debate. '' The essay call for a thorough investigation into the damaging effect of Stalin 's decade of dictatorial rule and demand that `` neo-Stalinists '' be oust from position of influence. 'The Only Guarantee ' `` Intellectual freedom be the only guarantee of a scientific-democratic approach to politics , economic development and culture , '' he declared. These be dare word in a Communist society under the tight control of the party and the security police. A Moscow dissident relay one of a handful of copy of the essay to a foreign correspondent , and The New York Times publish an article about it on July 11 , 1968 , and print the full translate text 11 day later , after arrangement have be make to get the manuscript to New York. The essay be broadcast back to the Soviet Union repeatedly by the Voice of America and other Western shortwave stations. The impact be profound and long-lasting. Around the world , people express amazement that such honest expression of conscience could come from a person bear and rear in the totalitarian Soviet system. Soviet official attempt to get Dr. Sakharov to sign an article already prepared for Izvestia , say the essay in by The New York Times be a fraud. He refused. Dr. Sakharov be strip of his top-secret security clearance. When he leave the party headquarters and drive back to his laboratory , the guard refuse to open the gate for him. Dr. Sakharov be transfer to the Lebedev Physics Institute but remain a member of the Academy of Sciences. He be penalize by a salary cut , but he still receive five time the salary of an ordinary worker. He be allow to keep his academy-assigned apartment and country cottage , and he be eligible until his exile to Gorky to summon a car and driver from the Academy of Sciences ' motor pool -sometimes , he once say , to drive him to dissident gatherings. Liberal Intellectuals Andrei D. Sakharov be bear on May 21 , 1921 , into a Moscow family of cultured and liberal intellectuals. This , he say , be a determining factor in shape his world outlook. His father , Dmitri , be a physic professor and author of a number of well-known texts. His grandfather , repel by a wave of hanging in the 1905 revolution , attract attention throughout Russia by a campaign to eliminate the death penalty. `` From childhood , I live in an atmosphere of decency , mutual help and tact , a liking for work and respect for the mastery of one 's profession , '' Dr. Sakharov wrote. He study physic at Moscow University , where he be quickly recognize a a brilliant student. He have just complete his third year when , on June 22 , 1941 , the Germans invade the Soviet Union. In a rare exemption during wartime , he be allow to stay in the university to complete his study in 1942. For the remainder of the war , Dr. Sakharov work a an engineer in a military plant and he win recognition for improvement in quality control. Peaceful Use of Atom In 1945 , the war over , he begin graduate study , and in 1948 receive a candidate 's degree , roughly equivalent to a Western doctorate. He then vanish for a decade , go off to the top-secret nuclear-weapons project in remote Turkmenistan. While there , he also work on peaceful us of nuclear energy. As a scientist , Dr. Sakharov be not require to join the Communist Party. The nuclear project be under the control of Lavrentii P. Beria , head of the security police until 1953 , when he be arrest and executed. Prisoners do most of the atomic project labor. `` Every day I saw the huge material , intellectual and nervous resource of thousand of people be pour into the creation of a mean of total destruction , something capable of annihilate all human civilization , '' Dr. Sakharov write in the introduction to `` Sakharov Speaks , '' publish in New York by Alfred A. Knopf in 1974. `` I notice that the control lever be in the hand of people who , though talented in their own way , be cynical. '' 'Impotence and Fright' He make a vain effort in the late 1950 's to persuade Mr. Khrushchev to cancel a series of atmospheric test and try later to stop what he term `` the senseless detonation of an enormous hydrogen bomb , '' whose fallout , he warn , would be certain to cause a `` colossal '' number of radiation victims. The bomb be detonate anyway. `` The feeling of impotence and fright that seize me on that day have remain in my memory ever since , '' he wrote. In 1963 , the United States and the Soviet Union sign a treaty ban nuclear explosion in space , the atmosphere and under water. Dr. Sakharov 's foreboding about mankind be ease by that treaty. And he be gratify that he have play a key role in persuade Moscow to accept the curbs. In March 1970 , the nuclear physicist , by now a world-noted dissident , be join by Valentin Turchin , a mathematican who later emigrate to the United States , and Roy Medvedev , a Marxist historian and unrelenting critic of Stalinism , in address a troubled letter to the Kremlin leadership , analyze failure throughout the Soviet system , include `` economic breakdown and stagnation. '' The critique be devastating. The three point to cripple policy error and red tape in the economy , technological backwardness , defect in planning and accounting , widespread alcoholism , censorship , imprisonment of writer , plundering of forest , ruin of farmland and pollution of water resources. Easing of Secrecy `` The cause of all this trouble , '' the letter say , be not the Soviet Communist system a such , but rather `` cruel distortion in the system cause by the antidemocratic tradition and norm of public life '' that appear during Stalin 's dictatorship and persist after his death. They propose an urgent program of democratization , a gradual easing of obsessive secrecy , amnesty for political prisoner , elimination of nationality designation in passport , reform in industry , education and the press , and gradual introduction at all level of multiple candidate for party and government posts. The proposal , which focus on the bad sore point of Soviet society , meet only cold silence from Soviet officialdom. Persisting in the struggle and turn more and more to foreign public opinion for support , Dr. Sakharov and two others , Andrei Tverdokhlebov and Valery Chalidze , who later go to the United States , announce on Nov. 4 , 1970 , the formation of a Committee for Human Rights , seek to implement in the Soviet Union the term of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. After the death of his first wife , Klavdiya , in the late 1960 's , Dr. Sakharov marry Yelena G. Bonner in 1971. She be a physician whom he meet at a dissident rally. He leave his large Academy of Sciences apartment and move into her modest two-room quarter , which they share with her mother. Nobel Prize Over the year , Miss Bonner give him support in his lonely battle , and she be to become the focus of wrath and charge that she have incite Dr. Sakharov to commit dissident deeds. In 1975 , at a time when he be under grow threat and pressure , the Norwegian Parliament 's Nobel Committee say Dr. Sakharov `` have fight not only against the abuse of power and violation of human dignity in all it form , but have with equal vigor fought for the ideal of a state found on the principle of justice for all. '' Stung by the Nobel Committee 's gesture , Moscow brand Dr. Sakharov `` a juda '' and `` laboratory rat of the West. '' He be deny a visa to go to Norway for the award. His wife , in Italy for eye care , go to Oslo and read his speech , in which he again stress the urgency of intellectual freedom. In January 1977 , a day after the inauguration of President Jimmy Carter , Dr. Sakharov send him a letter cite human-rights violation and oppression in the Soviet Union. He receive a reply through the American Embassy , but there be no further correspondence between the two a human right be overshadow by other issue in Washington. Afghanistan Invasion In the letter , Dr. Sakharov say a bomb blast in a Moscow subway car , which kill several people , be similar in purpose to the Hitler-inspired Reichstag fire in 1933 , which enable the Nazis to consolidate their rule , and the Stalin-instigated murder of Sergei Kirov in Leningrad in 1934 , which open the door to a wave of purge trials. In December 1979 , when the Soviet leader be try to stifle the dissident movement a the Moscow Olympics approach , they complicate their own uneasy situation by send troop into Afghanistan. Dr. Sakharov alarm the Kremlin by denounce the military intervention and urge the world to retaliate through a boycott of the Olympics. The response be swift. Security officer of the K.G.B. stop an Academy of Sciences car take Dr. Sakharov to a seminar , remove him and deliver him to a deputy prosecutor , who inform him that he have be strip of his state honor and would be send to Gorky , 250 mile east of Moscow. His wife be give two hour to pack and accompany him to the airport. In Gorky , Dr. Sakharov be keep isolate from the world. His mail be intercept , and most of his visitor be turn away by secret police agents. In 1984 , after he go on a hunger strike , all visitor be barred. Dr. Sakharov 's attempt to call friend and supporter from public telephone be thwart by the security police. Yet he manage to transmit a manuscript , which he title `` A Time of Anxiety , '' to The New York Times. In it he tell of a grim life in exile and reiterate his many criticism of the soviet system. 'What Kind of Country ? ' Five month after be send into exile , when he learn that a dissident friend , Viktor Nekipelov , have be sentence to a labor camp for anti-Soviet activity , Dr. Sakharov ask , in a stinging statement pass to Westerners in Moscow by his wife , `` What kind of country be this , cruel and without a soul , that destroy it best citizen and cynically break it own law and international agreement ? '' After Mr. Gorbachev intervene in December 1986 to permit him return to Moscow , Dr. Sakharov become an ally of the Soviet leader , speak out in support of the program for democratization. But he warn often against let any Soviet leader acquire too much power .