July 4 , 1989 OBITUARY Andrei A. Gromyko : Flinty Face of Postwar Soviet Diplomacy By CRAIG R. WHITNEY Whether Andrei Andreyevich Gromyko be a principal architect of the policy he expound over nearly three decade a Soviet Foreign Minister , or simply their loyal executor , remain a mystery shroud in his loyalty to the cause he serve so long. What be clear be that Stalin , Nikita S. Khrushchev and Leonid I. Brezhnev all find him indispensable in turn. But Mikhail S. Gorbachev finally find him an obstacle to his program for sweep change in Soviet internal and external affair and end Mr. Gromyko 's 28-year tenure a Foreign Minister in July 1985 by ease him upstairs to the ceremonial post of the presidency. Mr. Gromyko have be the instrument of Mr. Gorbachev 's accession to the leadership of the Soviet Communist Party in March 1985 , go before his age colleague in the Politburo then to tell them that it be time to cede the leadership to a young man. Later , after Mr. Gromyko retire , he write his memoir - revise them in 1989 a `` Memories , '' publish in Britain by Hutchinson - and say he have decide himself to retire a President in October 1988 because he felt old and out of touch. In April 1989 , he be drop from his last position of power a a member of the Politburo , in a sweeping purge of the old guard by Mr. Gorbachev. By that time , Soviet policy associate with the cautious Mr. Gromyko be be sweep aside with dizzy speed. In what Mr. Gorbachev call `` new thinking , '' one arm reduction proposal follow another , and the Soviet grip over Eastern Europe relax , allow Hungary and Poland to evolve in political direction Mr. Gromyko describe a counter-revolutionary when they first surface decade earlier. The Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan that he and his colleague have decide on in 1979 be openly deride 10 year later a a costly mistake. To Foreign Ministry at 29 Thus end an extraordinary diplomatic and political career that have begin in 1939 when Foreign Minister Vyacheslav M. Molotov call Mr. Gromyko , a postgraduate student not yet 30 year old , to the Foreign Ministry. In the year that follow , he travel to most of the country of the globe , meet and outlive the great statesman of the age. Present at the creation of the United Nations , he never miss a General Assembly session until he leave the Foreign Ministry. He be the first professional diplomat to be elevate to the Soviet Communist Party 's ruling Politburo , and he be one of the few member who do not drink , even before Mr. Gorbachev take over and decree abstemiousness a one of his first reforms. He be the able spokesman for many different Soviet policy over the years. He be `` Mr. Nyet '' in the cold war , the `` new Gromyko '' during the period of detente , and the dour and gruff exponent of a tough line in Afghanistan and Poland in later years. While Mr. Gromyko be new to office , Khrushchev , who have appoint him , tell a group of foreign ambassador , `` If I tell my Foreign Minister to sit on a block of ice and stay there for month , he will do it without back talk. '' As he acquire experience , Soviet official acquire more respect for him , and gradually the Foreign Ministry become his personal preserve. Foreign diplomat agree that he always seem to be in charge and superbly in command of his material. Mr. Gromyko 's career be closely bind up with the United States. In the spring of 1939 , when he be a researcher at the Academy of Sciences ' Institute of Economics in Moscow and learn English , Molotov have him transfer to the Foreign Ministry , most of whose experienced men have be eliminate in Stalin 's purges. He be put in charge of the American section , and six month later find himself in Stalin 's office , where the dictator announce that he be send him to the embassy in Washington a second in command. In 1943 , Stalin appoint him Ambassador to the United States. After the war , he move to New York for the first session of the United Nations , live at first in a Plaza Hotel suite. There - in the belly of the capitalist beast , a he later put it in `` Memories , '' translate by Harold Shukman - he confirm a view of America that stay with him all his life : `` Profit be the pitiless filter through which everything to do with culture and art and the country 's spiritual life have to pass. Only that which promise a return on capital can survive. '' Early Life and Family The future Foreign Minister be name Andrei Burmakov when he be bear on July 18 , 1909 , in the village of Stariye Gromyki , in what be now Soviet Byelorussia. The local baptismal and official record , for Andrei and nearly everybody else in the village , list the family name a `` Gromyko. '' His father , Andrei Matveyevich , be a literate peasant who have serve in the Czar 's army in the Russian-Japanese war and work at odd job around the village. After the war and the revolution , Andrei finish primary and trade schools. Later he attend a technical school near Minsk , where he join the Communist Party in 1931 , and , that same year , he meet and marry Lidiya D. Grinevich , a fellow student he describe a the daughter of Byelorussian peasants. The couple preserve an affectionate relationship through their long marriage , occasionally hold hand at diplomatic receptions. The Gromykos have two child and five grandchildren. A daughter , Emiliya , study history and later marry a Soviet diplomat , Aleksandr S. Piradov , an ambassador at large. A son , Anatoly , bear in 1932 , also enter the diplomatic service , serve at one point in the embassy in Washington and have be director of the Africa Institute of the Academy of Sciences in Moscow since 1976. The young Mr. Gromyko also study economics and Marxist theory at an institute in Minsk , then go to Moscow for the economics research that he leave for diplomatic work. Taking Care of Details During World War II , Stalin and President Roosevelt carry on Soviet-American relation largely by themselves , and Mr. Gromyko 's job then , a throughout his life , be to take care of the details. Yet he evidently have a certain amount of Stalin 's trust. In the summer and fall of 1944 , Mr. Gromyko help conceive the United Nations in talk hold by the United States , Britain and the Soviet Union at Dumbarton Oaks in Washington. He urge successfully that each of the major nation should have veto power , and after he become the first permanent Soviet representative to the United Nations in 1946 , he use it - 25 time before he leave the post in Juy 1948. But he also vote with the majority on occasion. In 1947 , for instance , he support the resolution for partition of Palestine into Jewish and Arab states. He have become a Deputy Foreign Minister when he be move to the United Nations , and in 1949 he become a First Deputy Foreign Minister in Moscow under Molotov 's successor , Andrei Y. Vishinsky. He often act a Foreign Minister during Mr. Vishinsky 's illness and vacations. This period come just after the Soviet blockade of Berlin in the winter of 1948-49 , and during the formation of the military alliance of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact , and later the Korean War. In 1952 Mr. Gromyko be send to London a Ambassador to the Court of St. James 's , and he be there when Stalin die in March 1953. Named by Khrushchev In the jockeying for power that follow , Molotov again become Foreign Minister , and bring Mr. Gromyko back to Moscow a his First Deputy. As Khrushchev consolidate his power over the next few year , Molotov fell out of favor , and in February 1957 , Mr. Gromyko become Foreign Minister. As long a Khrushchev hold power , Mr. Gromyko be treat like a lackey , but he bore the indignity loyally. In his memoir , Khrushchev describe him a `` a good civil servant who always go by the book. '' He make light of Mr. Gromyko 's professional thoroughness. A Western diplomat who meet Mr. Gromyko at disarmament talk in Geneva in 1959 remember him with awe. `` He have the American , British and French Foreign Ministers - Christian A. Herter , Selwyn Lloyd and Couve de Murville - stand on their head , '' the diplomat recalled. `` And Gromyko be speak in English at that. It be a real performance. '' Few of the great East-West foreign policy issue of the next few year bore Mr. Gromyko 's mark. Khrushchev be too colorful a personality. When the Soviet leader take off his shoe and bang it on his desk at the United Nations in 1960 , Mr. Gromyko do not follow suit. The bottom leave corner of his mouth turn down even far than usual , and he simply scowled. The Cuban Missile Crisis In American eye , Mr. Gromyko 's status sink even far during the Presidency of John F. Kennedy. In the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 , he appear to American official to be either ignorant of the fact or lie about them. At the height of the confrontation , after the United States have gather photographic evidence of Soviet construction of missile base in Cuba , Mr. Gromyko meet with President Kennedy , on Oct. 17 , but act a though he know of no missile emplacements. Robert F. Kennedy later recount the scene in his memoir , `` Thirteen Days : '' `` President Kennedy listen , astonish , but also with some admiration for the boldness of Gromyko 's position. To avoid any misunderstanding , he read aloud his statement of Sept. 4 , which point out the serious consequence that would arise if the Soviet Union place missile or offensive weapon within Cuba. `` Gromyko assure him this would never be do , that the United States should not be concerned. After touch briefly on some other matter , he say goodbye. '' Shortly after that , President Kennedy order a naval blockade to stop Soviet shipment of strategic missile to Cuba , and the Russians back down. Some think Mr. Gromyko never know about the bases. In his own memoir , he insist : `` Contrary to later assertion make in the West , at no time in our conversation do Kennedy raise the question of the presence of Soviet rocket in Cuba ; consequently there be no need for me to say whether there be any there or not. '' The debacle of this `` Caribbean crisis , '' a the Russians call it , be one of the reason for Khrushchev 's ouster two year later. Only after Khrushchev 's removal do Mr. Gromyko really begin to come into his own. A 'New Gromyko' The new collective leadership , with Brezhnev and Aleksei N. Kosygin soon emerge at the top , leave Mr. Gromyko in his key position at the Foreign Ministry. But the year after 1964 saw the emergence of the `` new Gromyko '' and of a foreign policy of a different order from the bluster , blunder and boast of the Khrushchev years. Diplomats notice that the usually dour Foreign Minister smile more often and even make a discreet joke. He seem to become more his own man. In these year , the alliance with China dissolve in ideological and territorial rivalry. Soviet control over Eastern Europe threaten to break up with the short-lived 1968 liberalization in Czechoslovakia but be reaffirm with the Soviet-led invasion. `` The Soviet people be under no obligation to ask for permission to intervene when issue of world peace and the freedom and independence of people be involve , '' Mr. Gromyko say later. `` That be our right a a world power. '' For all the assertiveness of that statement , the focus of Soviet foreign policy in the Brezhnev-Kosygin-Gromyko era be not confrontation but detente with the West , necessitate by the grow rift with China. A Rise to Stature Mr. Gromyko be entrust with the detail , the negotiation , the treaty text and the technical agreement that give detente shape and life. Loyally a always , he do the party 's bidding in this a in so much else , but he be also acquire stature and authority. It be he who negotiate the Soviet-West German treaty of 1970 in which Bonn recognize the postwar division of Europe , the existence of East Germany and the loss of the former German territories. Then , in a 1971 treaty with the United States , Britain and France , the Soviet Union agree to normalize the status of West Berlin. Talks on limit both side ' long-range bomber and missile carry nuclear weapon become the linchpin of the improve Soviet-American relationship in the early 1970 's and , at least for a while , be the basis for continued good relation even after detente come under strain. Mr. Gromyko become a closely identify with the process a Brezhnev. Most Western diplomat in Moscow come to believe that by the end of the decade Mr. Gromyko be as much involve in formulate Soviet foreign policy a he be in expound it. The first strategic arm agreement be reach after President Nixon go to Moscow in May 1972 for talk with Brezhnev. The negotiation produce a treaty limit defensive antiballistic missile system on both side , and another , expire in 1977 , limit offensive weapons. Elevation to Politburo Soon after that , Brezhnev and his colleague decide that it be time to bring Mr. Gromyko into the central decision-making group , and he be elevate to full membership in the Politburo on April 27 , 1973. With this great status , Mr. Gromyko go to Helsinki , Finland , in July 1973 to promote another Soviet diplomatic initiative - a conference on European security and cooperation to achieve the long-sought Soviet goal of Western recognition of the postwar division of Europe. The Foreign Minister 's authority hold , and a time go on and Brezhnev 's health begin to fail , the Soviet leader increasingly leave his foreign policy to Mr. Gromyko. The two travel to Vladivostok in 1974 to meet with President Ford on guideline for a second treaty to limit strategic arms. The real bargaining begin after the Carter Administration take office in January 1977 , with Mr. Gromyko by then the key figure on the Soviet side. Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance startle the Russians in March 1977 with new proposal to go beyond the Vladivostok agreement. But Mr. Gromyko call a televise news conference March 31 and reject the proposals. His remark be polish , touch with anger and sarcasm , a he accuse the United States of seek unilateral advantage. But he also say Moscow have `` enough patience to continue negotiation on all these problems. '' For more than two year , he and Mr. Vance meet in Moscow , Washington and Geneva to work out the detail of a new treaty , which be sign by Mr. Carter and Brezhnev in Vienna in June 1979. But the accord be never ratified. A New Freeze With U.S. The move into Afghanistan send American-Soviet relation into a deep freeze at the beginning of 1980 , and thus begin the third phase of Mr. Gromyko 's diplomatic career. About this time the leader of the Soviet Union begin to be cripple by age and poor health. First Brezhnev , in 1982 , and then his two immediate successor , Yuri V. Andropov and Konstantin U. Chernenko , die in office. Until 1985 , when Mr. Gorbachev come to power , the United States and the rest of the outside world have to go through Mr. Gromyko to deal with the Kremlin. And a personify by Mr. Gromyko , the Soviet leadership in those year be increasingly intractable and irascible , insist on a martial law crackdown against the Solidarity movement in Poland , reject call from a United Nations majority to pull out of Afghanistan , and rebuff President Reagan 's proposal to eliminate Soviet and American medium-range missile from Europe. After the NATO alliance decide in 1983 to deploy American medium-range missile in Europe to match Soviet SS-20 's , the Russians walk out of negotiation , usher in a period some fear would be a new cold war. When Moscow be ready to break the ice , Mr. Gromyko be the emissary , come to the United Nations in the fall of 1984 to meet with Mr. Reagan. Early in 1985 , he meet in Geneva with Secretary of State George P. Shultz to start a new framework for deal with space-based system and nuclear arms. Ushering in Gorbachev But Mr. Gromyko be to call the shot in those negotiation for only a few more months. In March 1985 , after Mr. Chernenko 's death , he take the floor in a closed session of the Central Committee to nominate Mr. Gorbachev a the new Soviet leader. `` This be a man of principle , a man of strong conviction , '' he said. `` I can personally confirm this. '' Revealing how the young man have run leadership meeting during Mr. Chernenko 's illness , Mr. Gromyko say of his ability in foreign affair : `` Mikhail Sergeyevich have speak out on many occasion , include Politburo meeting , on how essential it be for u , a they say , to keep our powder dry. '' He be report to have say of Mr. Gorbachev , `` Comrades , this man have a nice smile , but he have iron teeth. '' That July , Mr. Gromyko become the Soviet President. Mr. Gorbachev replace him in the foreign affair post with a man with little diplomatic experience , Eduard A. Shevardnadze. The move be a master stroke , at once honor Mr. Gromyko for his decade of service and end any threat he might pose to Mr. Gorbachev. From then on , Soviet policymaking in foreign affair be clearly the province of Mr. Gorbachev and the adviser of his choice -Mr. Shevardnadze and Anatoly F. Dobrynin , the former Ambassador to the United States. When Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev meet for their first summit meeting in Geneva in November 1985 , Andrei Gromyko be the man who be n't there .