June 19 , 1989 OBITUARY I.F. Stone , Iconoclast of Journalism , Is Dead at 81 By PETER B. FLINT I. F. Stone , the independent , radical pamphleteer of American journalism hail by admirer for scholarship , wit and lucidity and denounce by critic for wrongheadedness and stubbornness , die of a heart attack yesterday in a Boston hospital. He be 81 year old and live for many year in Washington. Mr. Stone 's career in eight publication , most of them left of center , span more than 65 years. Its capstone be his muckraking newsletter , I. F. Stone 's Weekly ( 1953 through 1968 ) and , after his pace be slow by a heart attack , I. F. Stone 's Bi-Weekly ( 1969 through 1971 ) . They be essentially one-man , four-page p and the people. Admirers of his informed skepticism praise him for courage and insights. Detractors acknowledge his integrity but accuse him of obsessive opposition to the use of power , particularly military power. Everyone agree that he annoy some people all the time and all people one time or another. Enjoying the Maverick 's Role The short , owlish maverick with dimpled cheek and major handicap in hearing and vision , be a tough-minded but pacifist gadfly , a tireless examiner of public record , a hector critic of public official , a persistent attacker of Government distortion and evasion and a pugnacious advocate of civil liberty , peace and truth. He enjoy be bar from background press briefing , which he denounce a `` usually brainwashings. '' He battle for many year to get a black admit to the National Press Club. He also differ with many liberal in insist on constitutional protection for Communists , declare that `` once you put ifs and buts in the Bill of Rights , nobody 's civil liberty will be secure. '' At the same time , he hail the American tradition of a free press , declare : `` There be very few country in which you can spit in the eye of the Government and get away with it. It 's not possible in Moscow. '' The primary grist for his profitable , 19-year newsletter be document rather than people. He read at least 10 newspaper a day and ferret out contradiction and inconsistency in the voluminous record of official Washington , use them to oppose McCarthyism , racism , the nuclear arm race , American military involvement in Vietnam and other issue he regard a stain on democracy. Sometimes It Was Exclusive Mr. Stone 's tenacity produce some important exclusive reports. One be his disclosure in 1957 that the Atomic Energy Commission 's first underground atomic test be detect not only 200 mile away , a the Government say , but 2,600 mile away. The Government 's assertion suggest that a test ban would allow the Soviet Union to cheat without fear of discovery. Mr. Stone confirm the lie by check with a seismologist at the Coast and Geodetic Survey. In 1971 , the combative journalist call himself `` a new Lefty before there be a new Left , '' but he repeatedly anger the new Left as well a the old. The controversy include his bitter denunciation of the Soviet bloc , where , he write , after a trip to the Soviet Union in 1956 , `` the worker be more exploited than in Western welfare states. '' `` This be not a good society , '' he conclude , `` and it be not lead by honest men. '' Mr. Stone enrage some reader by defend the Warren Commission report that reject a conspiracy in the 1963 assassination of President John F. Kennedy , by deplore violence by militant and by refuse to defend pornography. The Criticism of Israel The great outcry among reader follow his criticism of Israel. He visit the country many time and write two book eloquently favorable to Zionism and Israel 's fight for independence. But after the Arab-Israeli war of 1967 , he urge Israelis to compensate Arab refugee for their loss and to cede the occupied territory to them to create an Arab Palestine federate with Israel , with Jerusalem the joint capital. Assessing his newsletter , he remark , `` I try to bring the instinct of a scholar to the service of journalism ; to take nothing for grant ; to turn journalism into literature ; to provide radical analysis with a conscientious concern for accuracy , and in study the current scene to do my very best to preserve human value and free institutions. '' In his 70 's Mr. Stone learn classical Greek so he could read untranslated work and write `` The Trial of Socrates , '' publish in 1988 after more than a decade of study. The book , his 12th , take classical scholar to task for accept Plato 's conclusion , write nearly 2,500 year ago , that Socrates be sentence to death only for exhort his fellow Athenians to be virtuous. Plato a a Threat Without defend the verdict , Mr. Stone seek to show that Plato have fail to report that Socrates , his mentor , be regard a a threat to national security for assail the Athenians ' faith in participatory democracy at a time when their democratic government be threaten with overthrow by an aristocratic dictatorship. His early book include `` Underground to Palestine '' ( 1946 ) , `` This Is Israel '' ( 1948 ) , `` The Hidden History of the Korean War '' ( 1952 ) and `` The Killings at Kent State : How Murder Went Unpunished '' ( 1971 ) . In the decade after World War II , critic say Mr. Stone tend to put the best face on Soviet policy and the bad on American policy. But by the mid-1950 's he conclude that the Soviet hierarchy be compose of `` the same frustrating wooden Indians '' that people the American State Department. In a 1987 interview , he express grief over the ascendancy of those he term `` right-wing kook '' and deplore `` the ugly spirit of the subliminal message of Reaganism that you should go get yours and run. '' Mr. Stone 's longtime home facing Rock Creek Park in northwest Washington be a monument to the write word , with many wall line with book , floor to ceiling. Gazing at the volume , in Greek , Latin , Hebrew , English , French and German , he remark '' There 's so much I have n't read. There 's so much to learn. '' I. F. Stone be bear Isidor Feinstein in Philadelphia on Dec. 24 , 1907. ( He adopt the initial and add the surname Stone at age 30 ) . In his childhood his family move to nearby Haddonfield , N.J. , where his parent , Bernard Feinstein and the former Katherine Novack , Jewish immigrant from Russia , own a dry good store. The boy read widely and favor work by Walt Whitman and Jack London. He make his journalistic debut at age 14 with a neighborhood monthly call The Progress , which feature liberal editorials. This soon lead to job a a reporter on The Haddonfield Press and The Camden ( N.J. ) Courier-Post. The youth study philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania while edit and rewrite article full time at The Philadelphia Inquirer. He drop out of college in his junior year , but the university award him a B.A. degree in 1975 , make him an official member of the class of 1928. Through the year , he also receive many honorary doctorates. The New York Papers Mr. Stone be briefly a member of the Socialist Party , write editorial for The New York Post , be an associate editor and then Washington editor of The Nation and then write for PM , The New York Star and the New York Daily Compass. With the demise - The Star succeed PM , and The Compass succeed The Star , all soon toppling , one by one - of the three left-of-center New York daily , he begin publish his newsletter , with 5,300 subscribers. Cynics be astonish to learn that it be always in the black and eventually have 70,000 subscriber when it halt publication in December 1971. Mr. Stone 's wife since 1929 , the former Esther Roisman , be at time his only assistant on the publication. As they close shop , she say , `` We both feel we 're at the beginning of a new life and a new career. Izzy never look back. He have a zest for life , for every new day , that I 've never see in anyone else. '' In late year , Mr. Stone write for The New York Review of Books and occasionally for The Nation. Besides his wife , Mr. Stone be survive by a daughter , Celia Stone Gilbert , of Cambridge , Mass. ; two son wife , Mr. Stone be survive by a daughter , Celia Stone Gilbert , of Cambridge , Mass. ; two son , Jeremy of Chevy Chase , Md. , and Christopher of Los Angeles ; a brother , Louis of Glenside , Pa. ; a sister , Judy of San Francisco , and four grandchild .