November 6 , 1989 OBITUARY Vladimir Horowitz , Titan of the Piano , Dies By BERNARD HOLLAND Vladimir Horowitz , the eccentric virtuoso of the piano whose extraordinary personality and skill overwhelm six decade of concert audience , die suddenly early yesterday afternoon at his home in Manhattan , apparently of a heart attack. Though standard biography list his birth date a Oct. 1 , 1904 , Mr. Horowitz recently celebrate what he call his 86th birthday. Held in awe by aficionado of the instrument , Mr. Horowitz virtually corner the market on celebrity among 20th-century pianists. His presence hover over several generation of pianist who follow him. 'He Knew All the Repertory ' `` He touch every musician who ever hear him , '' the American pianist Murray Perahia say yesterday. Mr. Perahia , who be at the Horowitz home when he die , add : `` He know all the repertory and could play piece he have n't do in 20 year -- Beethoven , Scriabin , Chopin. He always counsel me to be freer , but he be upset when people try to imitate his style. He do n't like the term Classical or Romantic. He simply say to play from the heart. '' Reached in Tokyo today , another prominent American pianist , Emanuel Ax , say : `` I know people who worship Horowitz , a I do , and I know people who hat him. But no one be indifferent. He bring the idea of excitement in piano playing to a high pitch than anyone I 've ever heard. For me the fascinating thing be a sense of complete control , and on the other hand , the feeling that everything be just on the verge of go haywire. It never do go over that line , but there be the sense of an unbelievable energy be harness , and the felling that if he ever let it go , it would burn up the hall. '' The pianist Andre Watts say yesterday that Mr. Horowitz `` be like a demon barely under control out there on stage. '' Indeed , Mr. Horowitz 's playing of such standard a Tchaikovsky 's First Concerto and the Rachmaninoff Third electrify listeners. He be also famous for his high-powered version of Mussorgsky 's `` Pictures at an Exhibition , '' Sousa 's `` Stars and Stripes Forever '' and the Liszt Sonata. Harold C. Schonberg , long the senior music critic for The New York Times and the author of `` The Great Pianists , '' write : `` As a technician Horowitz be one of the most honest in the history of modern pianism. He achieve his dazzling effect by finger alone , use the pedal sparingly. Notes of scale could not be more evenly match ( his Scarlatti be technically fabulous ) ; chord could not be attack more precisely ; octave could not be sharp or more exciting ; leap could not be hit more accurately. `` No matter how difficult and complicate the piece , Horowitz would make it sound easy. And above all there be his stupendous fortissimo -- that orchestral body of tone that only Horowitz could produce. '' 'Colors and Contrasts' Of himself , Mr. Horowitz once say , `` The most important thing be to transform the piano from a percussive instrument into a singing instrument - a sing tone be make up of shadow and color and contrast. The secret lie mainly in contrasts. '' The Horowitz style be not admire by all. He be sometimes view with despair by critic who think his highly personalized interpretation ignore composer ' intentions. In the New Grove Dictionary of Music , Michael Steinberg write , `` Horowitz illustrate that an astounding instrumental gift carry no guarantee about musical understanding. '' The composer and critic Virgil Thomson call Mr. Horowitz `` a master of distortion and exaggeration. '' Mr. Horowitz be not overly worry by accusation of textual infidelity. `` When I sit at the keyboard , '' he say , `` I never know how I will play something [ miss text ] . The head , the intellect , be only the control factor of music making. It be not a guide. The guide be your feelings. Chopin never play his own piece the same way twice. '' At another time Mr. Horowitz say : `` I be a 19th-century Romantic. I be the last. I take terrible risks. Because my playing be very clear , when I make a mistake , you hear it. But the score be not a bible , and I be never afraid to dare. The music be behind those dots. You search for it , and that be what I mean by the grand manner. I play , so to speak , from the other side of the score , look back. '' The Evolution of a Myth Into Mr. Horowitz 's late 70 's and early 80 's -- when he make a heavily publicize and carefully orchestrate comeback in the concert world -- he retain the ability to extract color of either extraordinary brilliance or extraordinary delicacy. In his concert appearance during the 1920 's and 30 's , Mr. Horowitz 's ability to create excitement in whatever he do on stage make him an almost mythical figure -- a status only enlarge by his personal eccentricity and flair for attract public attention. Even his frequent retirement from perform have a romantic appeal to mass audiences. A man know for the frailty of his nerve , Mr. Horowitz quit play in public four time -- between 1936 and 1938 , from 1953 to 1965 , from 1968 to 1974 and from 1983 to 1985. This seem only to sharpen his public 's appetite. When Mr. Horowitz do play , he drive a hard bargain : his personal piano from his Manhattan living room accompany him ; concert be at 4 P.M. and only on Sunday. Advance team redecorate his hotel room to make him feel less estrange from the comfort of home ; his own food be cook to his taste. Mr. Horowitz 's last withdrawal from concert life come after a series of uneven performance in the early 1980 's -- one which he subsequently blame on overmedication. But in the last four year of his life , he become virtually a one-man industry in the concert business -- with a much-publicized tour of the Soviet Union , performances in Europe and America , all link with compact disk recording , videotape , television program and films. His return to Moscow and Leningrad in 1986 , after a 61-year absence , become a major medium event report around the world. Born Into a Musical Family He be name Vladimir Gorowitz when he be bear in Kiev , in the Ukraine , into a prosperous and culture family. His father be an engineer. His mother and sister , Regina , be pianist , a brother , Georg , a violinist. Mr. Horowitz alter the first letter of the family name for his Berlin debut in 1926. Lessons on the piano at home begin at the age of 3 , then formal training at 6. He study both the piano and composition at the Kiev Conservatory and in his early year lean more toward a life of composing. His musical talent be apparent from an early age. The Bolshevik Revolution in 1917 push Mr. Horowitz onto the concert stage. In the political upheaval , his family member lose most of their possession , and Mr. Horowitz begin play piano recital to earn money , food and clothing for them. He perform 15 time in Kharkov during the 1922-23 season with great success and subsequently go out on a 70-concert tour ( play 200 different work ) . In 1925 , Mr. Horowitz induce the Soviet authority to allow him a student 's visa for foreign travel , but on arrival in Western Europe , he ignore school and plunge instead into a two-year tour of Europe. Audiences love him and critic compare him to Anton Rubinstein and Busoni. Mr. Horowitz be bring to America by Arthur Judson , the all- powerful impresario of the era. Early in 1928 , Mr. Horowitz play the Tchaikovsky First with the New York Philharmonic under Sir Thomas Beecham. Olin Downes , then a critic for The New York Times , describe his reception a `` the wild welcome a pianist have receive in many season in New York. '' The performance , write Downes , be `` a whirlwind of virtuoso interpretation , amaze technique , irresistible youth , electrify temperament. '' The Many Cancellations This temperament contribute to his numerous retirement from the stage and the frequency with which he call off schedule appearances. One frustrated manager say that handle date change and cancellation for Mr. Horowitz be a full-time job. The pianist , Hollywood actor and all-round wit Oscar Levant -- also know for his high-strung behavior -- once propose a full-page ad that would read : `` Messrs. Horowitz and Levant wish to announce that they still have a few cancellation for next season. '' The pianist insist that he be not neurotic , only high strung , and blame his disaffection for concert performance on the rigor of travel. `` For me , play the piano be the easy thing in the world , '' he say in 1975. `` It 's all the thing around play that drive me crazy. '' About the same time , he say : `` I could play every day. It be the move that be the big deal for me. I have to take my own cook because I ca n't eat hotel food. I do n't eat meat. I 'm not sick. It 's just a belief. '' In addition to the cook , he also take along a machine to purify water. `` Every place have a different kind of water , and I do n't want foreign chemical in me , '' he explained. The first of his several withdrawal from the concert stage be engender by the 1935 season , in which Mr. Horowitz play nearly 100 recitals. Immensely fatigue , he have a particularly slow recovery from an appendectomy. For the next two year , he live in France and Switzerland , where he study alone. He begin to play again in 1938 , first in Zurich , then in Paris. In 1940 he return to the United States and renew his American career with a recital at Carnegie Hall. Playing for the War Effort In 1942 , he be the high paid concert artist in the country. Two year later , he be award American citizenship. During World War II , the pianist appear with Arturo Toscanini in many war-bond concert , and in 1945 he fashion his celebrated transcription of Sousa 's `` Stars and Stripes Forever '' for a patriotic rally in Central Park. After the war , he continue an active career , record and give concert throughout the world. In 1953 , he celebrate the 25th anniversary of his American debut with a concert at Carnegie Hall , later record and issue on a two-record RCA Victor set. Then he go into a retirement that last 12 years. Years later , Mr. Horowitz explain his disappearance to an interviewer : `` The doctor say that I be overwork -- that I need a rest. I think I would take a year 's sabbatical. It be wonderful. When it be over , I think I 'd take another one. I saw friend and play card and I talk philosophy and I read book and I listen to all kind of music. '' Ten year pass this way. Although several recording be issue during this period , include some of the pianist 's best , he be tantalizingly inaccessible to the public , and the Horowitz mystique grew. Mr. Horowitz begin to consider a return to the stage seriously in 1964. He begin play `` tryout '' concert for an invited group of friend at Carnegie Hall. Finally he announce a date -- May 9 , 1965. The ticket go on sale at 10 A.M. on April 26. A line have begin to form the previous morning ; by midnight , it have grow to 278 people , and by 7:30 on the morning of the 26th , there be 1,500 people wait in line for tickets. The night before have be damp and cold , and Mr. Horowitz , touch by the devotion of his audience , have send 100 cup of coffee to the wait fans. The Return Concert When Mr. Horowitz step out on the stage of Carnegie Hall , the audience rise to offer a stomping , cheer , stand ovation. The concert be highly charge but successful and be later release in a two-record set on Columbia Masterworks. He play a few select concert in the following year and record a television recital that be broadcast nationwide in 1968. Then he retire again. After shock therapy in late 1973 , which apparently revitalize him , Mr. Horowitz begin to give concert regularly in 1974. On Nov. 17 of that year , he play the first piano recital at the new Metropolitan Opera House at Lincoln Center. In 1976 , he make a rare appearance a a collaborative pianist , accompany the baritone Dietrich Fischer- Dieskau in Schumann 's `` Dichterliebe '' and play chamber music with the cellist Mstislav Rostropovich and the violinist Isaac Stern in a benefit concert for Carnegie Hall. Mr. Horowitz never do much teaching and , by all account , be not particularly adept. His best-known pupil be Byron Janis , Gary Graffman and Ronald Turini ; Mr. Turini be say to be his favorite. Other student include Alexander Fiorillo , Coleman Blumfield and Ivan Davis. In 1976 he announce that he would contribute his service to the Mannes College of Music , where he work briefly with Dean Kramer. However , when Rise Stevens resign a the president of the school , Mr. Horowitz immediately withdraw from the faculty. First Recording Was in 1928 Mr. Horowitz make his first recording in 1928 for RCA Victor ; he remain with the company until 1962 , when he move to Columbia Records. In 1975 , he return to RCA , where he remain until the mid-1980 's , when he begin to record for Deutsche Grammophon. This year , he return to CBS ( now call Sony Classical ) . His record cover a wide spectrum of music. A disk of Clementi sonata , record at his home in 1954 , be widely credit with help to establish a new audience for the composer , and he do much to popularize the sonata of Domenico Scarlatti. Peter Gelb , his manager , say Mr. Horowitz have be in good health recently. He have be record again , use the living room of his East 94th Street town house a a sound studio. Less than three week ago , he sign album at a midtown Manhattan record store. Mr. Horowitz 's last appearance a a performer be in the spring of 1987 when he play in West Berlin , Amsterdam and Hamburg. His last American concert be in the fall of 1986 when he play at Lincoln Center and help celebrate the reopening of a refurbished Carnegie Hall. Thomas Frost , who be Mr. Horowitz 's record producer for many year and make about 15 recording with the pianist , say yesterday that the last recording session with Mr. Horowitz be on Nov. 1. `` We have be work since Oct. 20 -- a Haydn sonata , some Chopin , and the Liszt-Wagner 'Liebestod ' be some of the pieces. Though we probably need two more session , I have a gut feeling there be enough more or less note-perfect material for a complete recording. We be very close to finishing. '' 'He Was Such A Communicator' Mr. Frost , who say that Mr. Horowitz have be play `` very well up to the end , '' remark also on the social nature of his recording sessions. `` He be such a communicator that he welcome visitor in the recording studio , '' Mr. Frost said. `` He hat to record in short section and would do so only under duress. His artistry be work out in the large details. The small detail come on the spur of the moment. '' When they din out together after some of the recent session , Mr. Horowitz tell Mr. Frost of plan for further concerts. `` He be look forward to a lot of activity , '' Mr. Frost said. `` There be no physical complaint ; his doctor tell him he have the blood pressure of a much young person. '' Watching over Mr. Horowitz 's health , as well a almost every aspect of his life , be his wife , Wanda Toscanini Horowitz , whom he meet in 1933 after an invitation from her father , the conductor Arturo Toscanini , to be the soloist in the Beethoven `` Emperor '' Concerto. They marry the same year. A daughter , Sonya , be bear in 1934 , and die in 1975. From their Manhattan home , Mrs. Horowitz take a central role in her husband 's activities. Mr. Horowitz settle permanently in the United States in 1940. Leonard Bernstein address a letter to Mrs. Horowitz yesterday that read a follow : `` I just hear that Volodya be dead. I send you love sympathy , but let me add my admiration for you and your long year of devotion to this amazing man. He be not only a super-pianist but a super-musician with all the mental fallibility such genius have. You care for him and guard him through a series of neurotic crisis the world may never know nor understand ; and you return him to u time and again , refresh , renew and ever greater. '' The White House say in a statement late yesterday : `` We be sadden at the loss of this world-renowned musician. We extend our sympathy to his family. His musical legacy will continue to live on. '' Mr. Horowitz be award the Medal of Freedom in 1986 by President Ronald Reagan , after the pianist 's return from his Soviet tour. Mr. Stern , the violinist and president of Carnegie Hall , reach in Tokyo today , reflect on Mr. Horowitz 's extraordinary career : `` How many musician can say that they have create a standard against which others will be judge ? It be not only the personality that be extraordinary , but his pianistic and musical accomplishment , against which piano playing in the future will be measured. His concert performance be extraordinary. `` One I recall in particular be his return to Carnegie Hall. In the Chopin 'Black Key ' Etude , the way he throw his hand at the octave passage at the end draw a giant gasp from the audience , which be fill with musicians. `` And when you saw him play close up , it be a if each of his 10 finger have a separate intelligence. Each move in it direction at the right time and with the right weight ; and he sit apart , observe it and control it from a central organism , without great effort. `` He will be regard a part of the pantheon of musician who influence their time , and who leave a special legacy that will be remember and think about by anyone who care about performance. '' Mr. Gelb indicate yesterday Mrs. Horowitz 's wish that her husband be bury in the Toscanini family plot in Milan .