January 7 , 1989 OBITUARY Hirohito , 124th Emperor of Japan , Is Dead at 87 By SUSAN CHIRA , Special to the New York Times Emperor Hirohito , the last of the World War II leader and Japan 's longest-reigning monarch , die today at the Imperial Palace. He be 87 year old. In his 62-year reign , the Emperor preside over the most tumultuous era in Japan 's modern history , although like most of the 123 emperor before him , he watch more than he acted. During his reign , his nation embrace militarism , conquer much of Asia , wag war on the Allied Powers , suffer the world 's first atomic bombing , and painfully rebuilt , rise in just four decade to become the world 's most vibrant economic power. Hirohito 's death come at 6:33 A.M. ( 4:33 P.M. Friday , Eastern standard time ) after more than a year of decline health. He have be confine to his bed for more than three months. Akihito Becomes Emperor Because Japanese tradition decree that the Chrysanthemum Throne may not be empty , Crown Prince Akihito , Hirohito 's 55-year-old son , become Japan 's 125th Emperor. In a ceremony as ancient a his title , Akihito receive two of the Imperial treasure - a sword and a jewel - and receive the Imperial seal and the seal of state. Shoichi Fujimori , the grand steward of the Imperial Household Agency , announce the Emperor 's death at 7:55 A.M. and reveal for the first time that Hirohito have be suffer from cancer of the duodenum , a section of the small intestine. `` The whole nation be deeply sadden by his death , '' the steward say , use a special honorific verb reserve for the death of an emperor. `` Despite the concerted effort of medical treatment , finally today His Majesty pass away from a tumor in the duodenum. '' The Emperor 's chief physician , Akira Takagi , tell reporter this morning that doctor have know Hirohito have cancer in September 1987 , after they have operate on his pancreas. But , he say , the doctor lie about that fact to prevent the Emperor from learn that he have cancer. In Japan , cancer patient be usually not tell that they have the disease. Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita , dress in a black suit with black armband , say : `` The sad news of the passing of His late Majesty the Emperor have leave me grief-stricken. Our sincere prayer for his recovery be in vain , and I be at a loss for words. '' There have be no official announcement of the date of the funeral , but Government official have decide that it will be hold 40 to 50 day after Hirohito 's death. This morning , the Cabinet decide to call a six-day official mourning period , during which all Government agency will refrain from music and dancing and will fly flags. For private citizen and private company , the Government be suggest a two-day mourning period. This morning , the flag outside the Imperial Household Agency be drape with black bunting. As news of Hirohito 's death spread , many Japanese throughout Tokyo put flag outside their home and businesses. An elderly woman hoist a flag to half-staff outside a sushi shop , radio station play classical music and a crowd gather near the Imperial Palace. A large contingent of riot police officer be deploy to guard against anti-imperial demonstration or the possibility that avid follower might commit suicide. No Shinto Rites Planned According to the Japanese television network NHK , the state funeral will not follow the Shinto ritual perform when the Emperor Taisho , Hirohito 's father , died. Because Japan have since adopt a new , democratic Constitution , the Government want to distinguish all the ceremony surround Hirohito 's death and Akihito 's ascension from the past , when Shinto be the state religion. But many tradition be be honored. This morning at the Imperial Palace , Mr. Takeshita , member of his Cabinet , the speaker of both house of the legislature and other official , clad in morning coat , watch the brief and ancient ritual that pass to the new Emperor two of Japan 's three sacred treasures. As Akihito stand on a white rug in front of a white and gold throne , Imperial Household Agency chamberlains bow twice , then hold up a sword and a jewel , wrap in embroidered cloth and tie with a purple cord. Another chamberlain then place the Imperial and state seal , wrap in purple coth and stamp in gold with the Chrysanthemum crest , before Akihito. He bow , and then stand a Mr. Takeshita and other Government official bow deeply before him. Then a chamberlain pick up the sword with both hand and walk out , follow first by Akihito and then by other chamberlain bear the jewel and the imperial and state seal wrap in purple cloth and stamp in gold with the chrysanthemum crest. Japanese be now mourn the end of an era : Showa , or Enlightened Peace , the title by which Hirohito will henceforth be known. That be the title chosen for Hirohito 's reign when he succeed his father , the Emperor Taisho , at the age of 25 on Dec. 25 , 1926. This afternoon , the Government say the new era name will be Heisei , which roughly translate a `` the achievement of peace. '' Chief Cabinet Secretary Keizo Obuchi , explain the choice , say the new coinage express the hope that `` both within the country and outside , on heaven and on earth , peace will be achieved. '' When Hirohito ascend the throne , his subject revere him a a descendant of Amaterasu , the sun goddess who , accord to Japanese mythology , create the Japanese archipelago from the drop of water that fell from her spear. Fueled by militarist propaganda that draw on these myth , more than two million soldier die in his name. 'Endure the Unendurable ' But on Aug. 15 , 1945 , that myth be shatter a his subject hear Hirohito 's voice for the first time. He announce Japan 's surrender on the radio and call on the Japanese to `` endure the unendurable. '' Now , he tell his countryman in a second precedent-shattering announcement five month later , the people be sovereign and the Emperor be not divine. Thus Akihito become the first Emperor to be instal since Japan be transform into a constitutional democracy under the American Occupation at the end of World War II. Eleven year old at the end of the war , the young Crown Prince diligently prepare himself to become Emperor in the new democratic era , study English with an American tutor and become the first heir to the throne to marry a commoner. The new Emperor be only the fourth in 120 year since Japan open itself to the world , abandon feudalism and begin it industrial drive under his great-grandfather , the Emperor Meiji. Hirohito 's long illness leave his nation prepare for his death. Until the last two year , he have be vital , pursue his avocation a a marine biologist , walk in his garden , and wave at the public a few time a year from the balcony at the Imperial Palace. Surgery in 1987 But in September 1987 he undergo surgery on his pancreas , the first operation ever perform on a Japanese emperor. He appear to rally from the operation successfully. But last year , he begin to grow thinner and have to cancel several public appearances. On the night of Sept. 19 he vomit blood , and the nation begin a tense , televise vigil. Crews of reporter camp out at the Imperial Palace , report his temperature , blood pressure , pulse , and respiration rate throughout his final illness. As the Emperor 's condition worsen , Government official cancel trip abroad , public figure put off wedding and other celebration , and city around the country cancel autumn festivals. For a while , Japan seem suspend in time , force to face the prospect of life without the only emperor most of the nation have ever known. As Hirohito linger , receive blood transfusion almost daily , his erratic blood pressure and other vital sign dutifully report several time a day , the public 's initial wave of emotion subside somewhat. This morning , Mr. Takeshita say : `` Our country have since pursue the realization of peace and democracy under the new constitution. It have achieve remarkable progress by virtue of the untiring effort of our people and have now become an important member of the international community. I feel most keenly that these achievement have be make possible by the presence of His Late Majesty a the symbol of the state and of the unity of the people. '' REAGAN SENDS CONDOLENCES WASHINGTON , Jan. 6 ( Special to The New York Times ) - President Reagan tonight extended condolence to the Emperor 's family and to the people of Japan after Hirohito 's death be announced. `` His Majesty 's 62-year reign span one of the most tumultuous , and yet at the same time constructive , era in the history of mankind - an age of unprecedented economic collapse , and most vicious war , astonish scientific achievement , and dramatic political and social change throughout the world , '' say Mr. Reagan , who add that he have enjoy several meeting with the Emperor , most recently in Tokyo in 1986. Saying the Emperor play a `` truly heroic role '' in bring an end to the war , Mr. Reagan add , `` We shall long remember him for his contribution which strengthen the United States-Japan relationship and set a future course of continued close and friendly relations. '' The statement be issue after the President enter Walter Reed Army Medical Center for surgery. Marlin Fitzwater , the White House press secretary , say no decision have be make on who would represent the United States at the Emperor 's funeral. He note that the funeral would probably be schedule for `` some period that would take u into the next Administration . ''