September 30 , 1989 OBITUARY August A. Busch Jr. Dies at 90 ; Built Largest Brewing Company By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr. August Anheuser Busch Jr. , the master showman and irrepressible salesman who turn a small family operation into the world 's large brewing company , die yesterday at his home in suburban St. Louis County , Mo. He be 90 year old and have recently be hospitalize with pneumonia. August Anheuser Busch Jr. , the master showman and irrepressible salesman who turn a small family operation into the world 's large brewing company , die yesterday at his home in suburban St. Louis County , Mo. He be 90 year old and have recently be hospitalize with pneumonia. He have be honorary chairman of the Anheuser-Busch Companies since his retirement in 1975. But he have remain active a the president of the St. Louis Cardinals , the National League baseball club he persuade the company 's board to buy in 1953. Mr. Busch , know a Gussie to virtually everybody who do not know him and a Gus to those who know him well enough not to call him Mr. Busch , be the grandson and great-grandson of the founder of the company that bore two of his names. The company , found in 1876 , survive Prohibition by move into widely diverse product like soft drink and automobile bodies. Born in St. Louis on March 28 , 1899 , Mr. Busch enter the family business a a young man and become general superintendent of brew operation in 1924. He take over a head of the brewery division after the death of his father in 1934. Although he do not become president of the company until the death of his older brother , Adolphus Busch 3d , in 1946 , Mr. Busch have already make his mark a a salesman-showman. To celebrate the repeal of Prohibition in 1933 , Mr. Busch recall the draft horse that have once pull beer wagon in Germany and pre-automotive America and obtain a team to haul the first case of Budweiser down Pennsylvania Avenue for delivery to President Franklin D. Roosevelt at the White House. Since then the famous eight-horse hitch of Clydesdales have become almost as famous a the brand they continue to promote. What be undoubtedly Mr. Busch 's great promotional coup be disguise a a civic duty - the company 's purchase of the Cardinals for $ 7.8 million in 1953 after the previous owner be convict of income tax invasion. `` My ambition , '' Mr. Busch declare , `` be , whether hell or high water , to get a championship baseball team for St. Louis before I die. '' He have a long wait. But begin in 1964 , the team win six National League pennant , most recently in 1987 , and the World Series in 1964 , 1967 and 1982. Savored Success Mr. Busch savor success , and he become a familiar triumphant figure to baseball fan in league playoff and World Series home game when he would ride into Busch Stadium on the Clydesdale wagon wave a red cowboy hat. He attribute the team 's success and the company 's to his policy of noninterference. Even so , he be active in the club 's affair long after he leave the company to others , and in 1982 he lead the campaign among major league owner not to retain the previous commissioner , Bowie Kuhn. Through the Clydesdales and the Cardinals , other promotional gimmick and a commitment to mass advertising , Mr. Busch turn a comparatively small and financially ail company into the industry giant. In his 29 year a the company 's active head , sale of beer go from 3 million to 37 million barrel a year. Last year the company produce 78.5 million barrel , almost double the output of it near competitor , and record sale of $ 9.7 billion. Its flagship brand , Budweiser , be the most popular beer in the world. Medium Stature , Loud Voice Through direct ownership and various trust , Mr. Busch own 12.5 percent of the company , or more than 30 million share of it common stock. At yesterday 's closing price of $ 43.375 on the New York Stock Exchange , the holding be worth more than $ 1.3 billion. The day 's increase of $ 1.125 a share represent a gain of more than $ 30 million. Trading in the company 's stock be suspend for 20 minute after the announcement of his death. Mr. Busch , at 5 foot 10 inch tall and 165 pound , be a man of medium stature , but he have a loud voice that be once liken to the roar of a hoarse lion. Fortunately for his colleague , he have a sense of humor about his own shortcoming , which include a hairtrigger temper. `` All right , you guy , '' he once shout at a raucous company meeting. `` Let me blow my stack first. Then you can blow yours. '' He also have an outsized zest for life , and both the wealth and the inclination to indulge it. Among other thing , his 281-acre estate , Grant 's Farm , include a cabin build by hand by President Ulysses S. Grant and have a 34-room French Renaissance chateau and a well-stocked private zoo , which reflect his abide love of animals. Mr. Busch train his own chimpanzee and elephant before donate them to the St. Louis Zoo. A onetime rodeo rider who later serve a master of the Bridlespur Hunt outside St. Louis , Mr. Busch stock his air-conditioned stable with several breed , include hackney , hunter and jumpers. He clatter his way into family legend one day when he ride one of his horse up the main staircase of the family residence to cheer up his bedridden father. Mr. Busch be marry four times. Two of the marriage end in divorce. His last wife , the former Margaret Rohde , die last year. His survivor include a sister , Mrs. Carl W. Gronewaldt of Cooperstown , N.Y. , and 10 children. They be Carlota Busch Giersch of Pasadena , Calif. , and Lilly Busch Hermann of St. Louis , both daughter of the late Mrs. Marie Church Busch ; August A. Busch 3d of St. Louis and Elizabeth Busch Burke of Middleburg , Va. , child of the late Elizabeth Overton Busch ; Adolphus A. Busch 4th of St. Louis , Beatrice Busch von Gontard of St. Louis , Peter W. Busch of Vero Beach , Fla. , Trudy Busch Valentine of St. Louis , William K. Busch of St. Louis and Andrew D. Busch of St. Louis , all child of Gertrude Buholzer Busch. Mr. Busch be also survive by 27 grandchild and 9 great-grandchildren. The funeral be to be private , and detail of a memorial service will be announce later .