May 31 , 1989 OBITUARY Claude Pepper , Fiery Fighter For Elderly Rights , Dies at 88 By REGINALD THOMAS Claude Pepper , the unabashed liberal Representative and former United States Senator from Florida who become a champion of the elderly in a political career that span 60 year , die yesterday afternoon at Walter Reed Army Hospital. The old member of Congress , he be 88 year old and live in Miami. Mr. Pepper have be hospitalize since April 6 , suffer from what a spokesman in his office say be stomach cancer. He return to Walter Reed Army Hospital a month ago after a stay at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. President Bush , in a statement in Bonn , call Mr. Pepper `` a gentleman , a noble human being. '' `` Claude Pepper give definition and meaning to the concept of public service , '' the President said. `` He fight for the poor and the elderly in his own determined way. '' Horace B. Deets , the executive director of the American Association of Retired Persons , say it would be difficult to find an advocate for the right of old Americans who could replace Mr. Pepper. `` There really be n't anyone on the American political landscape who could step into Claude Pepper 's shoe , '' he said. Mr. Pepper , who first go to Capitol Hill in 1936 a a Senator , help to pioneer lend-lease legislation that aid Britain before the United States enter World War II , co-sponsored a bill to repeal the poll tax and promote compulsory military service. He rise from his family 's farm in Alabama to become one of the more striking personality in American politics. Mr. Pepper , dub `` Red Pepper '' by some because of his red hair and fiery oratory and by others for his left-of-center political view , have a razor-sharp mind , a wealth of knowledge and a great flair for the dramatic. From 1929 , when he first enter politics , until his death , Mr. Pepper fight for the right of the elderly. One of his first act in the Florida House of Representatives be to sponsor a bill that allow old resident to fish without a license. And a he grow old Mr. Pepper continue to wage war against those he consider willing to take advantage of the elderly. At the age of 78 he vote for a law that raise the mandatory retirement age to 70 from 65. Supporter of Roosevelt In his Senate year Mr. Pepper be a stalwart supporter of President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal and World War II policies. When many legislator espouse an isolationist view on foreign policy , Mr. Pepper argue that the United States could not afford to turn from it international responsibilities. He be a pro-labor candidate who believe that a political leader 's role be to insure `` the right to a Government which in it heart want to be fair to every one of it citizen and which will see to it that every one of it citizen be fair to every one of his fellow citizens. '' Claude Denson Pepper be bear on Sept. 8 , 1900 , the old of four child in Dudleyville , Ala. , the son of a sharecropper. He be apparently destine to become a politician. One story tell of a 14-year-old Claude Pepper inform one of his teacher , `` Someday I 'm go to be a United States Senator. '' To finance his education at the University of Alabama , where he earn Phi Beta Kappa membership before graduate in 1921 , Mr. Pepper work a a teacher , steelworker , boiler operator and waiter. He enrol in Harvard Law School , graduate in 1924 in the top half-dozen of his class. Afterward he teach law at the University of Arkansas. One of his student , J. William Fulbright , later become a Senate colleague. Help for Older Anglers In 1925 Mr. Pepper move to the small lumber town of Perry , Fla. , establish a law practice. By 1929 he have be elect to the Florida House , where he sponsor his first legislation for the elderly , the resolution that exempt people over 65 from have to obtain fishing licenses. While in the House , he refuse to support a resolution condemn Lou Henry Hoover , the wife of President Hoover , for invite a black man to the White House for tea. After one two-year term , he be defeat for re-election. In 1930 he open a law practice in Tallahassee , the state capital. In 1934 Mr. Pepper challenge United States Senator Park Trammel but be defeat in the primary. But the race establish him a a strong statewide candidate , and he run unopposed in a special election in 1936 to finish the term of Senator Duncan U. Fletcher , who have die in office. Support for the New Deal Mr. Pepper , unlike most junior Senators , do not go unnoticed ; he immediately begin to speak out in support of the Roosevelt policies. His re-election in 1938 , a resounding victory over four opponent who include a former Governor of Florida , be consider a referendum on whether voter still support the New Deal. The next year , Mr. Pepper travel to Europe where he saw Nazism and Fascism first hand. He soon become one of the lead Senate supporter of American intervention in European effort to stop Hitler and Mussolini. He also continue to support labor program , assail what he say be the failure of big business to understand the need of workers. In 1948 Mr. Pepper be part of the early drive in support of Dwight D. Eisenhower a a Democratic candidate for President. But when Mr. Eisenhower decline to run a a Democrat , Mr. Pepper become an unenthusiastic backer of Harry S. Truman , who he believe be take too hard a line toward the Soviet Union. Loss of Senate Seat in 1950 Mr. Pepper 's liberal idea cost him his Senate seat in 1950 ; he lose a primary to Representative George Smathers. Mr. Smathers , a former protege of Mr. Pepper 's , depict the incumbent a `` Red Pepper , '' cite the Senator 's pro-Soviet stand and his friendship with former Vice President Henry A. Wallace , a third-party Presidential candidate in 1948 , as well a a picture of Mr. Pepper and Paul Robeson , the noted black progressive. In a statement issue a Mr. Pepper 's health decline , Mr. Smathers , who be now associate with a Miami law firm , call Mr. Pepper `` a great Congressman. '' The statement say that since his election to the House , Mr. Pepper have `` fight for the elderly of this nation a no other before him. '' Heavily in debt after his defeat , Mr. Pepper return to Florida to practice law. After a failed attempt to recapture a Senate seat in 1958 , he successfully run for the House in 1962 , win in a newly create district represent downtown Miami and Miami Beach. As the crime rate increase in Miami in the mid-1960 's , Mr. Pepper take on his first public advocacy role in the House , push through the creation of the Joint House-Senate Committee on Crime. He lead the committee until it be abolish in 1974 amid charge that it do little but chase headline and serve a a pulpit for it outspoken chairman. 'Mr. Social Security' In 1977 Mr. Pepper be name chairman of the House Select Committee on Aging , soon become know a `` Mr. Social Security '' for his ardent defense of Social Security and Medicare. He build a national reputation a the primary Congressional advocate for the elderly , introduce legislation to fight crime in housing project for the elderly , to cut Amtrak fare for senior citizen and to provide meal to invalids. In 1983 Mr. Pepper become chairman of the House Rules Committee , an influential panel that determine the scheduling and voting procedure for bill on the House floor. One of the last major piece of Mr. Pepper 's legislative legacy be a 1986 law bar mandatory retirement base on age. `` Abolishing age discrimination will offer new hope to old worker who be desperate to maintain their independence and dignity , '' he say at the time. Mr. Pepper keep extensive diary throughout his political career. Much of the text of his autobiography , `` Pepper : Eyewitness to a Century , '' publish in 1987 , be draw from diaries. Dramatic Changes in District Mr. Pepper 's Congressional District , the 18th , which take in most of Miami , as well a all of Miami Beach and such affluent community a Key Biscayne , Bal Harbour and Coral Gables , change dramatically in his year in office. The district 's population , once overwhelmingly Anglo-American , be now 50 percent Hispanic , with Cuban-Americans predominant. Although Mr. Pepper 's view be generally more liberal than those of many Cuban-Americans , he be careful not to alienate them , take stand in some area , particularly foreign policy , that reflect Cuban-American sentiment. For example , Mr. Pepper argue against the normalization of relation with Fidel Castro 's government and become a supporter of aid to the Nicaraguan rebels. Mr. Pepper 's stand on behalf of the elderly do not hurt him in his own district , where 30 percent of adult be at least 65 year old. Over the last decade , he consistently win re-election with more than 70 percent of the vote. Mr. Pepper 's wife , Mildred Irene , die in 1979. The Peppers have no child .