December 27 , 1989 OBITUARY Samuel Beckett Is Dead at 83 ; His 'Godot ' Changed Theater By MEL GUSSOW Samuel Beckett a towering figure in drama and fiction who alter the course of contemporary theater , die in Paris on Friday at the age of 83. He die of respiratory problem in a Paris hospital , where he have be move from a nursing home. He be bury yesterday at the Montparnasse cemetery after a private funeral. Explaining the secrecy surround his illness , hospitalization and death , Irene Lindon , represent the author 's Paris publisher , Editions de Minuit , say it be `` what he would have wanted. '' Beckett 's play become the cornerstone of 20th-century theater begin with `` Waiting for Godot , '' which be first produce in 1953. As the play 's two tramp wait for a salvation that never come , they exchange vaudeville routine and metaphysical musing - and comedy rise to tragedy. An Alternative to Naturalism Before Beckett there be a naturalistic tradition. After him , score of playwright be encourage to experiment with the underlie meaning of their work as well a with an absurdist style. As the Beckett scholar Ruby Cohn write : `` After 'Godot , ' plot could be minimal ; exposition , expendable ; character , contradictory ; setting , unlocalized , and dialogue , unpredictable. Blatant farce could jostle tragedy. '' At the same time , his novel , in particular his trilogy , `` Molloy , '' `` Malone Dies '' and `` The Unnamable , '' inspire by James Joyce , move subliminally into the mind of the characters. The novel be among the most experimental and most profound in Western literature. For his accomplishment in both drama and fiction , the Irish author , who write first in English and later in French , receive the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1969. At the root of his art be a philosophy of the deep yet most courageous pessimism , explore man 's relationship with his God. With Beckett , one search for hope amid despair and continue live with a kind of stoicism , a illustrate by the final word of his novel , `` The Unnamable '' : `` You must go on , I ca n't go on , I 'll go on. '' Or a he write in `` Worstward Ho , '' one of his late work of fiction : `` Try again. Fail again. Fail better. '' Though his name in the adjectival form , Beckettian , enter the English language a a synonym for bleakness , he be a man of great humor and compassion , in his life a in his work. He be a tragicomic playwright whose art be consistently instill with mordant wit. As scholar and critic scrutinize his writing for metaphor and ulterior meaning , he refrain from all analysis or even explanation. As he write to his favorite director , Alan Schneider : `` If people want to have headache among the overtone , let them. And provide their own aspirin. '' When Mr. Schneider rashly ask Beckett who Godot be , the playwright answer , `` If I know , I would have say so in the play. '' His great success be in his middle year , in the 1950 's with `` Waiting for Godot '' and `` Endgame , '' and with his trilogy of novels. It be suggest that for an artist of his stature , he have a relatively small body of work - but only if one measure size by number of words. Distilling his art to it essence , he produce score of eloquent play and story , many of those in his late year not strictly define a full length. But in term of the intensity of the imagery , play like `` Not I , '' `` Footfalls '' and `` Rockaby '' be complete visions. He write six novel , four long play and dozen of short one , volume of story and narrative fragment , some of which be short novels. He write poetry and essay on the art , include an essay about Marcel Proust ( one of his particular favorite ) , radio and television play , and prose piece he call residuum and disjecta. In his 80 's , he become an icon of survival. Even a he vow that he have nothing more to say , he continue to be torment and sustain by midnight thought and nightmarish images. Having discover what be for him the non-meaning of life and it brevity ( man be , he observe in `` Waiting for Godot , '' `` bear astride the grave '' ) , he never stop look for way to express himself. Once in write about paint he say , `` There be nothing to express , nothing from which to express , no power to express , no desire to express , together with the obligation to express. '' For him , that obligation be ineluctable. From an Outrage to a Classic Despite his artistic reputation , his ascension be slow and for many year discouraging. He labor in his own darkness and disillusionment , the equivalent of one of the isolated metaphorical world inhabit by his characters. When his work begin to be publish and produce , he be plague by philistinism , especially with `` Waiting for Godot , '' which puzzle and outrage many theatergoer and critic , some of whom regard it a a travesty if not a hoax. From the first he have his ardent supporter , who include , notably , Jean Anouilh , the bellwether of French theatrical tradition. He greet `` Godot '' at it premiere in Paris a `` a masterpiece that will cause despair for men in general and for playwright in particular. '' In both respect , Anouilh prove prescient. Today `` Godot '' be generally accept a a cornerstone of modern theater. It be perform worldwide in school and prison as well a on public stage and , in it Grove Press edition , be a perennial best seller. With `` Godot '' and his other play , Beckett influence countless playwright who follow him , include Edward Albee , Harold Pinter , Tom Stoppard and David Mamet. For more than 50 year the writer live in his adopted city of Paris , for much of that time in a working-class district in Montparnasse - a move that be to have the great effect on his life. Though he write most of his work in French , he remain definably Irish in his voice , manner and humor. Even in his final year , when he live in a nursing home in Paris , he join friend in a sip of Irish whisky , which seem to warm his bone and open him to great conviviality. Throughout his life he be a craggy and as erect a a Giacometti sculpture. When he be healthy , he take long , lop walk on Paris streets. In no way could he ever be consider an optimist. In an often repeated story , on a glorious sunny day he walk jauntily through a London park with an old friend and exude a feeling of joy. The friend say it be the kind of day that make one glad to be alive. Beckett respond , `` I would n't go that far. '' A Star in Studies and Sports Samuel Barclay Beckett be bear in Foxrock , a suburb of Dublin , on Good Friday , April 13 , 1906 ( that date be sometimes dispute ; it be say that on his birth certificate the date be May 13 ) . His father , William Beckett Jr. , be a surveyor. His mother , Mary Roe Beckett ( know a May ) , be a nurse before her marriage. Samuel and his old brother , Frank , be bring up a Protestants. They go to Earlsfort House School in Dublin. Samuel Beckett then continue his education at Portora Royal School in Enniskillen , County Fermanagh , and at Trinity College , Dublin , where he major in French and Italian. At school he excel both in his study and in sport , play cricket and rugby. He receive his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1927 and his Master of Arts degree in 1931. In the intervening time , he spend two year in Paris in an exchange program , lecture on English at the Ecole Normale Superieure. In Paris , he meet James Joyce and other member of the literary and artistic set. He be not , a be commonly think , Joyce 's secretary , but he become a close friend and aide , read to him when Joyce 's eye begin to fail. Beckett 's first publish work be an essay on Joyce that appear in the collection `` Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress , '' the work in progress be Joyce 's `` Finnegans Wake. '' His first poem , `` Whoroscope , '' be print in 1930 , follow one year later by his essay on Proust. Returning to Ireland , he teach Romance language at Trinity. He think briefly about remain in the academic profession but decide otherwise. He resign abruptly in 1932 and leave Ireland , return only for annual visit to his mother. ( His father die in 1933 , his mother in 1950. ) He wander from England to France to Germany before move to Paris permanently in 1937. By that time he have publish `` More Pricks Than Kicks , '' a collection of short story ; `` Echo 's Bones , '' a volume of poetry , and `` Murphy , '' his first novel. Written in English , a be all his work at the time , `` Murphy '' be about an Irishman in London who try to remove himself gradually from the visible world. Settling down in Paris , Beckett become a familiar figure at Left Bank cafe , continue his alliance with Joyce while also become friend with artist like Marcel Duchamp ( with whom he play chess ) and Alberto Giacometti. At this time he become involved with Peggy Guggenheim , who nickname him Oblomov after the title character in the Ivan Goncharov novel , a man who Miss Guggenheim say be so overcome by apathy that he `` finally do not even have the willpower to get out of bed. '' In 1938 , while walk with friend on a Paris street , he be stab with a knife by a panhandler. A young piano student name Suzanne Deschevaux-Dumesnil come to his rescue and telephone for an ambulance. One of his lung be perforate and the knife narrowly miss his heart. Beckett fully recover from the wound but it leave psychological scars. After he recover , he visit his assailant in prison and ask him the reason for the assault. The man reply , `` Je ne sais pa , Monsieur. '' More than ever , Beckett become aware of the randomness of life. The episode have one other long-ranging effect : He begin a lifelong relationship with Miss Deschevaux-Dumesnil , whom he marry in Folkestone , England , in 1961. A Hero of the Resistance With her , he choose to remain in France during World War II rather than return to the safety of Ireland. Both become active in the French Resistance. Forced to flee Paris , the couple go to Roussillon near the Spanish border. While work a a farm laborer and running message for the Resistance , Beckett write the novel `` Watt. '' It be often say that his experience in hide during the war be an inspiration for `` Waiting for Godot '' and for the novel `` Mercier and Camier. '' At the end of the war he work at the Irish Red Cross field hospital in St.-Lo. For his heroic service he be later award the Croix de Guerre and the Medaille de Resistance. After `` Watt , '' he begin write in French , which allow him , a the Joyce biographer Richard Ellman observe , `` a private liberation from the English tradition. '' The five year start in 1947 be his most intense creative period , produce most of his major work. That year he write his first play , `` Eleutheria , '' and begin the novel `` Molloy. '' They be follow by `` Waiting for Godot , '' which he write in longhand in a composition book. It take him four months. In a little more than a year he have finish his great play as well a the first two part of his trilogy of novel ( `` Molloy '' and `` Malone Dies '' ) . The 3 Openings of 'Godot' Though he find a publisher for the trilogy ( Jerome Lindon at Editions de Minuit , who remain his French publisher for the rest of his life ) , the play be more difficult to place. Miss Deschevaux-Dumesnil take them from producer to producer , a thankless route that the playwright once compare to give the play to a concierge. Then Roger Blin , the French actor and director , agree to present one. He choose `` Godot '' over `` Eleutheria '' partly because it have few characters. At Beckett 's behest , `` Eleutheria '' be never produce in his lifetime. It be only when `` Waiting for Godot '' be in rehearsal , with Beckett in attendance , that Blin fully realize the excitement of his discovery. `` En Attendant Godot , '' a the play be title , open on Jan. 5 , 1953 , at the Theatre de Babylone , and , begin a lifetime practice , the author do not attend. The first review , write by Sylvain Zegel in La Liberation , say Beckett be `` one of today 's best playwright , '' a fact that be not universally acknowledged. The first London production , use the playwright 's English translation and direct by Peter Hall , receive generally dismissive daily reviews. It be rescue by Harold Hobson , then the drama critic of The Sunday Times in London , who say the play might `` securely lodge in a corner of your mind as long a you live. '' In January 1956 , Michael Myerberg open the first United States production at the Coconut Grove Playhouse in Miami , with Bert Lahr and Tom Ewell cast in the lead role a those Beckett tramp , Estragon and Vladimir. Expecting a Bert Lahr comedy , the audience be mystified. As Alan Schneider , the director of that original production , say , do `` Godot '' in Miami be like dance `` Giselle '' in Roseland. With both the director and Mr. Ewell replace , the play move to Broadway in April. With the exception of Eric Bentley and a few others , the critic be confounded. Several be abusive. Despite the producer 's vainglorious advertising campaign to draw intellectual into the theater , the play close after 59 performances. What 'Godot ' Wrought That `` Waiting for Godot '' become a contemporary classic can be attribute to the enthusiasm of it champion and to the profundity of the work itself , which become more apparent with subsequent productions. `` Godot '' come to be regard not only a a clown comedy with tragic dimension but a a play about man cop with the nature of his existence in a world that appear to be hurtle toward a self-induced apocalypse. Before `` Godot '' be produce in London , Beckett complete a second play , `` Fin de Partie , '' or `` Endgame , '' a the title be translated. In this dramatic equivalent of chess , Hamm the master oppress Clov the servant in a bunker look out on the void of the world. `` Endgame '' be follow by the radio play `` All That Fall '' and by the monodrama `` Krapp 's Last Tape , '' write for the actor Patrick Magee. In 1961 after he and Miss Deschevaux-Dumesnil be marry , he finish `` Happy Days , '' about a long and not always happy marriage , in which a woman be bury up to her neck in earth. In 1964 he make his only trip to the United States for the filming of `` Film , '' the short Beckett movie that Mr. Schneider make with Buster Keaton. Uncomfortable in the hot July weather in New York , he be eager to return to Paris. About the same time , he write a number of stage , television and radio play , include `` Play '' ( in which three character be encase in urn ) , `` Cascando '' and `` Eh Joe , '' as well a the narrative fragment `` Imagination Dead Imagine. '' In 1969 he be award the Nobel Prize in literature for a body of work that `` have transform the destitution of man into his exaltation. '' Karl Ragnar Gierow , secretary of the Swedish Academy , say his write `` rise like a Miserere from all mankind , it muffle minor key sound liberation to the oppress and comfort to those in need. '' He be on holiday in Morocco at the time of the Nobel announcement and in characteristic fashion offer no public statement and refuse to attend the ceremony. He send his publisher in his stead. Reportedly he give his prize money of $ 72,800 to needy artists. As undeterred by the acclaim a he have be by his year of obscurity , he continue to write and to maintain his privacy. His play and prose become short and even terse , a in `` Not I , '' in which the play 's principal character be a woman 's heavily lipstick mouth ; `` That Time , '' in which a spotlight shine on a man 's head and his corona of white hair , and `` Rockaby , '' in which an old woman rock herself to death. In these play he choose to deal with what he call `` the battle of the soliloquy , '' sift the past and endure the continuum of life. Two of his prose piece , `` Company '' and `` Worstward Ho , '' be publish a short novels. On occasion he would visit London to supervise a production or Germany , where he frequently work on television play and where he stag a definitive German-language version of `` Waiting for Godot. '' During Beckett 's lifetime he have many close collaboration with actor ( Jack MacGowran , Patrick Magee , Billie Whitelaw , David Warrilow ) and with several director , especially with Mr. Schneider , who stag most of the American premiere of his plays. When Mr. Schneider be kill in a London traffic accident in 1984 , it be a blow for the playwright. In the same year , the New York Drama Critics Circle award him a special citation in recognition of his body of work and in particular for two evening of Beckett short play produce that season in New York. One of those play be `` Catastrophe , '' write for Vaclav Havel. It be for Beckett a rare political work about the interrogation of a dissident. In Beckett 's late year , director stag his radio play or adapt his prose to the stage. Mabou Mines offer dramatization of `` The Lost Ones , '' `` Mercier and Camier '' and `` Company. '' Though Beckett be liberal about allow adaptation of his prose , he be scrupulous in demand absolute fidelity to the stage direction as well a to the dialogue in his plays. In 1985 , JoAnne Akalaitis , a director with Mabou Mines , change the setting of `` Endgame '' from a bare interior to an abandon subway station. Through representative , Beckett issue a formal complaint against the production at the American Repertory Theater in Boston , and his objection appear in the play 's program. A Life 'Devoid of Interest' On his 80th birthday in 1986 , Beckett be celebrate in several cities. In Paris there be a citywide festival of play and symposium and in New York there be a week of panel and lecture analyze his art. As usual , he keep his silence , a in the characteristic note he send to those who approach him about write his biography. He say that his life be `` devoid of interest. '' He steadfastly maintain his routine through his late years. He live on the Boulevard St. Jacques in an apartment adjoin that of his wife and overlook the exercise yard of the Sante prison. Periodically he visit his country house , some 60 mile outside Paris. He make daily trip to a neighborhood cafe where he meet friend , have a double espresso and smoke several of his thin dark cigarettes. Periodically he write brief play and small prose pieces. Around him and without his encouragement , his reputation grow unbounded. The Mike Nichols revival of `` Waiting for Godot '' at Lincoln Center in 1988 be an event of magnitude , draw together the diverse talent of Steve Martin , Robin Williams and Bill Irwin and sell out for it entire engagement. This year there be a festival of Beckett radio play on National Public Radio , remind his audience that this be still another form that he have mastered. About a year ago , after fall in his apartment , he move to a nearby nursing home , where he continue to receive visitors. He live his last year in a small , barely furnished room. He have a television set on which he continue to watch major tennis and soccer event , and several book , include his boyhood copy of Dante 's `` Divine Comedy '' in Italian. On July 17 this year , his wife die and he leave the nursing home to attend the funeral. Late this year , after he become ill , he be move to a hospital. There be no immediate survivors. His last work to be print in his lifetime be `` Stirrings Still , '' a short prose piece publish in a limited edition on his 83d birthday. In it , a character who resemble the author sit alone in a cell-like room until he see his double appear - and then disappear. Accompanied by `` time and grief and self so-called , '' he find himself `` stir still '' to the end. Principal Works Most of Samuel Beckett 's play and fiction be publish in the United States by Grove Press and in France by Editions de Minuit of Paris. In Britain most of his play have be publish by Faber & Faber and his fiction by John Calder. These be among his principal work : Plays Waiting for Godot Endgame All That Fall Krapp 's Last Tape Happy Days Words and Music Play Not I That Time Footfalls A Piece of Monologue Rockaby Ohio Impromptu Catastrophe Prose More Pricks Than Kicks Murphy Watt Molloy Malone Dies The Unnamable Company Ill Seen Ill Said Worstward Ho Poetry Whoroscope Echo's Bones