April 16 , 1990 OBITUARY Greta Garbo , 84 , Screen Icon Who Fled Her Stardom , Dies By THE NEW YORK TIMES Greta Garbo , the enigmatic and elusive star of some of Hollywood 's most memorable romantic movie of the 1930 's and a 50-year focus of curiosity and myth , die yesterday at New York Hospital in Manhattan. She be 84 year old. A hospital spokesman , Andrew Banoff , say he be respect the wish of the family , provide no detail of her death , and say service would be private. The Swedish-born actress have a classic beauty and a natural talent for convey deep emotion before a camera. Her performance in such classic a `` Anna Christie , '' `` Grand Hotel , '' `` Queen Christina , '' `` Anna Karenina , '' `` Camille '' and `` Ninotchka '' be an arrest mix of urbaneness and vulnerability , with a glint of mockery. The Screen 's Great Sufferer The fine element in a Garbo film be Garbo. She invariably play a disillusioned woman of the world who fall hopelessly and giddily in love. Tragedy be often imminent , and her tarnished-lady role usually require her to die or otherwise give up her lover. No one could suffer like Garbo. Mysterious and aloof , she appeal to both men and woman , and she exert a major influence on woman 's fashion , hair style and makeup. On screen and off , she be a remote figure of loveliness. Garbo 's career span only 19 years. In 1941 , at the age of 36 , she make the last of her 27 movie , a slight comedy call `` Two Faced Woman. '' She go into what be to be temporary retirement , but she never return to the screen. Yet generation later , her best movie be show on television , in sold-out retrospective and in revival house , and she remain one of the great screen actress , evergreen , eternally young. In the 1930 's she be call `` the screen 's first lady , '' the standard against whom others be judged. Andre Sennwald write in The New York Times that she be `` the most miraculous blend of personality the screen have ever seen. '' Alistair Cooke term her `` every man 's fantasy mistress. '' The French call her `` La Divine. '' And Kenneth Tynan conclude , `` What when drunk one see in other woman , one see in Garbo sober. '' For more than half a century , the actress remain an enigma , `` the Swedish sphinx , '' because of her deep fear of reporter and other stranger and her insistence on guard her privacy. Ironically , in seek to avoid publicity , she become one of the most publicized woman in the world. Her penchant for privacy break all of Hollywood 's rule , say her biographer , John Bainbridge. Except at the start of her career , he write in `` Garbo , '' she `` grant no interview , sign no autograph , attend no premiere , answer no fan mail. '' A declaration often attribute to her be , `` I want to be alone. '' Actually she say , `` I want to be let alone. '' Her screen image be exotic and inscrutable , while her private life be simple , even mundane. In a rare statement to reporters she acknowledge , `` I feel able to express myself only through my role , not in word , and that be why I try to avoid talk to the press. '' Garbo 's aloofness frustrate the press , which publish thousand of photograph of her frantically clutch a drooping hat over her face a she shop or race for a train , ship or plane. Speculations About Her Escorts Her presumed love affair - she be never know to have marry - be the subject of voluminous gossip and speculation. Over the decade her frequent escort include the actor John Gilbert ; the conductor Leopold Stokowski ; the nutrition theorist Gayelord Hauser ; Baron Erich Goldschmidt-Rothschild , an art connoisseur , and George Schlee , a figure in haute couture. Garbo 's movie earn her more than $ 3 million , a record at a time of low income tax , and her frugality and astute investment , particularly in Manhattan real estate , increase her wealth. Her life have begin in virtual poverty. Greta Lovisa Gustafsson be bear in Stockholm on Sept. 18 , 1905 , the daughter of Karl Alfred and Anna Lovisa Gustafsson. Her father be an unskilled laborer of peasant stock who be often out of work. The family live in a shabby district of Stockholm , and Greta have to leave school at the age of 13 to help care for her seriously ill father. Every week she take him to a charity clinic , where they have to wait hour for his treatment. She vow to build her life so she would never be financially dependent. Her father die when she be 14 and she have to go to work , first a a latherer in a barber shop and then a a salesclerk in a department store. Her beauty soon gain her a role in a short film sponsor by the store , a part in a publicity short for a bakery and then a lead role a a frolicking bath beauty in a slapstick feature , `` Peter the Tramp. '' She win a two-year scholarship to Stockholm 's Royal Dramatic Theater Academy , where she be discover by Mauritz Stiller , a famous , worldly and flamboyant director. He and Victor Seastrom be the leader of the golden age of Swedish silent movies. The 40-year-old Mr. Stiller take absolute command of the professional and private life of the 17-year-old novice. He name her Garbo and cast her a the ingenue in his film epic of Selma Lagerlof 's novel `` Saga of Gosta Berling. '' Doubts in Sweden , A Hit in Berlin The four-hour movie draw mixed notice in Stockholm , but a three-hour version be a hit in Berlin , where reviewer find Garbo `` a soul-revealing Nordic princess. '' Her next role be a a poor prospective prostitute in `` Streets of Sorrow , '' direct by G. W. Pabst. Louis B. Mayer , the production chief of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer , saw `` Gosta Berling '' in Berlin and offer Mr. Stiller a contract. He accept on condition that his plump protegee also be hired. Mr. Mayer agree reluctantly , muttering , `` In America , men do n't like fat women. '' The first of Garbo 's 24 Hollywood movie , all make for M-G-M , be `` The Torrent , '' a 1926 melodrama star the Latin lover Ricardo Cortez. The daily rush reveal the young actress 's extraordinary film-acting talent , and her salary be raise before the movie be released. As soon a a camera begin roll , the awkward girl with the moody eye and large hand suddenly and charismatically spring to life. Now slim and only 20 , she play a seductive Spanish peasant who become an opera star. She be an overnight sensation. Mr. Stiller , still smart from be bar from direct `` The Torrent , '' begin direct her in `` The Temptress , '' a variation of `` The Torrent '' star another Latin , Antonio Moreno. The director have repeat argument with M-G-M executive and be abruptly dismiss in mid-shooting. He go to Paramount Pictures , but soon also antagonized executive there , and they let him go. Unable to hold a job in Hollywood , he return to Sweden in 1928. Within a year , he die of several ailment at the age of 45. His death devastate Garbo , who be say to feel deep guilt for many year for not return to Sweden to see him. His dynamic personality set the pattern for her late lovers. A Movie Succeeds And Rumors Fly Her third Hollywood role be a heartless adulteress in `` Flesh and the Devil , '' co-starring John Gilbert , the epitome of silent-movie masculinity. Their love scene , pepper with suggestive gesture and language , be electrifying. Reports of a Garbo-Gilbert romance sweep the country , and their passionate on-screen lovemaking be regard a a reflection of their off-screen lives. The gossip fuel the movie 's triumph. M-G-M then co-star the couple in `` Love , '' a 1927 modern-dress version of Tolstoy 's `` Anna Karenina , '' another huge success. In only two year , Garbo become a superstar. By shrewd negotiating , threaten to return to Sweden and stag a strike , she also win unheard-of raises. In only three year , her weekly salary soar from $ 350 to $ 5,000 , and six year later she win a record $ 270,000 per movie. She make seven more silent film in two year , `` The Divine Woman , '' portray Sarah Bernhardt ; `` The Mysterious Lady '' ; `` A Woman of Affairs , '' which be adapt from the novel `` The Green Hat '' by Michael Arlen ; `` Wild Orchids '' ; `` The Single Standard , '' and `` The Kiss. '' All make money despite the new dominance of sound movies. Off screen , there be continue rumor of a Garbo-Gilbert love affair , with photographer invariably dog them. There be gossip about an abortive elopement and report of a wedding ceremony at which she fail to appear. At any rate , apparently weary of the actor 's overbear bravado , she end the relationship in 1929. Talkies be destroy the career of many Europeans , and M-G-M delay Garbo 's sound debut more than two years. She be astutely present in an adaptation of Eugene O'Neill 's `` Anna Christie , '' where her accent be appropriate. The publicity slogan be simply : `` Garbo Talks ! '' Her speech be heavily accent and husky , but this new dimension of the Swedish enigma give her even great stature , and the movie play to pack house across the country. Her opening line of dialogue be widely quote and become classic : . She wearily enters a waterfront saloon and order the bartender to `` Gim me a visky with chincher ale on the side and do n't be stingy , baby. '' Garbo 's other early sound movie include `` Susan Lenox : Her Fall and Rise '' ( 1931 ) , co-starring Clark Gable ; `` Mata Hari '' ( 1932 ) , with Ramon Novarro , and a version of Luigi Pirandello 's mystical play `` As You Desire Me '' ( 1932 ) , co-starring Melvyn Douglas , in which she adroitly portray an amnesiac. An adaptation of Vicki Baum 's novel `` Grand Hotel '' feature four other star John and Lionel Barrymore , Joan Crawford and Wallace Beery but Garbo , a a fading ballerina , steal the movie. The film , direct by Edmund Goulding , win an Academy Award a the best picture of 1932. M-G-M honor Garbo 's distaste for publicity and her insistence that all visitor be bar from her sets. When close-ups be shoot , black screen be place around Garbo and the camera. Asked why she object to visitor , she say : `` When people be watch , I 'm just a woman make face for the camera. It destroy the illusion. '' Questioned about the screen , she say , `` If I be by myself , my face will do thing I can not do with it otherwise. '' Old Co-star Tries To Regain Career Despite these demand , her director and other associate respect her thorough professionalism and lack of temperament and admire her graciousness. `` Queen Christina '' ( 1933 ) give Garbo a long-sought chance to portray the eccentric 17th-century Swedish monarch. She co-star with Mr. Gilbert in an effort to bolster his sag career. Sound have reveal his thin voice , totally inadequate for his image of a dashing lover. He do well in `` Queen Christina , '' but his career continue to wither. He drink heavily , and die of a heart attack in 1936 at the age of 41. The largely fictional `` Queen Christina '' provide Garbo with one of her most radiant roles. The tragic film end with an enormous five-and-a-half-second-long close-up of her face a she stand on the prow of a ship. The queen have give up her throne for her lover , who be now dead. She be take his body back to Spain and then face a voyage to nowhere. Her breathtaking and mystical expression have often be liken to that of the Mona Lisa. Rouben Mamoulian , who direct , tell her the audience must use it imagination to interpret her thought , and instruct her `` to make your face a mask , to think and feel nothing. '' Recalling the movie after 50 year , Mr. Mamoulian reveal in a 1983 interview that Garbo have often direct herself. `` When we get to the first intimate scene , she ask me to leave the set. '' he said. `` I ask her why. She say , 'During these scene I allow only the cameraman and light man on the set. The director go out for a coffee or a milkshake. ' I reply , 'When I 'm direct a movie , I do n't go out for a milkshake. ' Reluctantly , she agree I could stay. '' Garbo 's title roles in `` Anna Karenina , '' with Fredric March , and an adaptation of Alexandre Dumas fils 's `` Camille , '' co-star a youthful Robert Taylor , be two of her fine performances. They win her the New York Film Critics Awards for best actress in 1935 and 1936. She never receive an Oscar for best actress. But in 1955 the motion picture academy seek to make amends by award her a special Oscar for `` a series of luminous and unforgettable performances. '' Comedy Is Tried To Reclaim Fans By the late 1930 's Garbo 's box-office appeal be decline , and M-G-M 's solution be to have her do her first comedy. The vehicle be `` Ninotchka , '' a brilliant satire write by Billy Wilder , Charles Brackett and Walter Reisch and direct by Ernst Lubitsch. Garbo superbly play a humorless , self-absorbed Soviet envoy who be humanize by Paris and the urbane Melvyn Douglas. The slogan for the 1939 movie read , `` Garbo Laughs. '' Her second comedy be `` Two Faced Woman , '' a frivolous , heartless farce and her only unsuccessful movie. Meanwhile , the European market , which provide the major income from her picture , be largely cut off by World War II , and M-G-M refuse to meet her salary demands. She announce her retirement. During the war , Garbo be criticize for not aid the Allies. But in 1976 , in a book title `` A Man Called Intrepid : The Secret War , '' William Stevenson disclose that she have help Britain by identify high-level Nazi sympathizer in Stockholm and by provide introduction and carry message for British agents. Garbo hop to return to movie after the war. There be repeat report over two decade of project that be to include her , but , for various reason , none ever materialized. In late year , Garbo call herself `` a wanderer '' and travel often to Switzerland , the French Riviera and Italy , though she become an American citizen in 1951. For more than 40 year her home base be a Manhattan apartment on East 52d Street , overlook the East River. She be a secretive about her relative a about herself , and the name of her survivor could not immediately be learned. Usually alone , Garbo regularly stroll , shop and browse in the East 50 's and 60 's , where New Yorkers savor fleeting glimpse of her haunting face. She wear fashionable but simple outfit , large hat and flat shoe and almost no makeup. The occasional description of her offer by friend suggest she have a childlike innocence and be selfish and self-absorbed. They deplore the aimlessness of her life. But another friend , Jane Gunther , say , `` She have a poetic magic , so difficult to describe , and all one know be that one want this in one 's life. '' Assaying Garbo 's art and life , John Bainbridge offer this tribute : `` She do nothing that be second-rate. She have dignity and nobility. Like so many great actress , she may never have possess a particle of intellectual power , but she have genius before the camera because she be guide by a secret , sublime , infallible instinct to do the right thing in the right way. So unerring be her instinct that it produce the illusion of a most subtle intelligence. '' The Films Before the Solitude These be Greta Garbo 's most important films. Her first talkie be `` Anna Christie. '' The Legend of Gosta Berling 1924 The Street of Sorrow 1925 Flesh and the Devil 1927 Love 1927 A Woman of Affairs 1929 Anna Christie 1930 Susan Lenox , Her Fall and Rise 1931 Mata Hari 1931 Grand Hotel 1932 As You Desire Me 1932 Queen Christina 1933 The Painted Veil 1934 Anna Karenina 1935 Camille 1936 Conquest 1937 Ninotchka 1939 Two Faced Woman 1942