May 17 , 1990 OBITUARY Sammy Davis Jr. Dies at 64 ; Top Showman Broke Barriers By PETER B. FLINT Sammy Davis Jr. , a versatile and dynamic singer , dancer and actor who overcome extraordinary obstacle to become a leading American entertainer , die of throat cancer yesterday at his home in Los Angeles. He be 64 year old and have be in deteriorate health since his release from Cedar-Sinai Medical Center on March 13. The showman be bear in a Harlem tenement , grow up in vaudeville from the age of 3 and never go to school. His talent a a mime , comedian , trumpet player , drummer , pianist and vibraphonist as well a singer and dancer be shape from his childhood and make him one of the nation 's first black performer to gain mainstream acclaim. With heavy jewelry around his neck and on his finger , and clad in a snug jumpsuit or tuxedo , the short , slim showman with a broken nose , defiant jaw and big , crooked smile have a rakish charm that energize stage for decades. He sell out leading nightclub and concert hall , win personal triumph in such Broadway musical a `` Mr. Wonderful '' ( 1956 ) and `` Golden Boy '' ( 1964 ) , illumined movie and television and make score of hit recording with such signature song a `` What Kind of Fool Am I ? , '' `` Candy Man , '' `` Mr. Bojangles '' and `` I've Got ta Be Me. '' Slurs and Skepticism The triumph be punctuate by sometimes ugly controversy - abuse and slur by white , particularly over his marriage to a white actress , May Britt ; resentment by black over what they view a his white life style , and widespread skepticism over his mid-1950 's conversion to Judaism. Mr. Davis also endure major health setbacks. He lose his left eye in a near-fatal 1954 auto crash , have reconstructive hip surgery in 1985 that enable him to dance again , and be tell last year that he have throat cancer. He underwent eight week of radiation treatment for a carcinoma grow behind his vocal cord , until his doctor say the cancer be in remission. He have smoke heavily for many years. The debilitating illness and treatment prompt 26 of his fellow entertainer to salute his courage and longtime effort to lower racial barrier in a two-and-a-half-hour television tribute on Feb. 4. The frail but indomitable Mr. Davis , whose voice be only a husky whisper , do not speak , but he rise to do a brief soft-shoe step to a stand ovation. Only a year earlier , he have announce his defeat of alcohol and cocaine. He complete a world tour with Frank Sinatra and Liza Minnelli ( who fill in for an ailing Dean Martin ) and publicize `` Why Me ? , '' a book on which he have collaborate with his friend Jane and Burt Boyar a a sequel to their best-selling 1965 Davis biography , `` Yes I Can. '' The 1989 book say that John F. Kennedy have ask Mr. Davis and Miss Britt not to participate in the 1961 Presidential inauguration , lest the sight of an interracial couple anger Southerners. Mr. Davis also recount the racism that haunt his life , from bloody fight in the Army to be turn away from New York nightclubs. 'An Affinity ' for Judaism His conversion to Judaism , accord to the book , arise from self-scrutiny during his convalescence from the 1954 car crash. His family be Baptist and until then he have think little of religion , but he study Judaism deeply , conclude `` it teach justice for everyone , '' and find `` an affinity '' between Jews and black , who have both `` be oppress for centuries. '' The second biography also explore the breakup of his marriage to Miss Britt , who , in divorce him in 1968 , cite `` no family life to speak of , '' and his neglect of their three child : a daughter , Tracey , and two adopted son , Mark and Jeff. He have previously be marry briefly to Loray White , a dancer. In 1970 he marry Altovise Gore , also a dancer. Mr. Davis admit to compulsive carousing , reckless gambling and spending ( $ 50 million over 20 year while earn $ 3 million a year ) and excessive drinking and smoking. With characteristic bravado , he once again hail himself a a reformed man , boasting of sobriety with such irony a `` The hard thing be wake up in the morning and realizing that 's as good a you 're go to feel all day. '' Supported Humanitarian Causes Yet there be a more private side to Mr. Davis. The entertainer eschew publicity while take part in civil right march and contribute generously to humanitarian causes. His many award include induction into the Hall of Fame of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , honorary degree from black college , and a Kennedy Center honor for career achievement. A deep regret of the age Mr. Davis be his support of Richard M. Nixon during the 1972 Presidential election campaign. He later renounce his backing , accuse Mr. Nixon of have make civil right promise he do not keep. Looking back in 1987 , Mr. Davis affirm that if the Kennedy Center salute to his career do not soften his rancor over the inaugural racial rebuff by President Kennedy , `` I do n't know what does. '' Sammy Davis Jr. be bear to Sammy Davis and the former Elvira Sanchez on Dec. 8 , 1925 , in a Harlem tenement at 140th Street and Eighth Avenue. He be bring up by his father 's mother , Rosa Davis , while his parent , both vaudevillian , be on tour. In his third year , his mother leave the act and also the family , and he join the Orpheum circuit with his father and Will Mastin. With typical zest , the youngster learn show business while his father get him occasional tutor to appease truant officers. As sound movie begin to cripple vaudeville , the troupe shrank and eventually become `` The Will Mastin Trio , feature Sammy Davis Jr. '' Drafted at 18 , he graduate from comic book after remedial reading lesson from a black sergeant while he battle racist taunt and insult from white G.I. 's , who repay him several time by break his nose. Performing in Army camp around the country , he work hard , he recall , to reach the bigot , `` neutralize them and make them acknowledge '' him. Some Lean Years for the Group After the war , with vaudeville nearly dead , the Will Mastin Trio have several lean year struggle to break into variety theater and cabaret around the country. Gradually , a Mr. Davis hone his talent , the act become his showcase , with his father and uncle provide tap and soft-shoe background. The group , now `` star Sammy Davis Jr. , '' begin play top variety house and nightclub , become headliner and repeatedly break box-office record , while he gain solo prominence with recording and television appearance a a variety showman and actor. On Broadway , Mr. Davis have many concert success and star in three musicals. One , in 1956 , be the quasi-biographical `` Mr. Wonderful , '' which draw from Brooks Atkinson , drama critic of The New York Times , the observation that the show `` come alive only when young Mr. Davis rock and roll , tap-dances or do imitations. '' The other two musical be an updated version of `` Golden Boy '' in 1964 and a 1978 revival of `` Stop the World , I Want to Get Off. '' Perhaps his most enduring movie role be Sportin ' Life in `` Porgy and Bess '' ( 1959 ) , a part that elicit high praise from Bosley Crowther , motion picture critic of The Times. Mr. Crowther write that `` in every respect he be the sharp and most insinuating figure in the show. '' He play an avuncular dancer in `` Tap '' ( 1989 ) , his last movie role. His other film include `` Ocean 's 11 '' ( 1960 ) , `` Sergeants Three '' ( 1962 ) , `` Johnny Cool '' ( 1963 ) and `` Robin and the Seven Hoods '' ( 1964 ) . In addition to his wife , Altavesa , his mother , his daughter , Tracey , and son Mark and Jeff , Mr. Davis be survive by his son Manny ; two sister , Ramona James of Manhattan and Suzette Davis of Portland , Ore. , and two grandchild , Andrew and Sam Michael. A funeral will be hold tomorrow at 11 A.M. at Forest Lawn Memorial-Park in the Hollywood Hills , with burial at Forest Lawn Memorial-Park in Glendale .