October 15 , 1990 OBITUARY Leonard Bernstein , 72 , Music 's Monarch , Dies By DONAL HENAHAN Leonard Bernstein , one of the most prodigally talented and successful musician in American history , die yesterday evening at his apartment at the Dakota on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. He be 72 year old. Mr. Bernstein 's spokeswoman , Margaret Carson , say he die of a heart attack cause by progressive lung failure. His death follow by five day the announcement that Mr. Bernstein would retire from perform because of health problems. A heavy smoker for most of his life , he have be suffer from emphysema , pulmonary infection and a pleural tumor. In recent month , Mr. Bernstein have cancel concert in Japan and in Charleston , S.C. , and a tour of Europe. He conduct his final performance at Tanglewood on Aug. 19 , when he lead the Boston Symphony in Britten 's `` Four Sea Interludes '' and the Beethoven Seventh Symphony. 'Fated for Success' Long before Mr. Bernstein become , at the age of 40 , the young music director ever engage by the New York Philharmonic , the drama critic Harold Clurman size up the flamboyant musician 's future : `` Lenny be hopelessly fat for success. '' It be Mr. Bernstein 's fate to be far more than routinely successful , however. His fast-burning energy , his bewilder versatility and his profuse gift for both music and theater coalesce to make him a high-profile figure in a dozen field , among them symphonic music , Broadway musical , the ballet , film and television. Still , his hydra-headed success do not please all his critics. While he be music director of the Philharmonic from 1959 to 1969 , some friend and critic urge him to quit and compose theater music full time. Many regard him a potentially the savior of the American musical , to which he contribute score for `` On the Town , '' `` Wonderful Town , '' `` Candide '' and `` West Side Story. '' Determining His Focus At the same time , others be deplore his continued activity in such field , contend that to be a successful leader of a major orchestra he would have to focus on conducting. Still other observer of the Bernstein phenomenon wish he would concentrate on the ballet , for which he have show an affinity ( `` Fancy Free , '' `` Facsimile '' ) , or on opera and operetta ( `` Trouble in Tahiti , '' `` Candide '' ) . Or on musical education. His television program on such subject a conducting , symphonic music and jazz fascinate million when he appear on `` Omnibus , '' the cultural series , and later a star of the Philharmonic 's televised Young People 's Concerts. And still others , a loyal few , counsel Mr. Bernstein to throw it all over and compose more serious symphonic scores. His gift along this line be apparent in such work a his Symphony No. 1 ( `` Jeremiah '' ) of 1942 , Symphony No. 2 ( `` The Age of Anxiety '' ) of 1949 and Symphony No. 3 ( `` Kaddish '' ) of 1963. He play the piano well enough to have make a separate career a a virtuoso. He be a facile poet. He write several book , include the popular `` The Joy of Music '' ( 1959 ) . He be a teacher of rare communicative talent , a television audience discovered. But Mr. Bernstein resolutely resist pressure to restrict his activities. During his decade a the Philharmonic 's musical director , he grow steadily a an interpreter and a a technician. His performance of Mahler 's symphony be almost universally concede to be of the high quality , and his recording for Columbia Records of the complete set not only constitute the first such integral collection but also continue to be regard a among the most idiomatic Mahler performance available. His obsession with that composer , in fact , have be credit with generate the Mahler boom in America. His conducting of work by Classical composer like Mozart and Haydn , often deride in his early day , attract more and more praise a his career unfold and he could relax a little. `` There be nothing Lenny ca n't do supremely well , '' an acquaintance remark several year ago , `` if he do n't try too hard. '' The future Renaissance man of American music be bear in Lawrence , Mass. , on Aug. 25 , 1918 , the son of Samuel and Jennie Resnick Bernstein. His father , a beauty-supplies jobber who have come to the United States from Russia a a boy , want Leonard to take over the business when he grow up. For many year the father resist his son 's intention to be a musician. The story of how he discover music become encrust with legend over the year , but all source agree he be a prodigy. Mr. Bernstein 's own version be that when he be 10 year old his Aunt Clara , who be in the middle of divorce proceeding , send her upright piano to the Bernstein home to be stored. The child look at it , hit the key and cry : `` Ma , I want lesson ! '' Until he be 16 , by his own testimony , he have never hear a live symphony orchestra , a late start for any musician , let alone a future musical director of the Philharmonic. Virgil Thomson , while music critic of The New York Herald Tribune in the 1940 's , comment on this : `` Whether Bernstein will become in time a traditional conductor or a highly personal one be not easy to prophesy. He be a consecrated character , and his culture be considerable. It might just come about , though , that , have to learn the classic repertory the hard way , which be to say after 15 , he would throw his cultural beginning away and build toward success on a sheer talent for animation and personal projection. I must say he worry u all a little bit. '' These theme - the concern over Mr. Bernstein 's `` talent for animation '' and over his penchant for `` personal projection '' - be to haunt the musician through much of his career. Economy of Motion Not His Virtue As for `` animation , '' that theme tend to dominate much of the criticism of Mr. Bernstein a a conductor , particularly in his youthful days. Although he study conduct in Philadelphia at the Curtis Institute with Fritz Reiner , whose precise but tiny beat be a trademark of his work , Mr. Bernstein 's own exuberant podium style seem model more on that of Serge Koussevitzky , the Boston Symphony 's music director. The neophyte maestro churn his arm about in accordance with some inner message , largely ignore the clear semaphoric technique describe in textbooks. Often , in moment of excitement , he would leave the podium entirely , rise like a rocket , arm fling aloft in indication of triumphal climax. So animated , in fact , be Mr. Bernstein 's conducting style at this point in his career that it could cause problems. At his first rehearsal for a guest appearance with the St. Louis Symphony , his initial downbeat so startle the musician that they simply look in amazement and make no sound. Like another prodigally gift American artist , George Gershwin , Mr. Bernstein divide his affection between the `` serious '' European tradition of concert music and the `` popular '' American brand. Like Gershwin , he be at home in jazz , boogie-woogie and the cliche of Tin Pan Alley , but he far outstrip his predecessor in general musical culture. In many aspect of his life and career , Mr. Bernstein be an embracer of diversity. The son of Jewish immigrant , he retain a lifelong respect for Hebrew and Jewish culture. His `` Jeremiah '' and `` Kaddish '' symphony and several other work be found on the Old Testament. But he also acquire a deep respect for Roman Catholicism , which be reflect in his `` Mass , '' the 1971 work he write for the opening of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington. A similar catholicity be reflect throughout his music. His choral composition include not only song in Hebrew but also `` Harvard Songs : Dedication and Lonely Men of Harvard. '' He be graduate in 1939 from Harvard , where he have study composition with Walter Piston and Edward Burlingame Hill. A sense of his origin , however , remain strong. Koussevitzky proclaim him a genius and probable future musical director of the Boston Symphony - `` The boy be a new Koussevitzky , a reincarnation ! '' - but the old conductor urge Mr. Bernstein to improve his chance for success by change his name. The young musician reply : `` I 'll do it a Bernstein or not at all ! '' He pronounce the name in the German way , a BERN-stine , and could no more abide the pronounciation BERN-steen than he could enjoy be call `` Lenny '' by casual acquaintances. In a sense , he be in lifelong flight from Lenny Bernstein , from be treat a the raffish `` ordinary guy '' that the nickname seem to suggest. Although some elder member of the New York Philharmonic never stop call him Lenny , Mr. Bernstein live down the nickname , and in his late year hear himself address almost reverentially a `` Maestro '' in the world 's music capitals. The man who have be patronize in print for many year a `` Glamourpuss '' or `` Wunderkind of the Western World '' become a favorite of Vienna both a conductor and a accompanist for such lied specialist a Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau and Christa Ludwig. Fame bring the usual honorary degree , and honor far beyond the usual. He not only conduct at La Scala in Milan , at the Metropolitan Opera and at the Staatsoper in Vienna , but he be also invite by Harvard in 1973 to lecture , a Charles Eliot Norton Professor of History , on linguistics a apply to musical analysis. The distinction have previously be confer on Robert Frost , T. S. Eliot , Igor Stravinsky , Aaron Copland and Paul Hindemith. Typically , Mr. Bernstein 's Harvard performance be greet with a mingling of critical raf and boos. Harvard play an important part in Mr. Bernstein 's rise , provide a pinch of Brahminism. The boy whose bar mitzvah be at Temple Mishkan Tefila have go on to the elite Boston Latin School , and graduate cum laude from Harvard with a B.A. During his last semester at Harvard , he organize and lead a performance of Marc Blitzstein 's `` Cradle Will Rock , '' a left-wing musical that have be ban in Massachusetts , but that could not be proscribe within the academic walls. It be not his first fling a a producer. At age 16 he have star in his own production of `` Carmen '' at a summer camp , play the title role alluringly in wig and black gown. It be a a result of another schoolboy production , at Camp Onota in the Berkshires , that he meet Adolph Green , with whom he later collaborate in several Broadway musicals. Mr. Bernstein be a camp counselor and theater director and Mr. Green be in `` The Pirates of Penzance. '' An Unlikely Start For a Conductor Subsequently , when Mr. Bernstein be out of a job in New York City , he look up Mr. Green , move in with him in his East Ninth Street apartment in Greenwich Village , and begin play the piano at the Village Vanguard for a group call the Revuers. The ensemble include , besides Mr. Green , his musical comedy collaborator Betty Comden and the actress Judy Holliday. Mr. Bernstein meet Aaron Copland at Harvard in 1937 , and through him come to know two other aspire composer , Roy Harris and William Schuman. Admiring his intuitive grasp of modern music and his phenomenal skill at play complex orchestral score on the piano , the composer agree that Mr. Bernstein should become a conductor. Dimitri Mitropoulos , the New York Philharmonic 's music director , meet Mr. Bernstein in 1938 and add to the consensus. At that point , Mr. Bernstein `` do n't know a baton from a tree trunk , '' a he later put it. Nevertheless , he have make up his mind. Because he have apply at the wrong time of the year and be turn down by the Juilliard School , he go to Philadelphia to audition for Reiner 's conduct class at the Curtis Institute. The Hungarian maestro open a score in the middle , put it on the piano and tell Mr. Bernstein to play until he could recognize the piece. The aspiring conductor , who be have difficulty see the music because he be suffer from an allergic reaction to Copland 's cat , nevertheless discern that the work be the `` Academic Festival '' Overture of Brahms. He be accepted. At Curtis , he study conduct with Reiner and piano with Isabella Vengerova. His early piano teacher include a neighbor , Freida Karp , Helen Coates and Heinrich Gebhard. In 1940 he go to Tanglewood , where he study at the Berkshire Music Center with Koussevitzky , who quickly adopt Mr. Bernstein and call him Lenyushka. In later year , Mr. Bernstein pride himself on have retain the respect and friendship of both Koussevitzky and Reiner , who hold virtually oppose idea about what a conductor should do and how he should do it. But the story a the famously irascible Reiner tell it to acquaintance be different : `` He do n't leave me for Koussevitzky - I throw him out. '' In truth , not all of Mr. Bernstein 's association with elder colleague be warm and collegial. In John Gruen 's biographical `` The Private World of Leonard Bernstein , '' publish in 1968 , Mr. Bernstein assert that Artur Rodzinski have once pin him against the wall of a dressing room , try to choke him because of jealousy over the young assistant 's flair for publicity. But accord to Mr. Bernstein , Rodzinski have by this time become somewhat peculiar : he always carry a gun in his back pocket , for instance , for psychological support when he face the orchestra. A Boycott Causes Stumble at the Start It be Rodzinski , however , who give Mr. Bernstein his chance at conduct the New York Philharmonic at a lean time when the young man be scrap along a a musician in New York. When he be 22 , Mr. Bernstein have be offer a guest-conducting engagement with the Boston Symphony by Koussevitzky but have be force to refuse. The American Federation of Musicians , to which Mr. Bernstein belong , advise it member to boycott the Boston Symphony , the last of the major orchestra remain unorganized. Mr. Bernstein try to mark time by open a teaching studio in Boston , he later recall , but `` nobody came. '' That fall , he move to New York , where he fare hardly better. Eventually he get a $ 25-a-week job at Harms-Remick , a music-publishing house , where his duty include listen to Coleman Hawkins and Earl ( Fatha ) Hines , and get their jazz down on paper. He also write popular arrangement under the name of Lenny Amber ( Bernstein in English ) . The Philharmonic offer by Rodzinski come without warning. Rodzinski have hear Mr. Bernstein conduct a rehearsal at Tanglewood , remember the young man , and after an hour 's discussion , have hire him a an assistant for the 1943-44 season. Assistant conductor by tradition do a great deal of assist , but not much conducting. Destiny have other plan for Leonard Bernstein , however , and when opportunity knock one Sunday afternoon in 1943 , he be ready to open the door. On Nov. 14 , Bruno Walter fell ill and could not conduct the Philharmonic. The young assistant take over his program ( work by Schumann , Rosza , Strauss and Wagner ) and achieve a sensational success. Because the concert be broadcast over radio and a review appear on page 1 of The New York Times the next day , the name of Leonard Bernstein suddenly become know throughout the country. `` Typical Lenny luck , '' some longtime Bernstein observer said. But Mr. Bernstein have give luck a hand : Knowing that Walter be not feel well , he have study the program 's score especially hard , just in case. At 25 , he have become a somebody in the symphonic world. After that break , though he be still more then a decade away from become music director of the Philharmonic , Mr. Bernstein begin to consolidate his gains. He put in three excite but financially unproductive season ( 1945-48 ) a conductor of the New York City Symphony. He receive no fee , and neither do the soloists. In 40 's , Celebrity And Back Muscles In the late 1940 's Mr. Bernstein bloom a a public figure. He come to be a familiar sight at the Russian Tea Room , at Lindy 's and at Reuben's. Columnists report that he like boogie-woogie , the rumba and the conga , and that female admirer swoon when he step on the podium. Tallulah Bankhead once watch Mr. Bernstein conduct a Tanglewood rehearsal and say to him in her husky baritone : `` Darling , I have go mad over your back muscles. You must come and have dinner with me. '' Just about everyone in those year want Mr. Bernstein. The United States Chamber of Commerce name him a one of the outstanding men of the year , along with Nelson A. Rockefeller and John Hersey. His fan , it be report , rip at his clothes and attack him in his car. Paramount test him for the title part in a film about Tchaikovsky , but he be turn down , accord to the conductor , because `` my ear be too big. '' Mr. Bernstein , in fact , look the part of a pop idol with his strong profile and wavy black hair. Musically , his career be on the upswing , too. In 1947 he conduct a complete Boston Symphony concert a a guest , the first time in Koussevitzky 's 22-year reign that any other conductor have be permit to do that in Carnegie Hall. He serve a musical adviser of the Israel Philharmonic Symphonic Orchestra for the 1948-49 season. He be a member of the Berkshire Music Center from 1948 and head of it conduct department from 1951. He serve a professor of music at Brandeis University from 1951 to 1956. In 1953 Mr. Bernstein become the first American-born conductor to be engage by La Scala in Milan , Italy 's foremost opera house , lead a performance of Cherubini 's `` Medea '' with Maria Callas in the title role. During the six-year tenure of Mitropoulos a music director of the Philharmonic , begin in the 1951-52 season , Mr. Bernstein be a frequent guest conductor. In 1957-58 , the two work jointly a principal conductor of the orchestra. A year later , Mr. Bernstein be name music director. The New York appointment would have be a severe test of any conductor. The orchestra 's quality have go downhill , it repertory have stagnate and audience have fall off. Orchestra morale be low and still sinking. Mr. Bernstein leap in with his customary brio and showmanship and his willingness to try new ideas. He designate the Thursday evening concert a `` Previews , '' at which he speak informally to the audience about the music. He build his season around theme like `` Schumann and the Romantic Movement '' and `` Keys to the 20th Century. '' Strange-sounding work by avant-garde composer like Elliott Carter , Milton Babbitt , Karlheinz Stockhausen , Gunther Schuller and John Cage begin to infiltrate the Philharmonic 's programs. He take the orchestra on tour to Latin America , Europe , Japan , Alaska and Canada. It sometimes seem that Mr. Bernstein could not possibly squeeze in one more engagement , one more social appearance. During one particularly busy stretch , he conduct 25 concert in 28 days. His conduct style accurately reflect his breathless race through life. Although in late year he tone down his choreographic manner , he remain one of the more consistently elevate conductor of his time. That irrepressible buoyancy sometimes lead to trouble : in 1982 he fell off the stand in Houston while conduct Tchaikovsky and two year later encore that frighten stunt while lead the Vienna Philharmonic in Chicago. The bad injury he suffer , however , be a bruise from a medallion he wear around his neck. Throughout his Philharmonic year , he keep his tie with Broadway and the show-business friend he have make before he become an internationally adulated maestro. He have already write music for the musical version of `` Peter Pan '' ( 1950 ) and `` The Lark , '' a play star Julie Harris ( 1955 ) . For Hollywood , he write the score to `` On the Waterfront '' ( 1954 ) . Musical success on the stage follow : `` On the Town '' ( 1944 ) , `` Wonderful Town '' ( 1953 ) , `` Candide '' ( 1956 ) and `` West Side Story '' ( 1957 ) . Several of the stage work continue to thrive : in 1985 Mr. Bernstein conduct a quasi-operatic version of `` West Side Story '' ( the cast include Kiri Te Kanawa and Jose Carreras ) that please him immensely and introduce the work to a new generation of listeners. Then there be the ballet `` Fancy Free '' ( 1944 ) and `` Facsimile '' ( 1946 ) ; the song cycle `` I Hate Music '' and `` La Bonne Cuisine '' ; the `` Jeremiah '' and `` Age of Anxiety '' symphony ; the one-act opera `` Trouble in Tahiti '' ; Serenade for violin and string orchestra with percussion ; the Symphony No. 3 ( `` Kaddish '' ) , and the `` Chichester Psalms. '' In the year after he have leave the music directorship of the Philharmonic to become the orchestra 's laureate conductor , he return to the theater. He create the ecumenical and controversial `` Mass '' and , with Jerome Robbins , the ballet `` Dybbuk , '' stag by the New York City Ballet in 1974. Mr. Bernstein 's life take a turn toward great stability in 1951 when he marry the actress Felicia Montealegre Cohn. Her American father have be head of the American Smelting and Refining Company in Chile and she have be send to New York City to study the piano. After several year of off-and-on romance , they be marry in Boston. They have three child : a daughter , Jamie , a son , Alexander Serge ( name for Serge Koussevitzky ) and a second daughter , Nina. In addition to his child , who all live in New York City , and his mother , of Brookline , Mass. , Mr. Bernstein be survive by a sister , Shirley Bernstein of New York City , and a brother , Burton , of Bridgewater , Conn. Mr. Bernstein and his wife begin a `` trial separation '' after 25 year of marriage. They continue , however , to appear together in concert , one such occasion be a program in tribute to Alice Tully at Alice Tully Hall , where Mr. Bernstein conduct Sir William Walton 's `` Facade '' with his wife a one of the two narrators. Mrs. Bernstein die in 1978 after a long illness. After leave the music director 's post with the Philharmonic in 1969 , Mr. Bernstein hardly curtail his frantic activities. He continue to guest-conduct , to record for Columbia Records , to conduct at the Metropolitan Opera and to play the piano for lied recitalists. His company , Amberson Productions , which he have form with his friend Schuyler G. Chapin to handle his diverse interest , expand into the new field of videocassettes. Mr. Bernstein , a longtime Democrat and liberal , take a deep interest in politics and be a friend of the Kennedys. His `` Mass '' be dedicate to John F. Kennedy. Among guest at fund-raising party in his apartment during the late 1960 's , one could find some of the lead civil-rights advocate of the period , a form of hospitality that inspire the writer Tom Wolfe to coin the term `` radical chic. '' In his book `` Radical Chic & Mau-Mauing the Flak Catchers , '' Mr. Wolfe describe a fund-raising party that Mr. Bernstein give for the Black Panthers. During Mr. Bernstein 's Philharmonic decade , the orchestra engage it first black member , the violinist Sanford Allen. He continue compose , if only in spurts. Late work include `` Jubilee Games , '' `` Arias and Barcarolles , '' `` Halil '' and a sequel to his opera `` Trouble in Tahiti '' entitle `` A Quiet Place. '' After it premiere in Houston in 1983 , `` A Quiet Place '' be produce at the Vienna State Opera , La Scala and the Kennedy Center in Washington. Almost to the time of his death , Mr. Bernstein carry on a bewildering variety of activity , rush about the world with the same tireless abandon that have characterize his life in the day when he be churn out a hit a season on Broadway. But Broadway have change by the time Mr. Bernstein 's final theatrical score reach the Mark Hellinger Theater in March 1976. The long-awaited work that he and Alan Jay Lerner have compose , `` 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue , '' close after seven performances. He turn up in Israel , where the Israel Philharmonic be put on a Leonard Bernstein retrospective festival to celebrate the 30th anniversary of his debut on an Israeli podium. During a two-week period , his music be hear in concert hall , theater , movie house and other auditorium all over the country. In 1988 , when he be 70 year old , Mr. Bernstein be name laureate conductor of the Israeli orchestra. That birthday year bring honor from all direction , but none seem to gratify him more than the celebration stag for him at the Tanglewood Festival , scene of so many triumph early in his career. On Nov. 14 , 1988 , to mark the 45th anniversary of his Philharmonic conducting debut , he lead the orchestra in an all-Bernstein concert. Laurel wreath continue to shower on him in his last decades. Elected to the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters in 1982 , he be award the Academy 's Gold Medal three year later. The city of Milan , home of La Scala , also give him it Gold Medal. A discordant note sound in 1989 when he refuse to accept a medal from the Bush Administration , apparently a a protest against what he regard a censorship of an AIDS exhibition by the National Endowment for the Arts. Like many other artist and public figure , he contribute his service at concert to benefit the fight against AIDS. Mr. Bernstein 's private life , long the subject of rumor in the musical world , become an open book in 1987 when his homosexuality be bring to wide public attention by Joan Peyser 's `` Bernstein : A Biography. '' As Age Advances , The Pace Does Too Far from slow down as age encroach , Mr. Bernstein seem to accelerate. Last Christmas he lead a performance of Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony in Berlin to celebrate the crumbling of the wall between East and West Germany. With typical flair , he substitute the word `` Freiheit '' ( `` Freedom '' ) for the poet 's `` Freude '' ( `` Joy '' ) in the choral finale. The East German Government bestow on him it Star of People 's Friendship Medal. Although he have reportedly refuse an offer to return to the New York Philharmonic a music director , he be schedule to conduct six week of concert for the next few seasons. Before collapse from exhaustion this year in Japan , Mr. Bernstein have take part in the Pacific Music Festival. Late in his extraordinarily restless and fruitful life , Mr. Bernstein defend his early decision to spread himself over as many field of endeavor a he could master. `` I do n't want to spend my life , a Toscanini do , study and restudying the same 50 piece of music , '' he write in The Times. `` It would , '' he continue , `` bore me to death. I want to conduct. I want to play the piano. I want to write for Hollywood. I want to write symphonic music. I want to keep on try to be , in the full sense of that wonderful word , a musician. I also want to teach. I want to write book and poetry. And I think I can still do justice to them all . ''