April 22 , 1990 OBITUARY Erte , a Master of Fashion , Stage and Art Deco Design , Is Dead at 97 By ALAN RIDING Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES Erte , the Russian-born Art Deco designer whose prolific career in theater , sculpture and the graphic art span most of the 20th century , die here today after a short illness. He be 97 year old. Erte , whose name derive from the French pronunciation of the initial of his real name , Romain de Tirtoff , continue to work until just a few week ago. His recent design include the set for the musical `` Stardust , '' which recently end a run in Washington , and the set and costume for `` Easter Parade '' at Radio City Music Hall. A slightly build man with a shock of white hair , he fell ill last month with kidney problem during a vacation on the Indian Ocean island of Mauritius. He be fly back to Paris two week ago and die this morning at the Cochin Hospital here. Erte gain recognition a a fashion designer in Paris before World War I , but his first major success be a a stage designer in the 1920 's and 1930's. His name have long be identify with the great music hall of France , the United States and Britain. Art Deco Revival In the 1970 's and 1980 's , when he turn his hand to lithograph and serigraphs , he become widely know in the United States. As the Art Deco style come back into fashion , many of his work , include `` The Alphabet '' and `` The Numbers '' series , be sell a posters. Born into an aristocratic family in St. Petersburg on Nov. 23 , 1892 , Erte be attract to the theater and at one point waver between become a dancer or an artist. But eventually , he recall year later , `` I come to the conclusion that I could live without dance but could not give up my passion for painting and design. '' In 1912 , he move to Paris and collaborate briefly with the fashion designer Paul Poiret. Moving on to the theater , he design costume for an exotic young dancer name Mata Hari , who would be shoot a a spy for the Germans in 1917. Performers from Sarah Bernhardt to Anna Pavlova would wear his costumes. Between 1915 and 1937 he design hundred of cover for the monthly fashion magazine Harper 's Bazaar. His highly stylized design of sinuous woman drape in bead and fur help define fashion for a generation. His work would also appear in Vogue , the Illustrated London News , Cosmopolitan and Ladies ' Home Journal. From Stage Sets to Lamps Between the two World Wars , his elaborate stage and costume design be in much demand for opera , theater and ballet in Paris , Monte Carlo , New York , Chicago and Glyndebourne , but perhaps most memorably for music hall production , which be enormously popular at the time. He produce set and costume for sumptuous production like Irving Berlin 's `` Music Box , '' George White 's `` Scandals , '' the Ziegfeld Follies , the Folies-Bergere and show at the Casino de Paris and the London Palladium. Erte be know for his ability to turn his talent in many directions. He reportedly paint only once in oil , prefer the gouache or tempera medium. He accept commission to design jewelry , lamp , furniture and interior decor. A major turn point in his career come in 1965 , when he meet Eric and Salome Estorick , the founder of Seven Arts Ltd. of New York and London. Seven Arts remain the exclusive agent for Erte 's work until his death. # 1967 Exhibition When the Estoricks organize an exhibition of 170 of his work in New York in 1967 , the Metropolitan Museum of Art buy the entire collection. `` It be , I believe , without precedent that a museum buy an entire exhibition of a living artist , '' Erte write many year later. `` Certainly it be a first time for the Met. '' After another highly acclaim show in London , the Estoricks advise Erte to produce lithograph and serigraphs. '' They point out that with graphic I could reach the very large public that these exhibition have create , '' the artist write in the introduction to `` Erte at Ninety-Five , '' a book publish to mark a recent birthday. Erte enjoy do series of related lithograph , among them `` The Precious Stones , '' `` Signs of the Zodiac '' and `` The Seven Deadly Sins. '' He use the theme of `` La Traviata '' for a set of Dunhill play card , with each suit represent by a different act. In his late year Erte turn to sculpture , use many of his early design a model for another art form. Energy in His '90s `` He be work until just a few week ago , '' Mr. Estorick say in a telephone interview from New York. `` He be do very well. He have make a lot of money over the past 25 year and be build a home in Majorca. He be full of energy until the end. '' In the book publish for his 95th birthday , Erte write that he prefer variety in his life. `` I loathe wear the same clothes two day run or eat the same dish over and over again , '' he wrote. `` I 've always love traveling because it vary the decor of my life. Monotony engenders boredom and I have never be bore in my life. '' He like work with his two cat , Caramelle and Talia , by his side , and classical music playing in the background. `` I 'm in a different world , '' he write , `` a dream world that invite oblivion. People take drug to achieve such freedom from their daily cares. I 've never take drugs. I 've never need them . ''