April 18 , 1990 OBITUARY Ralph David Abernathy , Rights Pioneer , Is Dead at 64 By RICHARD SEVERO The Rev. Ralph David Abernathy , a pioneer leader in the civil right struggle who be one of the most trusted confidant of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the Southern Christian Leadership Conference , die yesterday at the Crawford W. Long Hospital of Emory University in Atlanta. He be 64 year old. The Rev. Ralph David Abernathy , a pioneer leader in the civil right struggle who be one of the most trusted confidant of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the Southern Christian Leadership Conference , die yesterday at the Crawford W. Long Hospital of Emory University in Atlanta. He be 64 year old. The Rev. Ralph David Abernathy , a pioneer leader in the civil right struggle who be one of the most trusted confidant of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the Southern Christian Leadership Conference , die yesterday at the Crawford W. Long Hospital of Emory University in Atlanta. He be 64 year old. The hospital issue a statement explain that Mr. Abernathy , who have be in poor health in recent year and have be hospitalize since March 23 , be undergo a lung scan yesterday morning when his blood pressure drop and his heart stop beating. He be give emergency treatment and place on a cardiopulmonary support system. Doctors plan emergency surgery , but Mr. Abernathy die at 12:10 P.M. Late yesterday the White House issue a statement from President Bush that say , `` Barbara and I join with all Americans to mourn the passing of the Rev. Ralph Abernathy , a great leader in the struggle for civil right for all Americans and a tireless campaigner for justice. '' The King-Abernathy friendship start in the early 1950 's and continue until Dr. King 's assassination on April 4 , 1968 , in Memphis. Mr. Abernathy be with him that day and cradle his bloody head a Dr. King lay mortally wound on a balcony of the Lorraine Motel. Mr. Abernathy then take care of some detail of the funeral and deliver the eulogy for his friend. The two have march together , address friendly and hostile audience together , face violence together , and on many an occasion go to jail together. Successor to Dr. King After Dr. King 's death , Mr. Abernathy take over the leadership of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference , which he run for nine years. Many of the conference 's leader have misgiving , but Dr. King have want it that way. He have always praise Mr. Abernathy 's help , and Mr. Abernathy consistently say that he do not mind be in Dr. King 's shadow and that the two be never rivals. And yet there be accusation in 1989 that Mr. Abernathy have abuse Dr. King 's trust. The complaint come from prominent leader in the civil right movement after publication of Mr. Abernathy 's autobiography , `` And The Walls Came Tumbling Down , '' in which he write that Dr. King have be an adulterer. Mr. Abernathy say he have not reveal anything that have not already be discuss publicly. `` Had others not deal with the matter in such detail , I might have avoid any commentary , '' he wrote. He also say that although he personally do not approve of Dr. King 's behavior , he understand it reason , because both he and Dr. King be away from home so much. The Rev. Joseph Lowery , who succeed Mr. Abnernathy a president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference , say yesterday that he regret the thing Mr. Abernathy have say about Dr. King in the book but praise Mr. Abernathy `` a a stalwart steward '' in the civil right struggle and call him `` a faithful servant of the cause of liberty and justice. '' Remembrance by Young Andrew Young , former Mayor of Atlanta and now a candidate for governor of Georgia , be a civil right worker in the 1960 's who know Mr. Abernathy well. Mr. Young say yesterday that Mr. Abernathy would be remember a one who perform `` a silent labor that be very much need , '' and a a `` jovial , profound , love preacher who give his life in the service of others. '' One of Dr. King 's two son , Martin Luther King 3d , call Mr. Abernathy 's death `` a very tragic loss to our nation. '' The autobiography be not the first time Mr. Abernathy have be involve in dispute with colleague in the civil right movement. One of his most notable adversary be Dr. King 's widow , Coretta Scott King. In 1978 he take issue with the script of a six-hour television `` docudrama '' on Dr. King 's life. He call it `` a distortion of history '' because it do not give proper credit to various conference leaders. But Mrs. King strongly disagree with him and say the drama be a faithful portrait of the man and the movement. In 1980 Mr. Abernathy again become the focus of controversy when he endorse Ronald Reagan 's campaign for the Presidency. Several black leader assail his judgment and Mrs. King distance herself from Mr. Abernathy , call Mr. Reagan a `` war hawk '' who `` lack distinction even a an actor. '' But Mr. Abernathy say he have receive assurance from Mr. Reagan that black would be appoint to high post in a Reagan Administration. Endorsement of Reagan The Reagan endorsement come at the end of a decade of some difficulty for Mr. Abernathy. He leave the presidency of the S.C.L.C. in 1977 , at a time when the group have fall into debt and critic say it no longer spark the imagination of black a it have when it be run by Dr. King. But if Mr. Abernathy be criticize a too conservative , disorganized , wed to the technique of the past and lack Dr. King 's charisma and gift of oratory , he continue to win praise for his contribution to the early day of the civil right struggle and to Dr. King 's success in lead it. Some say Dr. King could not have triumph a he do without Mr. Abernathy 's help. Mr. Abernathy and Dr. King serve a pastor of different Baptist church in Montgomery. They meet in Atlanta in the early 1950 's , in the Ebenezer Baptist Church , whose minister be Dr. King 's father , the Rev. Martin Luther King Sr. Bus Boycott in Montgomery Mr. Abernathy become pastor of the First Baptist Church of Montgomery in 1951. A few year later , Dr. King be name pastor of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Atlanta. They become fast friend and find that they agree on what be need if black be to progress : a consistent , nonviolent effort that would have broad appeal not only to the black it be try to help , but also to whites. Together they organize a boycott of bus in Montgomery in 1955 , after Rosa Parks , a black seamstress , be arrest because she refuse to give up her seat to a white person. The organization that direct the boycott be the Montgomery Improvement Association. Through it auspex , black begin to use car pool or walk to wherever they have to go , rather than patronize segregated public transportation. Dr. King be it president and Mr. Abernathy an important aide. In the year that follow the boycott , which help achieve the integratio they seek , Dr. King and Mr. Abernathy go to jail together 17 time a a result of demonstration they lead from Selma , Ala. , to Albany , Ga. Mr. Abernathy , along with Hosea Williams , Bernard Lee , Andrew Young , James Bevel , Jesse Jackson and others , be mainstay of the conference , which be establish by Dr. King in 1957 to promote peaceful integration in the South. Mr. Williams , who be mobilization director of the conference , say he think of Dr. King and Mr. Abernathy a `` the great team , '' observing , `` Martin would n't make a decision without him. '' Fighters for civil right in the South be no stranger to violence. In 1957 , a year after a Federal court issue an injunction that give black and white equal status on bus , a decision upheld by the United States Supreme Court , Mr. Abernathy 's home and church be bombed. He and his family be not harm , but the church be destroyed. In 1961 Dr. King ask Mr. Abernathy to resign his pastor 's job to devote all his energy to the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Mr. Abernathy serve it a vice president at large , a job he keep until Dr. King 's death. `` We 're go to prove beyond the shadow of a doubt that you can kill the dreamer but you can not kill the dream , '' he say , but the conference be not able to maintain it influence and power a it have when Dr. King be alive. Grandson of a Slave The grandson of a slave , Ralph David Abernathy be bear on March 11 , 1926 , in Linden , Ala. , one of 12 child and the young of seven boys. His father , William L , Abernathy , who own a 500-acre farm in Marengo County , support the Linden Academy , a local high school for black , and be say to be the first black ever ask to serve on a grand jury in his county. Mr. Abernathy earn a bachelor 's degree in mathematics at Alabama State College in Montgomery , then receive a master 's in sociology from Atlanta University in 1951. In 1977 , after he leave the conference , he make an unsuccessful run for the Atlanta seat in the House of Representatives that have be vacate by Mr. Young. Mr. Abernathy return to his post a pastor of the West Hunter Street Baptist Church in Atlanta and serve for many years. Mr. Abernathy leave his wife , the former Juanita Odessa Jones , and four child , Juandalynn R. , Donzaleigh A. , Ralph D. 3d and Kwame L .