June 3 , 1990 OBITUARY Rex Harrison , a Leading Man With Urbane Wit , Dies at 82 By ERIC PACE Rex Harrison , the suave British actor who win a Tony in 1957 and an Academy Award in 1964 for his portrayal of Prof. Henry Higgins in `` My Fair Lady , '' die of pancreatic cancer yesterday at his home in Manhattan. He be 82 year old. The actor , who be knight in July 1989 , play a wide variety of role during his long career in theater and film , but he be best know for his portrayal of the waspish professor of phonetics in the musical base on George Bernard Shaw 's play `` Pygmalion. '' Sir Rex make his last stage appearance on May 11 in a revival of `` The Circle , '' a comedy by Somerset Maugham. The production , in which he co-star with Glynis Johns and Stewart Granger , open Nov. 20 , 1989 at the Ambassador Theater. `` He want to be on the stage - that be it , '' say Sir Rex 's attorney , Harold Schiff. `` He do n't care about retiring. '' `` He die with his boot on , no question about it , '' say Elliot Martin , producer of `` The Circle. '' A popular actor who love his craft , Mr. Harrison be know for his wit and charm. He be tall and elegant and be often cast a a man of wealth and refinement. In `` The Circle '' he play a British lord whose scandalous past come back to haunt him. Serious but unpretentious about his work , the actor once say : `` There 's always a struggle , a striving for something big than yourself in all form of art. And even if you do n't achieve greatness - even if you fail , which we all must - everything you do in your work be somehow connect with your attitude toward life , your deep secret feelings. '' Mr. Harrison gain international fame with his award-winning stage and film portrayal of the sharp-tongued professor in the Alan Jay Lerner-Frederick Loewe musical. His co-star a the cockney flower girl Eliza be Julie Andrews on Broadway and Audrey Hepburn in the movie. He be nominate for an Academy Award in 1963 for his other favorite film role , Julius Caesar in `` Cleopatra , '' in which Elizabeth Taylor play the title role. He appear in more than 40 film , and many stage production over the decade , in the United States and the United Kingdom , include his portrayal of Henry VIII in `` Anne of the Thousand Days '' ( 1948 ) , for which he win his first Tony , and `` The Love of Four Colonels '' ( 1953 ) , which he also directed. Despite all his theatrical experience , Mr. Harrison , a musical duffer , have to work hard on his performance in the first stage production of `` My Fair Lady. '' `` Originally I have a block about appear in a musical , '' he recall year later. `` I go to a voice teacher for a while , but that do no good. My range be about one and a half notes. I end up talk the musical number , which be revolutionary at the time. '' `` The lyric be extremely intricate , '' he added. `` They move along like a precisely act scene. If you miss a word - heaven help you - the orchestra rattle past like an express train , and you 've get to run like the devil to catch up. '' 'Just a New Haven Hit ! ' After successful warm-up performance out of town , there be still moment of panic during the Broadway opening , on March 15 , 1956 , at the Mark Hellinger Theater. Mr. Lerner recall later in his autobiography , `` On the Street Where I Live , '' that the New York audience be disappointingly hush during the first scene , which have generate much laughter out of town. Aghast , the director , Moss Hart , rush up to co-worker in the rear of the theater , cry : `` I know it ! It 's just a New Haven hit ! That 's all ! Just a New Haven hit ! '' Mr. Hart erred. In The New York Times the next morning , Brooks Atkinson write : `` Bulletins from the road have not be misleading. 'My Fair Lady ' be a wonderful show. As Professor Higgins and Eliza , Rex Harrison and Julie Andrews play the lead part with the light , dry touch of top-flight Shavian acting. '' `` Although Mr. Harrison be no singer , '' Mr. Atkinson say , `` you will probably imagine that he be sing when he throw himself into the anguished lyric of 'A Hymn to Him ' in the last act. '' `` By that time , he have make Professor Higgins ' temperament so full of frenzy that something like music do come out of him , '' he go on. Mr. Harrison recall in his autobiography , `` Rex , '' which come out in 1974 : `` My contract for 'My Fair Lady ' be for nine month only - but how could you leave a show like that ? It be all far too exciting , and I stay with it for two years. '' He go on to act for another year in a `` Fair Lady '' production at the Drury Lane Theater in London , where he and the show also have an enormous success. 'By George , They 've Got It ! ' Film critic also applaud the movie `` My Fair Lady '' and Mr. Harrison 's performance in it. Bosley Crowther write in The Times : `` As Henry Higgins might have whoop , 'By George , they 've get it ! ' They 've make a superlative film from the musical stage show - a film that enchantingly convey the rich endowment of the famous stage production in a fresh and flow cinematic form. '' Mr. Harrison win further praise from Mr. Crowther for his performance in the film `` Cleopatra. '' `` Caesar be no fustian tyrant , '' the critic write , `` Played stunningly by Rex Harrison , he be a statesman of manifest wisdom , shrewdness and magnanimity. And he be also a fascinating study in political ambiguities. Mr. Harrison 's faceted performance be the best in the film. '' Rex Carey Harrison be bear March 5 , 1908 , in Huyton , England , a granite-quarrying town six mile east of Liverpool. His parent be William Reginald Harrison , a cotton broker , and Edith Carey Harrison. Stagestruck from boyhood , he go to work backstage for the Liverpool Repertory at the age of 16. His first part be one line ; he move on to other act part , then tour for nine year in road company of successful play before he make his mark , initially on the London stage , where he appear for the first time in 1930 and for the last time in 1988 , in `` The Admirable Crichton. '' In 1981 , Artistic Control Mr. Harrison never attend drama school , but have no regret on that score. `` The important thing be to learn through experience , '' he say in an interview for The Times before `` The Circle '' open in 1989. `` The more you do the more you learn. I do n't think anyone can teach act from a podium. '' Mr. Harrison later return to the role of Professor Higgins , to repeat stand ovation , in a 1981 Broadway revival of `` My Fair Lady , '' in which he be give total artistic control. Lauding Mr. Harrison 's re-creation of the part , Frank Rich 's review in The New York Times say : `` Yes , he 's 25 year old - so be we all , God help u - but he still look natty in his cardigan , his velvety smoking jacket , his ballroom finery. And he be invest the role of Henry Higgins with a generosity of spirit and mellifluous humor that only year and experience can bring. '' Mr. Harrison be marry in 1934 to Marjorie Noel Collette Thomas , with whom he have a son , Noel ; to the actress Lilli Palmer in 1943 , with whom he also have a son , Carey ; to the actress Kay Kendall in 1957 ; to the actress Rachel Roberts in 1962 , and to Elizabeth Rees Harris in the early 1970's. All the marriage end in divorce except the one to Miss Kendall , who die in 1959. Sir Rex be survive by his sixth wife , Mercia Tinker , whom he marry in 1978 , and by his two sons. The funeral will be private , but there will be a public memorial service at 11 A.M. June 18 at the Little Church Around the Corner in Manhattan. Do n't You Pause , 'Enry 'Iggins ? Some of Mr. Harrison 's better-known stage appearance be in the following play : Anne of the Thousand Days , 1948 The Cocktail Party , 1950 Book and Candle , 1950 The Love of Four Colonels , 1953 My Fair Lady , 1956 The Fighting Cock , 1959 Caesar and Cleopatra , 1977 The Kingfisher , 1978 Heartbreak House , 1984 The Circle , 1989 His more than 40 film include : Major Barbara , 1941 Blithe Spirit , 1945 Anna and the King of Siam , 1946 The Ghost and Mrs. Muir , 1947 Unfaithfully Yours , 1948 The Four Poster , 1952 Midnight Lace , 1960 Cleopatra , 1963 The Yellow Rolls-Royce , 1964 My Fair Lady , 1964 Doctor Doolittle , 1967