September 4 , 1991 OBITUARY Frank Capra , Whose Films Helped America Keep Faith in Itself , Is Dead at 94 By PETER B. FLINT Frank Capra , the Academy Award- win director whose movie be suffuse with affectionate portrayal of the common man and the strength and foible of American democracy , die yesterday at his home. He be 94 year old and live in La Quinta , Calif. , a suburb of Palm Springs. He die in his sleep , say his son Tom , executive producer of NBC 's `` Today '' show in New York. Mr. Capra , the son of illiterate Sicilian peasant who come to this country by steerage when he be 6 , be one of Hollywood 's pre-eminent director in the 1930 's and 40 's , one of the first whose name appear on marquee and above the title in film credits. Won 3 Oscars He be the first to win three directorial Oscars -- for `` It Happened One Night '' ( 1934 ) , `` Mr. Deeds Goes to Town '' ( 1936 ) and `` You Ca n't Take It With You '' ( 1938 ) . The motion picture academy also vote the first and third movie the best of the year. Capra movie be idealistic , sentimental and patriotic. His major film embody his flair for improvisation and spontaneity , buoyant humor and sympathy for the populist belief of the 1930's. Generations of moviegoer and television viewer have revel in the hitch-hiking antic of Clark Gable and Claudette Colbert in `` It Happened One Night ; '' in Gary Cooper 's whimsical self-defense of Longfellow Deeds at a hilarious sanity hearing in `` Mr. Deeds Goes to Town ; '' in the impassioned filibuster by James Stewart a an incorruptible Senator in `` Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , '' in Mr. Cooper 's battle to prevent a power-crazed industrialist from take dictatorial control of the country in `` Meet John Doe , '' and in Mr. Stewart 's salvation by a guardian angel in `` It 's a Wonderful Life. '' Bluffed His Way In The typical hero in almost all late Capra movie be a homespun American crusader , an honest and naive idealist threaten by evil forces. He eventually win out because of his innate goodness , wit and courage -- and the critical aid of a shrewd , knowledgable girlfriend. Mr. Capra bluff his way into silent movie in 1922 and , despite total ignorance of movie making , direct and produce a profitable one-reeler. He then diligently learn his craft , advance from prop man to gag writer to director-producer. He rise to fame at Columbia Pictures , which , when he begin , be a minor production company head by the tyrannical Harry Cohn. Impressed by Mr. Capra 's brashness , Mr. Cohn let him direct a series of adventure film and he become the key director in make Columbia a major studio. His first major success be `` Lady for a Day , '' a rambunctious 1933 comedy base on a Damon Runyon tale. A year later , `` It Happened One Night , '' a comedy sleeper , become the first movie to win all five major Academy Awards : best film , director , screenplay , actor and actress. `` Mr. Deeds Goes to Town '' center on a hayseed hero who , inherit $ 20 million , seek to subsidize farm for the Depression 's jobless. Successful Gamble Mr. Capra then gamble successfully on a costly and opulent filming of a mystical novel , `` Lost Horizon , '' by James Hilton , about a remote Tibetan paradise call Shangri-la , star Ronald Colman. `` You Ca n't Take It With You '' be base on a Pulitzer-Prize play by George S. Kaufman and Moss Hart about an unconventional family. '' `` Mr. Smith Goes to Washington '' evoke the wrath of both the Senate and the Washington press corp for depict a corrupt Senator and a tippling journalist. But the 1939 film be regard by critic a one of Mr. Capra 's most brilliant. `` Meet John Doe '' draw criticism for what be see a a `` cop-out '' happy ending. But Bosley Crowther of The Times call the 1941 movie `` superlative '' and say it be `` by far the hardest-hitting and most trenchant picture on the theme of democracy '' Mr. Capra have yet made. By the late 1940 's , however , the director 's optimism no longer coincide with the mood of Americans and his movie be describe by some reviewer a naive , sentimental and sanctimonious `` Capra-corn. '' In his autobiography , unabashedly call `` The Name Above the Title , '' he acknowledge his `` gee whiz '' philosophy , but defend it. `` I always felt the world can not fall apart as long a free men see the rainbow , feel the rain and hear the laugh of a child , '' he wrote. Proud and independent , Mr. Capra be a pioneer in gain autonomy over the film he make , from the first concept to final cuts. He collaborate with his scriptwriter , usually Robert Riskin , and , under his `` one-man , one- film '' credo , he produce as well a direct all his late movies. Many Innovations Capra innovation include accelerated , faster-than-life pacing with overlap dialogue ; unaffected , conversational speech ; removal of men 's makeup , and the tape recording of preview to gauge audience reaction that might necessitate revisions. Noted for get actor to perform at the top of their talent , Mr. Capra make star of Harry Langdon , Jean Harlow and Barbara Stanwyck. Soft-spoken in private life , he could be a tough professional , match wit and barb with Harry Cohn and , a president of the Directors Guild , force major producer , after a bitter dispute in 1939 , to recognize and grant concession to the guild. He be also a former president of the motion picture academy. Mr. Capra be an articulate , effervescent and competitive man who have a short , wiry build , a square jaw , and glisten teeth. He dress casually , favor flat cap , sweater and rumple trousers. Frank Capra be bear on May 18 , 1897 , in Palermo , Sicily. In 1903 his family cross the Atlantic in steerage and settle in Los Angeles. Vowing to rise from poverty , the boy read voraciously. He work from elementary school on , first selling newspaper while battle other newsboy for choice selling sites. Unlike his six sibling , he go to college , the California Institute of Technology , where he win a scholarship while hold several job , and be graduate in 1918. He then enlist in the Army , where he teach mathematics. After World War I , unable to get engineering work , he become a vagabond for several year , roam around the West , do menial job and variously sell book and wildcat mining stocks. He trick his way into movie by give an aspire producer the impression he be a director. For $ 75 he adapt and direct a Rudyard Kipling barroom poem , spend $ 1,700 to make the one-reeler , which be sell to Pathe for $ 3,500. Mr. Capra become , successively , a prop man , film cutter , assistant director , title-frame writer and gag writer for Hal Roach 's `` Our Gang '' comedy and Mack Sennett 's Keystone Comedies. At Columbia Pictures he make a quickie comedy , `` That Certain Thing , '' win a long-term contract and direct success like `` Submarine , '' `` Flight , '' `` Dirigible , '' `` Platinum Blonde , '' with Jean Harlow , and `` The Miracle Woman , '' with Barbara Stanwyck. Took Up Contemporary Issues Hitting his stride , he turn to contemporary issues. In `` American Madness '' ( 1932 ) , a banker ( Walter Huston ) lend money on the basis of character rather than collateral. The bank suffer a run , but the people he have trust save the day. In `` The Bitter Tea of General Yen , '' Mr. Capra deal daringly with racism and miscegenation. The movie , star Miss Stanwyck and Nils Asther , open Radio City Music Hall in 1933. In the next eight year , Mr. Capra make an unbroken succession of hits. When the Japanese attack Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7 , 1941 , he join the Army again. Before go on active duty he film Broadway farce , `` Arsenic and Old Lace , '' star Cary Grant. During the war , Colonel Capra produce a series of acclaimed propaganda movie show the contrast between freedom and totalitarianism. The first of the series , `` Prelude to War , '' win the best-documentary Oscar in 1942. He also win the Distinguished Service Medal , France 's Legion of Merit and the Order of the British Empire. After the war , Mr. Capra and several colleague form an independent production company , Liberty Films. But financing and tax become obstacle and they eventually sell the company to Paramount. Though Mr. Capra get $ 1 million in the sale , he lose full control of the film-making process. His Favorite Film In 1946 , while still enjoy full control at Liberty , he co-wrote and direct `` It 's a Wonderful Life , '' a quintessential Capra fantasy reflect his conviction that no man who have friend be a failure. The film , star James Stewart a a small-town battler who be save from suicide by an angel , be fault by some reviewer for sentimentality. Nonetheless , the movie win many admirer over the decade and be invariably telecast at Christmastime. It be Mr. Capra 's favorite among his films. He go on to direct a series of acclaimed film until , in 1961 , he remake `` Lady for a Day , '' retitled `` Pocketful of Miracles , '' star Bette Davis , a Prohibition-era lampoon that be widely regard a date and rambling. It be his last movie. In 1967 he and his wife leave Hollywood for La Quinta , where he garden , golfed , fish , hunt and , a a self-taught musician , play many string instruments. Mr. Capra 's wife Lucille , who be know a Lu , die in 1984 , 52 year after their wedding. In addition to his son Tom , he be survive by another son , Frank Jr. , of Malibu , Calif. ; a daughter , Lucille , of Findlay , Ohio , and 10 grandchildren. Frank Capra 's career span nearly four decades. These be the film he directed. Long Pants , 1927 For the Love of Mike , 1927 Submarine , 1928 The Younger Generation , 1929 The Donovan Affair , 1929 Flight , 1929 Ladies of Leisure , 1930 Rain or Shine , 1930 Dirigible , 1931 The Miracle Woman , 1931 Platinum Blonde , 1931 Forbidden , 1932 American Madness , 1932 The Bitter Tea of General Yen , 1933 Lady for a Day , 1933 It Happened One Night , 1934 Broadway Bill , 1934 Mr. Deeds Goes to Town , 1936 Lost Horizon , 1937 You Ca n't Take It With You , 1938 Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , 1939 Meet John Doe , 1941 Tunisian Victory , 1944 Arsenic and Old Lace , 1944 It 's a Wonderful Life , 1946 State of the Union , 1948 Riding High , 1950 Here Comes the Groom , 1951 A Hole in the Head , 1959 Pocketful of Miracles , 1961