September 26 , 1991 OBITUARY Dr. Seuss , Modern Mother Goose , Dies at 87 By ERIC PACE Theodor Seuss Geisel , the author and illustrator whose whimsical fantasy write under the pen name Dr. Seuss entertain and instructed million of child and adult around the world , die in his sleep on Tuesday night at his home in La Jolla , Calif. He be 87 year old. The exact cause of death be unclear , say Jerry Harrison , who oversee child 's book for Random House , Mr. Geisel 's longtime publishers. Mr. Harrison say the author have be suffer from an infection of his jawbone that have become acute in recent months. `` We 've lose the fine talent in the history of child 's book , '' Mr. Harrison say in a telephone interview , `` and we 'll probably never see one like him again. '' Mr. Geisel 's work delight child by combine the ridiculous and the logical , generally with a homely moral. `` If I start out with the concept of a two-headed animal , '' he once say , `` I must put two hat on his head and two toothbrush in the bathroom. It 's logical insanity. '' Mr. Geisel 's first book , `` And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street , '' appear in 1937. It be follow by such classic a `` Horton Hatches the Egg '' in 1940 and `` The Cat in the Hat '' in 1957. Over the year , zany animal character , name and book title be the Dr. Seuss trademarks. There be `` Yertle the Tertle '' ( 1958 ) , `` Fox in Socks '' ( 1965 ) , `` Mr. Brown Can Moo ! Can You ? '' ( 1970 ) and others too improbable to mention. But the archetypal Seuss hero , many connoisseur felt , be Horton , a conscientious pachyderm who be dupe by a lazy bird into sit on her egg. Horton stuck to the job for many week , despite dreadful weather and other harassment , say , `` I mean what I say and I say what I mean ; an elephant 's faithful 100 percent. '' His virtue be finally reward when the egg hatch and out come a creature with a bird 's wing and an elephant 's head. Mr. Geisel win the heart and mind of child `` by the sneaky stratagem of make them laugh , '' Richard R. Lingeman write in a review in The New York Times. He also charm adult , especially with `` Oh , the Places You 'll Go ! , '' a 1990 book he write for adult reader as well a child , which have be on The New York Times best-seller list for 79 weeks. Sales of `` Horton Hatches the Egg , '' `` The Cat in the Hat '' and other child 's book by Mr. Geisel total well over 200 million copy , Kathleen Fogarty , the director of publicity for Random House Books for Young Readers , said. She say he have write 48 book in his long career , some of them mean for adult as well a children. In 1984 , he win a special Pulitzer citation `` for his contribution over nearly half a century to the education and enjoyment of America 's child and their parents. '' Mr. Geisel -- he pronounce the name GUYS-ell -- be also the founder and a longtime executive of Beginner Books , a publishing concern buy by Random House. Its book for young child , some by Dr. Seuss , have sell more than 50 million copy and be in school library in country around the world. His book have be translate into 20 language , Ms. Fogarty said. 'Adults Are Obsolete Children' Mr. Geisel begin use his middle name a a pen name for his cartoon because he hop to use his surname a a novelist one day. But when he get around to do a grown-up book -- `` The Seven Lady Godivas '' in 1939 -- the grown-ups do not seem to want to buy his humor , and he go back to write for child , become famous and wealthy. `` I 'd rather write for kid , '' he later explained. `` They 're more appreciative ; adult be obsolete child , and the hell with them. '' When Mr. Geisel be interested or amuse , which be very often , his eye would light up with boyish warmth. With his lank hair , beaky nose and neat bow tie , he look rather like the college professor he have originally set out to be. Though he never earn a doctorate , his alma mater , Dartmouth College , give him an honorary one. The world of Mr. Geisel 's imagination be nourish by his childhood visit to the zoo in Springfield , Mass. He be bear in Springfield on March 4 , 1904 , the son of Theodor R. Geisel , the Superintendent of Parks , and Henrietta Seuss Geisel. Superintendent Geisel , the son of an emigre German cavalry officer who found a brewery in Springfield , expand the zoo and like to show it off to his son. In the Cage With the Lions `` I use to hang around there a lot , '' Mr. Geisel recall in an interview. `` They 'd let me in the cage with the small lion and the small tiger , and I get chew up every once in a while. '' After graduate from high school , he major in English at Dartmouth , where he contribute cartoon to the campus humor magazine , Jack-O'-Lantern , and become it editor. He graduate with a B.A. in 1925. Then follow a year of graduate work in English literature at Lincoln College of Oxford University , after which he spend a year travel in Europe. In 1927 , Mr. Geisel marry Helen Marion Palmer of Orange , N.J. , a teacher he have meet when they be study at Oxford. It be she who persuade him to give up thought of teaching and make draw a career. 'These Fabulous Animals ' `` Ted 's notebook be always fill with these fabulous animal , '' she later recalled. `` So I set to work divert him ; here be a man who could draw such picture ; he should be earn a living do that. '' In addition to serve a her husband 's business manager and help edit his book , she write child 's book under her maiden name. Mr. Geisel begin contribute humorous material to Vanity Fair , Liberty , Judge and other magazines. But when he first become famous , it be for draw the `` Quick Henry , the Flit ! '' insecticide advertisements. Mr. Geisel also write for the movies. His documentary film `` Hitler Lives '' and `` Design for Death '' win Academy Awards in 1946 and 1947 , and his cartoon short `` Gerald McBoing Boing '' win an Oscar in 1951. He also design and produce cartoon for television , include the Peabody Award-winning `` How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! '' and `` Horton Hears a Who ! '' Among his late book be some on serious topics. In `` The Butter Battle Book '' ( 1984 ) , he introduce young reader to the danger of the nuclear arm race. In 1986 , in `` You 're Only Old Once ! , '' he address the problem of old age in a book for grown-ups. Edward Sorel , write in The New York Times Book Review , say the book be illustrate with Mr. Geisel 's `` characteristic verve and imagination. '' But , he add , `` there 's something amiss in the blithe assumption that the sort of rhyme which delight a 4-year-old ( or an adult reading to a 4-year-old ) will still entertain when read alone through bifocals. '' Admirers of Mr. Geisel say the universality of `` Oh , the Places You 'll Go ! , '' which address the difficulty of find one 's way through life , account for it success last year. The book quickly become a popular graduation present , and more than a million copy be say to have be sold. After write the book , Mr. Geisel work on the screenplay for a plan feature-movie version. And this July , `` Six by Seuss , '' a one-volume collection of six of his early book , be published. Helen Palmer Geisel die in 1967. She and Mr. Geisel have no children. In 1968 , Mr. Geisel marry Audrey Stone Dimond , who survive him. The Seuss Fauna In Nearly 50 Books The improbable creature and landscape create by Theodor Seuss Geisel appear in nearly 50 book publish over more than a half-century. These be some of his best-known works. And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street 1937 The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins 1938 Horton Hatches the Egg 1940 Horton Hears a Who ! 1954 How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! 1957 The Cat in the Hat 1957 Yertle the Turtle 1958 The Cat in the Hat Comes Back 1958 One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish 1960 Green Eggs and Ham 1960 Fox in Socks 1965 Mr. Brown Can Moo ! Can You ? 1970 The Lorax 1971 The Butter Battle Book 1984 You 're Only Old Once ! 1986 Oh , the Places You 'll Go ! 1990 A Menagerie in Fantasy and Poetry `` In this box be two thing I will show to you now. You will like these two thing , '' Said the cat with a bow. `` I will pick up the hook. You will see something new. Two things. And I call them Thing One and Thing Two. These Things will not bite you. They want to have fun. '' Then , out of the box Came Thing Two and Thing One ! And they run to u fast. They say , `` How do you do ? Would you like to shake hand With Thing One and Thing Two ? '' And Sally and I Did not know what to do. So we have to shake hand With Thing One and Thing Two. -- From `` The Cat in the Hat '' ( 1957 ) The Grinch hat Christmas ! The whole Christmas season ! Now , please do n't ask why. No one quite know the reason. It could be his head be n't screw on just right. It could be , perhaps , that his shoe be too tight. But I think that the most likely reason of all May have be that his heart be two size too small. -- From `` How The Grinch Stole Christmas ! '' ( 1957 ) I 'm king of the butterfly ! King of the air ! Ah , me ! What a throne ! What a wonderful chair ! I 'm Yertle the Turtle ! Oh , marvelous me ! For I be the ruler of all that I see ! -- From `` Yertle the Turtle '' ( 1950 ) `` You 're glumping the pond where the Humming-Fish hummed ! No more can they hum , for their gill be all gummed. So I 'm send them off. Oh , their future be dreary. They 'll walk on their fin and get woefully weary in search of some water that be n't so smeary. '' -- From `` The Lorax '' ( 1971 )