September 29 , 1991 OBITUARY Miles Davis , Trumpeter , Dies ; Jazz Genius , 65 , Defined Cool By JON PARELES Miles Davis , the trumpeter and composer whose haunt tone and ever-changing style make him an elusive touchstone of jazz for four decade , die yesterday at St. John 's Hospital and Health Center in Santa Monica , Calif. He be 65 year old. He die of pneumonia , respiratory failure and a stroke , his doctor , Jeff Harris , say in a statement release by the hospital. A spokeswoman for the hospital , Pat Kirk , say yesterday that Mr. Davis have be a patient there for several weeks. Mr. Davis 's unmistakable , voicelike , nearly vibratoless tone -- at time distant and melancholy , at others assertive yet luminous -- have be imitate around the world. His solo , whether ruminate on a whispered ballad melody or jabbing against a beat , have be model for generation of jazz musicians. Other trumpeter play fast and high , but more than in any technical feat Mr. Davis 's influence lay in his phrasing and sense of space. `` I always listen to what I can leave out , '' he would say. Equally important , Mr. Davis never settle into one style ; every few year he create a new lineup and format for his groups. Each phase bring denunciation from critic ; each , except for the most recent one , have set off repercussion throughout modern jazz. `` I have to change , '' he once said. `` It 's like a curse. '' Mr. Davis come of age in the be-bop era ; many successive style -- cool jazz , hard-bop , modal jazz , jazz-rock , jazz-funk -- be sparked or ratify by his example. Throughout his career he be ground in the blue , but he also draw on pop , flamenco , classical music , rock , Arab music and Indian music. Musicians he discover often move on to innovation of their own. Mr. Davis be also know for a volatile personality and arrogant public pronouncement , and for a stage presence that could be charismatic or aloof. For a while , he turn his back on audience a he play and walk offstage when he be not soloing. His public persona be flamboyant , uncompromising and fiercely independent ; he drive Ferraris and Lamborghinis and do not mince word when he dislike something. Yet his music be deeply collaborative. He spur his sidemen to find their own musical voice and be inspire by them in turn. Trumpet at 13 Miles Dewey Davis 3d be bear May 25 , 1926 , in Alton , Ill. , the son of an affluent dental surgeon , and grow up in East St. Louis , Ill. On his 13th birthday , he be give a trumpet and lesson with a local jazz musician , Elwood Buchanan. He get his musician ' union card at 15 so he could perform around St. Louis with Eddie Randall 's Blue Devils. Clark Terry , the trumpeter , one of his early idol , become Mr. Davis 's mentor , and his local reputation grow quickly. Mr. Davis 's parent make him turn down early offer to join big bands. But in 1944 the Billy Eckstine band , which then include two men who be begin to create be-bop -- Charlie Parker on alto saxophone and Dizzy Gillespie on trumpet -- arrive in St. Louis with an ail third trumpeter. Mr. Davis sit in for two weeks. The experience make him decide to move to New York , the center of the be-bop revolution. He enrol in the Juilliard School of Music in September 1944 , and for his first month in New York he study classical music by day and jazz by night , in the club of 52d Street and Harlem. Mr. Parker , who room with Mr. Davis for a time , and Mr. Gillespie introduce him to the coterie of be-bop musicians. From them he learn the harmonic vocabulary of be-bop and begin to forge a solo style. Mr. Davis make his first recording in May 1945 back up a singer , Rubberlegs Williams. He also perform in the 52d Street club with the saxophonist Coleman Hawkins and Eddie ( Lockjaw ) Davis. In the fall of that year he join Charlie Parker 's quintet and drop out of Juilliard. `` Up at Juilliard , '' Mr. Davis say later , `` I play in the symphony , two note , 'bop-bop , ' every 90 bar , so I say , 'Let me out of here , ' and then I left. '' With Parker 's quintet , Mr. Davis record one of the first be-bop session in November 1945. It yield the single `` Now 's the Time '' and `` Koko. '' For the next few year he work primarily with Parker , and his tentative , occasionally shaky play evolve into a pared-down , middle-register style that create a contrast with Parker 's aggressive forays. He make his first recording a a leader on Aug. 14 , 1947 , with a quintet that include Parker on tenor saxophone. But Mr. Davis be move away from the extroversion of early be-bop , and in 1948 he begin to experiment with a new , more elaborately orchestrated style that would become know a `` cool jazz. '' Working with the arranger Gil Evans ( a frequent collaborator throughout his career ) , John Lewis and Gerry Mulligan , Mr. Davis bring a nine-piece band to the Royal Roost in New York to play rich , ruminative ensemble piece , with solos float in diffuse cloud of harmony. Although the public show little interest , Mr. Davis be able to record the music in 1949 and 1950 , and it help spawn a cerebral cool-jazz movement on the West Coast. Mr. Davis become a heroin addict in the early 1950 's , perform infrequently and make erratic recordings. But in 1954 he overcome his addiction and begin his first string of important small-group recordings. `` Walkin ' , '' a swaggering blue piece inform by the extended harmony of be-bop , turn decisively away from cool jazz and announce the arrival of hard bop. During 1954 Mr. Davis record with such lead musician a the saxophonist Sonny Rollins and the pianist Horace Silver and Thelonious Monk. Over the next year , he make a triumphant appearance at the Newport Jazz Festival and assemble his first important quintet , with John Coltrane on tenor saxophone , Red Garland on piano , Paul Chambers on bass and Philly Joe Jones on drums. Breakthrough to Popularity Like many of the Davis band to follow , it seem to be an incompatible grouping in prospect , mix the suavity and harmonic nuance of Garland and Chambers with the forcefulness of Jones and the raw energy of Coltrane. But it achieve a remarkable balance of delicacy and drive , with a sense of space and dynamic influence by the pianist Ahmad Jamal 's trio , and it bring Mr. Davis his first general popularity. The quintet record six album in 1955-56 , four of them in marathon session to fulfill Mr. Davis 's record contract with the independent Prestige Records label so he could sign with Columbia , a major label. In 1957 Mr. Davis have a throat operation to remove node from his vocal cords. Two day later he begin shout at someone who , he once say , `` try to convince me to go into a deal I do n't want. '' His voice be permanently damage , reduce to a raspy whisper. During the late 1950 's Mr. Davis alternate orchestral album with Gil Evans arrangement -- `` Miles Ahead '' ( 1957 ) , `` Porgy and Bess '' ( 1958 ) and `` Sketches of Spain '' ( 1960 ) -- with small-group sessions. He record the soundtrack for Louis Malle 's film `` Ascenseur Pour l'Echafaud '' ( `` Elevator to the Gallows '' ) with French musician , then reconvene his quintet and add Julian ( Cannonball ) Adderley on alto saxophone. The sound track and the sextet 's first album , `` Milestones , '' signal another metamorphosis , cut back the harmonic motion of be-bop to make music with few chord and more ambiguous harmonies. Mood and Melodic Tension With `` Kind of Blue '' in 1959 , that change be complete. Most of the piece on `` Kind of Blue '' ( compose by Mr. Davis or his new pianist , Bill Evans ) be base on modal scale rather than chords. Mood and melodic tension become paramount , in music that be at time voluptuous and austere. From this point onward , Mr. Davis would return often to music base on static , stripped-down harmonies. John Coltrane , among others , be to make modal jazz one of the definitive style of the 1960's. The Davis group 's personnel fluctuate in the early 1960 's until Mr. Davis settle on a new quintet in 1964 , with Wayne Shorter ( who become the group 's main composer ) on tenor saxophone , Herbie Hancock on piano , Ron Carter on bass and Tony Williams on drums. It be one of the most important ensemble in 1960 's jazz , push tonal harmony to it limit and develop a dazzling rhythmic flexibility. On the album `` E.S.P. , '' `` Miles Smiles , '' `` The Sorcerer '' and `` Nefertiti , '' the group could swing furiously , then open up unexpected space or dissolve the beat into abstract wave of sound. The quintet define an exploratory alternative to 1960 's free jazz. The four sidemen also record prolifically on their own , extend the quintet 's influence. Branching Into Rock Rhythms Mr. Davis have touch on rock rhythm in one selection on `` E.S.P. , '' but with the 1968 album `` Miles in the Sky '' and `` Filles de Kilimanjaro , '' he begin to experiment more seriously with rock rhythm , repeat bass line and electronic instruments. He also begin to work with open-ended composition , base on rhythmic feeling , fragment of melody or bass pattern and his own on-the-spot directives. Mr. Davis expand the group on `` In a Silent Way '' ( 1969 ) with three electric keyboard and electric guitar. Using static harmonic and a rock undercurrent , the music be eerie and reflective , at once abstract and ground by the beat. `` Bitches Brew '' ( 1969 ) , record by a large group -- trumpeter , soprano saxophonist , bass clarinetist , two bassist , two or three keyboardist , three drummer and a percussionist -- be an aggressive , spooky sequel , roil and churn with improvisation in every register. The two album , along with performance at the Fillmore East and Fillmore West rock auditorium , bring Mr. Davis 's music to the rock audience ; `` Bitches Brew '' become a best-selling album. Musicians who have work with Mr. Davis from 1968-70 go on to lead the pioneering jazz-rock group -- the Mahavishnu Orchestra , Tony Williams Lifetime , Weather Report and Return to Forever. Reaching Young Blacks Mr. Davis , meanwhile , be turn from rock toward funk ; in interview at the time , he talk about reach young black audiences. His band in the 1970 's be anchor by a bassist , Michael Henderson , who have work with Stevie Wonder , and they move percussion and syncopate bass line into the foreground. Around them , keyboard , saxophone , guitar and Mr. Davis 's trumpet ( now electrify , and often play through a wah-wah pedal ) supply rhythmic and textural effect as well a solos. `` On the Corner '' ( 1972 ) , which also use Indian tabla drum and sitar , mark the change , and a pair of live album , `` Dark Magus '' and `` Pangaea , '' be even more jolting. Conventional melody and harmony have be virtually abandon ; the music be a thicket of rhythm and electronic textures. Critical reaction at the time be mixed , but those album become an inspiration to the late-1970 's `` no wave '' noise-rockers and a new generation of funk experimenter in the 1980's. By the end of 1975 mount medical problem -- among them ulcer , throat node , hip surgery and bursitis -- force Mr. Davis into a five-year retirement. In 1981 he return with an album , `` The Man With the Horn , '' a Kool Jazz Festival concert in New York and a band feature Robert Irving 3d a keyboardist and co-producer. Although Mr. Davis 's technique be intact , the music seem for the first time to involve commercial calculation and a look backward at Mr. Davis 's previous style ; he even play pop songs. With `` You 're Under Arrest '' ( 1985 ) , `` Tutu '' ( 1986 ) and `` Music From Siesta '' ( 1988 ) , he record the music layer by layer , like pop album , instead of lead musician in live interaction. But on stage and on record , especially on the blues-oriented `` Star People '' ( 1983 ) , there be still moment of the fierce beauty that be Mr. Davis 's last legacy to American music. His last New York performance be in June a part of a double bill with B. B. King in the JVC Jazz Festival. In a review in The New York Times , Peter Watrous call the performance `` a particularly bad night '' for Mr. Davis. `` The problem seem simple , '' Mr. Watrous wrote. `` Mr. Davis be incapable of sustain more than a few note at a time ; the spareness seem less an editorial decision than a decision hand down by physical constraints. '' Mr. Davis be marry three time , to the dancer Frances Taylor , singer Betty Mabry and the actress Cicely Tyson. All end in divorce. Survivors include a daughter , Cheryl ; three son , Gregory , Miles IV and Erin , and several grandchildren. Memorial service be be plan in New York City and East St. Louis , say Ms. Kirk at the hospital .