April 2 , 1991 OBITUARY Martha Graham Dies at 96 ; A Revolutionary in Dance By ANNA KISSELGOFF Martha Graham , a prime revolutionary in the art of this century and the American dancer and choreographer whose name become synonymous with modern dance , die yesterday at her home in Manhattan. She be 96 year old. Miss Graham die of cardiac arrest after be treat for two month for pneumonia , say Ron Protas , general director of the Martha Graham Dance Company. Miss Graham have become ill in December after a 55-day tour of the Far East with her troupe. She enter the hospital on Jan. 15 and return home two week ago. Frequently rank with Picasso , Stravinsky and James Joyce for develop a form of expression that break the traditional mold , Miss Graham be initially acclaim a a great dancer. Masterworks and Invention Yet ultimately her genius -- universally recognize a she become the most honored figure in American dance -- be embody in her choreographic masterworks and her invention of a new and codified dance language. The Graham technique , which be now use by dance company throughout the world , become the first endure alternative to the idiom of classical ballet. Powerful , dynamic , jagged and fill with tension , this vocabulary combine with Miss Graham 's distinctive system of train to set her above other dance innovators. Although such achievement be part of Miss Graham 's multi-faceted pioneering role in help to establish modern dance outside the old ballet tradition after the 1920 's , she continue to amaze her public for more than 60 years. She choreograph more than 180 works. The most recent be her self-mocking `` Maple Leaf Rag , '' which have it premiere on Oct. 2 with the Martha Graham Dance Company in New York. Throughout her career , Miss Graham 's fundamental tenet be that dance should reach audience through a visceral response rather than an objective image that register upon the intellect. `` Out of emotion come form , '' she say , and then prove that out of form she could re-create the same emotion onstage. She never waver in her belief that movement could express inner feeling. Miss Graham seek to give `` visible substance to thing felt '' and to `` chart the graph of the heart. '' These celebrate Graham phrase become the metaphor central to her art. Miss Graham 's dance speak eloquently against the crushing of the human spirit , and one of her frequent theme be the condemnation of intolerance , especially toward nonconformists. Her own life a a creative artist epitomize the independent spirit with which she so frequently imbue her dramatic heroines. The figure conquer sexual fear in `` Errand Into the Maze , '' the woman look deep into herself while prepare for an unnamed fate in `` Herodiade '' and the American pioneer brim with optimism in `` Frontier '' could also be Clytemnestra or Jocasta , antiquity 's queen who -- in the Graham canon -- emerge from crisis through the sheer force of self-understanding. Miss Graham usually cast herself at the center of these work until 1969 , when she give her last performance and retire reluctantly from the stage at the age of 75. Because she rarely meet conventional expectation about dance , she be both misunderstood and acclaimed. She be surround by debate throughout her career ; few remain indifferent to her. Acknowledgment of Miss Graham 's role a a dominant force in all the art at first come from painter , writer , musician and the act profession. Gregory Peck and Bette Davis be among the many drama student she teach over the year at the Neighborhood Playhouse. Eleanor Roosevelt invite Miss Graham to perform at the White House in 1937 , and in 1976 Miss Graham become the first dance personality to receive , from President Gerald R. Ford , the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the country 's high civilian honor. Nonetheless , Miss Graham 's highly intense dancing and choreography be not intend to soothe the spirit and do not find ready acceptance. Quest for Inner Reality , But Never for Realism Like Picasso , she be concern with an inner reality. `` For me , dance be theater , '' she wrote. But she never resort to a realistic theater. More often than not , her choreography present a dancer 's body a distorted or dislocate , an assemblage of form align into maximum expressiveness. Audiences throughout the world be often disturb by Miss Graham 's frank acknowledgment of human sexuality , especially in her famous cycle inspire by Greek myths. Miss Graham 's Medea , Jocasta , Phaedra and Clytemnestra give vent to their lust and hate , bar the passion that few human like to recognize in themselves but that Miss Graham expose with the unflinching scrutiny of a 20th-century Jungian analyst. For Miss Graham , dance become a collective memory that could communicate the emotion universal to all civilization : mythology , she felt , be the psychology of the ancients. Miss Graham 's encyclopedic approach to dance -- a creative wellspring from source as vary a American Indian ritual to the Bible -- often carry several level of meaning and startle a public that define dance in linear or pictorial terms. Miss Graham , for her part , say she want her dance to be `` felt '' rather than comprehend in the usual manner. In 1944 , John Martin , dance critic for The New York Times , write of the emotional effect that the Graham dance theater could have upon the viewer. He warn that `` Deaths and Entrances , '' the choreographer 's study of turbulent passion inspire by Anne , Charlotte and Emily Bronte , the 19th-century English writer , be `` un-understandable through the usual organ of understand '' and `` slip in through sensory perceptions. '' The Graham Technique Is Based on Breathing In general , Miss Graham saw art a a reflection of it time inseparable from life. `` My dancing , '' she say , `` be not an attempt to interpret life in the literary sense. It be an affirmation of life through movement. '' Even the dance technique that she hammer out on her own body and then transfer to her school and company derive from the most organic aspect of human life : the act of breathing. That act be formalize and dramatize in the idiom 's most basic principle , call contraction and release -- intensified moment of exhalation and inhalation. Miss Graham say her aim be `` to increase the emotional activity of the dancer 's body so that you be teach the body , not teach the mind. '' The contraction , originate in the dancer 's pelvis , create the percussive angular movement and sexual tension that invariably startle a newcomer to the Graham repertory. But it be the Graham idiom a a whole that can look strange to those who expect more of a continuum in dancing. Being 'the Thing Itself ' Instead of Portraying It Above all , she say , `` Dance be not representational. '' Miss Graham recall in late year that a a young dancer about to embark upon an independent career in 1922 , she have chance upon a nonfigurative painting by Wassily Kandinsky -- a slash of red against a field of blue. `` I will dance like that , '' she said. Like other modernist , Miss Graham reject literal imagery in favor of abstraction. Form for form 's sake , however , hold no interest for her. Instead she focus on abstraction in it strict sense , that of extract the essence of a quality of emotion. A celebrate example be `` Lamentation , '' the 1930 solo in which Miss Graham , encase in a tube of stretch jersey , create sharply angular shape on a bench. She do not dance about grief , but seek to be what she call `` the thing itself '' or the embodiment of grief. Miss Graham 's gift for the distilled image range over her entire career. In `` Cave of the Heart '' ( 1946 ) , her Medea be the personification of hate , consume by the venom of jealousy a visualize in snakelike contours. The quintessential Graham could be find in `` Frontier '' ( 1935 ) , one of the choreographer 's piece on overt American themes. The solo initiate her 32-year collaboration with the sculptor Isamu Noguchi. The set for `` Frontier '' be a fragment of a fence seemingly anchor by a rope behind. It have the same spareness and economy of Miss Graham 's solo and the score of her music director and mentor of that time , Louis Horst. Noguchi note in general that he have find in Miss Graham `` a drive that motivate her to strip the dance to it stark rudiment. '' Noguchi 's Sets Sought 'A Limitless Illusion' Both artists share an affinity for form that look abstract and be resonant with multiple meanings. Writing in 1984 , Noguchi say that for `` Frontier '' he have `` think to catch the essential sculpture of space -- a limitless illusion. '' He continue : `` This be the path I continue to investigate whenever Martha would call on me to rise to the occasion. She be the one who always come to me with her requirement and the myth she wish to encompass. My role be to respond. '' Miss Graham 's work reveal an integrate vision. She begin use contemporary score for the company she form in 1929. After 1934 , she tend to use commissioned music and be guide here by Horst , a composer who insist that dance have a life independent of music and do not derive from it. Miss Graham herself , sometimes accuse of use dance a mere aural decor , often say that she do not seek to interpret another art form -- that be , music. Among the composer who write score for Miss Graham be Samuel Barber , William Schuman , Gian Carlo Menotti and Aaron Copland , whose score for her 1944 classic , `` Appalachian Spring , '' win the Pulitzer Prize. Martha Graham , the eldest of three daughter , be bear on May 11 , 1894 , in Allegheny , Pa. , to George Graham , a physician who specialize in mental disorder , and the former Jane ( Jenny ) Beers , a descendant of Miles Standish. In 1908 , the family move to Santa Barbara , Calif. Started Dance Training At 22 , After Father Died In 1916 , after the death of her father and after graduation from a junior college , the Cumnock School , Miss Graham enrol in the Denishawn school in Los Angeles and then join the Denishawn Company. Denishawn , organize by Ruth St. Denis and Ted Shawn , be then the only major dance company that work outside the classical ballet tradition , and it become the incubating ground for such pioneering talent a Doris Humphrey , Charles Weidman and Miss Graham herself. John Murray Anderson saw Miss Graham with Denishawn and hire her for his Greenwich Village Follies in 1923 and 1924. But in those two year Miss Graham realize that neither Denishawn , with it exotic pretext for dance , nor the commercial theater be right for her. At the invitation of Rouben Mamoulian , she join the dance division of the Eastman School of Music in Rochester , where she teach dance. On April 18 , 1926 , she make her concert debut at the 48th Street Theater in New York with work that still show the influence of Denishawn. `` The idiom , '' the critic Robert Sabin recall in 1953 , `` be still prevalently romantic and eclectic , but the spirit be new and as bracing a a salty sea wind. '' Miss Graham taught in the early year in her studio at 66 Fifth Avenue , near 13th Street , and at the Neighborhood Playhouse. She assemble a company of women. Because the member have to support themselves , they would work on new work for nine month , then give a few recital in New York and go on tour. From her group , augment by men in 1938 to 1939 , come the next generation of modern dancer , choreographer and teacher : Anna Sokolow , Sophie Maslow , Pearl Lang , May O'Donnell , Erick Hawkins , Merce Cunningham and later Paul Taylor and John Butler. Miss Graham , who have a long-term relationship with Horst , be marry in 1948 to Mr. Hawkins. They separate in the early 1950 's and be later divorced. Received Financial Help From Many Individuals Before World War II , Miss Graham take on outside assignments. In 1930 , she be the Chosen One in Stravinsky 's `` Rite of Spring '' with the Philadelphia Orchestra , conduct by Leopold Stokowski and choreograph by Leonide Massine. A few year later she collaborate on dramatic production with Blanche Yurka , Katharine Cornell and Guthrie McClintic , and Archibald MacLeish. Troubled by the recur financial problem that be endemic to an art form struggle for acceptance , Miss Graham be help over the year by individual patrons. Among them be Frances Steloff , founder of the Gotham Book Mart , whose $ 1,000 loan make the initial 1926 concert possible , Miss Cornell , Bethsabee de Rothschild , Lila Acheson Wallace and , most recently , Halston. Mrs. Wallace make it possible for the Martha Graham Center for Contemporary Dance to acquire the building at 316 East 63d Street , where the Graham school be situated. In the early year , Miss Graham costume herself and the woman in her troupe in stretch jersey. She later refer to this time a her `` long woolen '' period. Her dance be spare and stark , testimony to her deep interest in ritual , and she be strongly influence by the ceremonial Indian dance she have witness in the Southwest. These experience be reflect in such work a `` Primitive Mysteries '' and `` El Penitente , '' which remain in her company 's repertory. From American Themes To Ancient Mythology In the 1930 's , Miss Graham be know for her American themes. `` We must look to America to bring forth an art as powerful a America itself , '' she say , and produce such work a `` American Document , '' `` American Provincials , '' `` Appalachian Spring , '' `` Letter to the World '' and `` Salem Shore. '' After 1946 , she immerse herself in Hebrew and Greek mythology with `` Cave of the Heart , '' `` Night Journey , '' `` Errand Into the Maze , '' `` Judith , '' `` The Witch of Endor , '' `` Phaedra '' and , most powerfully , the full-evening `` Clytemnestra '' of 1958. She pick up historical personage with legendary quality , the Bronte sister for `` Deaths and Entrances '' and Joan of Arc for `` Seraphic Dialogue. '' As the year progress , Miss Graham be loath to leave the stage. Since she be the central figure on that stage , she eventually begin to create role for herself that be less physically demanding. After her retirement from dance , her new work rarely focus on a protagonist. Repeatedly acclaim a a choreographer , she always consider herself a dancer first. After relinquish her role to young dancer , she continue to direct her company. She make triumphant tour to the Far East and Europe under Government auspex and , in her 80 's and 90 's , increasingly travel abroad with her company. Her tour last fall take in Japan , Taiwan , South Korea and Hong Kong. Congressional Propriety Offended by 'Phaedra' It be on a European trip in 1962 that she run afoul of two United States Representatives , Edna Kelly of Brooklyn and Peter Frelinghuysen of New Jersey. They saw `` Phaedra '' in Bonn and , apparently not know the Greek legend of a queen 's passion for her stepson , protest that the work be too explicit to be a proper cultural export for the United States. Although Miss Graham be identify with a new art form that initially reject classical ballet a be inadequate for contemporary expression , she collaborate with ballet 's leading personalities. In 1959 , the New York City Ballet present `` Episodes , '' consist of two section to Webern 's music. George Balanchine choreograph one half and Miss Graham the other. In 1975 , just before Dame Margot Fonteyn and Rudolf Nureyev appear a guest in her company , she declare , `` The war have end , '' allude to the perceive conflict between modern dance and ballet. Further proof come when Mikhail Baryshnikov appear a a guest with her troupe from 1987 to 1989. Among Miss Graham 's award be the first Guggenheim Fellowship give to a dancer ; the Kennedy Center Honors ; the Aspen Award in the Humanities ; the Capezio Dance Award ; the first Samuel H. Scripps-American Dance Festival Award to honor achievement in modern dance ; the Meadows Award in the performing art ; the Handel Medallion of New York City ; the Henry Hadley medal for contribution to American music , and the first National Medal of Arts. In 1987 , Queen Margrethe II of Denmark give Miss Graham the Ingenio et Arti medal , a rarely award honor and her country 's high distinction for contribution to the art and sciences. Jack Lang , the French Minister of Culture , personally decorate her in 1984 with the Legion of Honor at the Paris Opera. She receive a number of honorary degree , from Yale , Harvard and other universities. Miss Graham like to emphasize that her work and private life be separate. `` I have always fight against any dramatization of my peculiarity or my personality , '' she said. Writing for The New York Times , Thomas Lask note it be through her work `` that she have , in William Faulkner 's apt phrase , put a scratch on the face of eternity. '' Martha Graham be live proof of her own adage : `` No artist be ahead of his time. He be his time ; it be just that others be behind the time. '' Miss Graham leave no immediate survivor .