October 8 , 1991 OBITUARY Leo Durocher , Fiery Ex-Manager , Dies at 86 By THOMAS ROGERS Leo Durocher , perhaps major league baseball 's best example of the win-at-all-costs manager , one who view the game not a a challenging pastime for talented athlete but a a sport relative of guerilla warfare , die yesterday in Palm Springs , Calif. He be 86 year old. A spokesman at Desert Hospital , Randy Bevilacqua , say Durocher die of natural causes. Durocher achieve national notoriety proclaim `` nice guy finish last '' while drive his team to three National League pennant and one supremely unexpected World Series victory. Durocher always place heavy reliance on physical and psychological intimidation of the enemy , the army of foe that , to him , include the umpiring crews. To him , base hit , hook slide and sharp-breaking curveballs be important , but equally so be sharp spike , beanball and umpire-baiting. Twenty-four of his 48 year in and around professional baseball be spend a manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers , New York Giants , Chicago Cubs and Houston Astros , but he be also a good-fielding , light-hitting shortstop for 17 season ; a Los Angeles Dodgers coach under Walter Alston for four year in the 1960 's , and a once-a-week baseball broadcaster with NBC 's `` Game of the Week '' in the late 1950's. Broke In With Yanks Leo Ernest Durocher be bear in West Springfield , Mass. , on July 27 , 1905. He reach the major league briefly in 1925 and then for good in 1928 with the Yankees. He leave , bid a grumpy farewell to the game , in 1973 when he quit a manager of the Astros , at odds with his player , his front office , umpire and the high-echelon executive of the game. As a 5-foot-9-inch , 160-pound battler with the Yankees , Cincinnati Reds , St. Louis Cardinals and the Dodgers , he be know a a fine fielding shortstop whose glove and hustle make up for a .247 batting average. Before his abrasive personality rub harshly on some of the higher-priced Yankees star and Yankee management , bring his trade to the Reds in 1930 , he be characterize by Babe Ruth a `` the all-American out. '' Ruth , then at the peak of his legendary career , be only one of the Bronx Bombers not on good term with `` Lippy , '' a he be known. After three year in Cincinnati , Durocher find his spiritual baseball home with the Cardinals of the mid-1930 's , the famed Gas House Gang that feature talented eccentric like Dizzy and Paul Dean , Pepper Martin , Frankie Frisch and Joe Medwick. The volatile shortstop 's taste for all-out combat on the field and merry hi-jinks off it blend nicely with the rough and ready style of the Cardinals. Joined Dodgers in '38 In 1938 , Durocher move to Brooklyn and take over the managerial duty the following year , quickly become a sort of balding , mercurial folk hero to the rowdy Dodger fans. He become renowned for fiery , dirt-kicking tirade against umpire that delight the partisan fan of `` Dem Bums '' -- Dixie Walker , Pete Reiser , Dolph Camilli , Billy Herman , Pee Wee Reese , Whitlow Wyatt , Kirby Higbe and Medwick. In 1941 , Durocher lead that group to Brooklyn 's first pennant in 21 year , but the Yankees win the World Series in five games. While at Brooklyn , Durocher estimate that he be fire and rehired informally at least 60 time by Larry MacPhail , the general manager , before Branch Rickey take over during World War II. As a nationally know figure after his success with the Dodgers and his many raucous battle against umpire , Durocher make many radio broadcast and public appearance and enjoy rub shoulder with celebrity as well a some less reputable figures. Suspended for '47 Season Baseball Commissioner A. B. ( Happy ) Chandler suspend Durocher for the entire 1947 season for `` the accumulation of unpleasant incident '' that be `` detrimental to baseball. '' Durocher have be warn by Chandler about his association with gamble figure , have figure in a highly publicize controversy with MacPhail -- by then an owner of the Yankees -- and have draw headline with his marriage to the actress Laraine Day , whose former husband charge that Durocher have steal her away from him while pose a a family friend. In Durocher 's absence , the Dodgers win the pennant in 1947 -- Jackie Robinson 's rookie season -- under the leadership of Burt Shotton , a quiet , elderly man who wear a business suit in the dugout and never venture onto the playing field to challenge an umpire 's judgment. Durocher gain entry into `` Barlett 's Familiar Quotations '' for a remark he make about Mel Ott , the former New York Giants superstar and then their manager. `` Nice guy finish last , '' be the quote , but Durocher later claim , after the line draw some criticism from defender of sportsmanship , that he do not necessarily imply a cause-and-effect relationship. Both Dodger and Giant fan go into shock not long after Durocher have return from his suspension. Rickey be not on the best of term with Durocher by then , and when the Giants make it known that they be look to replace Ott a manager , Rickey suggest Durocher a his replacement. On July 15 , 1948 , Durocher forsake Ebbets Field for the Polo Grounds , and Shotton take over the Dodger manage job again. Durocher have be despise for a decade by Giant fan ; now Dodger fan saw the move a treasonous betrayal of the `` Flatbush Faithful. '' Durocher enjoy his great managerial acclaim in the early 1950 's with the Giants. He provide unswerving and never-say-die leadership in 1951 a the Giants rally from a 13 1/2-game deficit in mid-August to win the pennant. They beat the Dodgers in a three-game playoff series courtesy of Bobby Thomson 's fabled home run in the last of the ninth inning of the deciding game at the Polo Grounds. Supplying an important part of the drive to first place be Willie Mays , a rookie center fielder of multiple talent whom his manager often call the best all-round player he have ever seen. When Mays return after two year of Army service in 1954 , he lead the Giants to another pennant , and Durocher be able to claim his only World Series victory , a 4-0 sweep of the heavily-favored Cleveland Indians who have set an American League record with 111 victory in a season. Durocher quit the Giants at the end of the 1955 season to become a baseball commentator on television and also have a brief tryout a a television actor and variety-show host , but receive little critical encouragement. With Cubs and Astros He return to the diamond to serve a coach under Alston from 1961 to 1964. In 1966 , he go back to the manager 's office with the hapless Chicago Cubs. He come close to win a pennant with the Cubs in 1969 , the year of the Mets ' miraculous victory. But in seven year of try , he could never get the Cubs high than second and on July 27 , 1972 , he be replace by Whitey Lockman. Just a month later , he be pick to succeed Harry Walker a manager of the Astros. Durocher claim he be fascinate by the potential talent he saw in Cesar Cedeno , a young outfielder with many of the skill possess by Mays. Cedeno prove a solid ballplayer , but not a superstar. After the Astros finish fourth in 1973 , Durocher decide that the `` new breed of ballplayer , '' the inflexibility of the Astros ' front office , the unquestioned authority that umpire have acquire and the deaf ears that the National League and the commissioner 's office have turn to his complaint be too much to bear or combat. He resign a manager for the last time. In 1975 , he publish a book about his year in baseball , `` Nice Guys Finish Last , '' in collaboration with Ed Linn. As with most of his endeavor , the book create controversy , and it sell well .