February 11 , 1992 OBITUARY Alex Haley , 70 , Author of 'Roots , ' Dies By ERIC PACE Alex Haley , the Pulitzer Prize-winning author of `` Roots : The Saga of an American Family , '' which chronicle his ancestor ' origin in Africa and their passage from slavery to freedom in America , die yesterday at Swedish Hospital Medical Center in Seattle. He be 70 year old and have home in Knoxville , Tenn. , Norris , Tenn. , and Seattle. He die of cardiac arrest , say a spokeswoman for the hospital , Jane Ann Wilder. Mr. Haley 's son , William Alexander Haley , say at a news conference in Seattle yesterday that his father have apparently suffer a heart attack and be take to the hospital by ambulance. He be schedule to speak today at the Bangor Naval Submarine Base at Bremerton , Wash. , 15 mile from Seattle. `` Roots , '' which be publish in 1976 , spur an interest in genealogy among Americans of many ethnic heritages. The ABC television mini-series fashion from the book attract million of viewer early in 1977. Sharing a Legacy The work , base in part on research in Africa , begin with Mr. Haley 's creative depiction of the birth of one of his ancestor , Kunta Kinte : `` Early in the spring of 1750 , in the village of Juffure , four day upriver from the coast of The Gambia , West Africa , a manchild be bear to Omoro and Binta Kinte. Forcing forth from Binta 's strong young body , he be black a she be , and he be bawling. '' The book end with an account of the burial of Mr. Haley 's father , and the author 's affirm `` the hope that this story of our people can help to alleviate the legacy of the fact that preponderantly the history have be write by the winners. '' Marly Rusoff , the executive director of publicity for Doubleday , which originally publish the book , say yesterday that more than 1.5 million copy of `` Roots '' have be publish in hard cover , include book club edition , and that more than 4 million copy of the Dell paperback edition have be sold. In addition , the book have be publish in more than two dozen foreign country , say John Hawkins , who head the literary agency represent Mr. Haley. The ABC mini-series of `` Roots , '' first broadcast in January 1977 , still rank among the 100 highest-rated programs. According to Nielsen Media Research , it eight episode reach average audience that range from 28.8 million household to 36.3 million households. The sequel , `` Roots : The Next Generation , '' be broadcast in February 1979 and also draw large audiences. The cast of the 1977 mini-series , produce by David L. Wolper Productions , include LeVar Burton , Ben Vereen , John Amos , Leslie Uggams , Maya Angelou , Cicely Tyson , Edward Asner , Harry Rhodes and Robert Reed. The writer and television historian Les Brown write that the mini-series `` emptied theater , fill bar , cause social event to be cancel and be the talk of the nation during the eight consecutive night it play on ABC. '' Gratitude and Challenges Speaking of his writing 's impact , Mr. Haley say in a radio interview last month , `` To this day , people , particularly African-American people but white people as well , will just totally , unexpectedly walk up and not say a word , just walk up and hug you and then say 'Thank you. ' `` But the history of `` Roots '' be not untroubled. Lisa Drew , the book 's editor at Doubleday , say yesterday that two copyright infringement suit have be file against Mr. Haley. One be dismiss , she say , and one lead to a settlement between Mr. Haley and Harold Courtlander , who have contend that a brief passage in `` Roots '' be take from a novel that Mr. Courtlander have written. Mr. Haley contend that the word come from `` something somebody have give me. '' `` Roots '' draw widespread praise but also criticism from reviewer , many of whom express uncertainty about how to approach the book , which Mr. call a combination of fact and fiction. James Baldwin , write in The New York Times , say the work be a powerful affirmation of what he call continuity and consequence in black history. But Jason Berry write in The New York Times Book Review that while `` no other novelist or historian have provide such a shattering , human view of slavery , '' nonetheless it would be a great loss if Mr. Haley `` do n't assemble his factual data into some sort of formal statement. '' And R. Z. Sheppard , write in Time magazine , praise `` Roots '' but say it have `` considerable structural and stylistic flaws. '' He add , `` In general , the more verified fact that Haley have to work with , the more wooden and clutter his narrative. '' A Work on Malcolm X Mr. Haley 's other writing include `` The Autobiography of Malcolm X , '' publish in 1965. He also write for periodical include Atlantic , Harper 's , Reader 's Digest and The New York Times Magazine. More than six million copy of `` The Autobiography of Malcolm X , '' on which he collaborate with the black nationalist who be assassinate in Harlem in 1965 , be report to have be sell by 1977 in the United States and other countries. Reviewing the work in The Nation , Truman Nelson say it be `` a great book '' and add , `` You can hear and feel Malcolm in this book ; it be a superb job of transcription. '' I. F. Stone say in The New York Review of Books that it be write with `` sensitivity and devotion '' but that Mr. Haley be `` politically conventional '' and have blunt part of Malcolm 's views. Writing in Coast Guard Mr. Haley be bear on Aug. 11 , 1921 , in Ithaca , N.Y. , the son of Simon Alexander Haley and the former Bertha George Palmer. He go on to study at Elizabeth City Teachers College in North Carolina from 1937 to 1939 and enlist in the Coast Guard later in 1939 , advance to the rank of chief journalist before retire in 1959. He then become a freelance writer. Mr. Haley hone his writing skill during his year in the Coast Guard , work in his spare time. In 1952 the Coast Guard create for him the rank of chief journalist -- a far cry from his first Coast Guard job a mess boy. Musing on his career , he once say , `` I be a sailor , I be a cook and this and that , and it might be say I be bootstrapped up to be a writer. '' But he say `` the real bootstrapping '' have be do earlier by his father , who rise from humble beginning to earn a graduate degree in agriculture and go on to teach in Southern colleges. In late year , after `` Roots '' bring him fame , Mr. Haley continue to do much writing at sea , this time a a passenger on cargo vessel , which give him surcease from the harried life of a celebrity. His 1941 marriage to Nannie Branch end in divorce in 1964. His 1964 marriage to Juliette Collins end in divorce in 1972. In addition to his son , who live in Jefferson City , Mo. , Mr. Haley be survive by his third wife , the former Myra Lewis of Los Angeles , from whom he be separate ; two daughter , Lydia Ann Haley of Augusta , Ga. , and Cynthia Gertrude Haley of New York City , and four grandchild .