August 13 , 1992 OBITUARY John Cage , 79 , a Minimalist Enchanted With Sound , Dies By ALLAN KOZINN John Cage , the prolific and influential composer whose Minimalist work have long be a drive force in the world of music , dance and art , die yesterday at St. Vincent 's Hospital in Manhattan. He be 79 year old and live in Manhattan. He die of a stroke , a hospital spokesman said. The influence of Mr. Cage , who be also a writer and philosopher , spread far beyond the musical world. He be a central influence on the work of the choreography of Merce Cunningham , whom he have know since they be student at the Cornish School of the Arts in Seattle more than 50 year ago. It be Mr. Cage who persuade Mr. Cunningham to start his own dance company , with which Mr. Cage tour a composer , accompanist and music director. He be also an influence on the artist Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg , who be his friend , and on several generation of performance artists. With Three in One In 1989 , when the Anthony d'Offay Gallery in London bring together page from Mr. Cage 's 1958 `` Concert for Piano and Orchestra , '' videotape of Mr. Cunningham 's choreography and a collection of Mr. Johns 's work in a show call `` Dancers on a Plane : Cage , Cunningham , Johns , '' John Russell write in The New York Times about Mr. Cage 's centrality in this constellation : `` There be never a manifesto , a statement of position , a 'momentous ' interview. He just do it , and the others do what they do , and in way that everybody can sense and nobody can quite explain , the interaction of these three have consistently bring about astonish results. '' In the music world , of course , Mr. Cage 's influence be extremely far-reaching. He start a revolution by propose that composer could jettison the musical language that have evolve over the last seven century , and in do so he open the door to Minimalism , performance art and virtually every other branch of the musical avant-garde. Composers a different in style from one another -- and from Mr. Cage -- a Philip Glass , Morton Feldman , Earle Brown and Frederic Rzewski have cite Mr. Cage a a beacon that help light their own paths. `` Perhaps no one living artist have such a great influence over such a diverse lot of important people , '' Richard Kostelanetz , a writer who edit several book about Mr. Cage , write in a New York Times Magazine article in 1967. `` Nowadays , even those critic who disagree with him respect his willingness to pursue his idea to their 'mad ' conclusion , and he be impoverish for too many year for anyone seriously to doubt his integrity. '' In a career that begin in the 1930 's , Mr. Cage compose hundred of work , range from early piece that be organize accord to the conventional rule of harmony and thematic development , to late piece that defy those rule and be compose use what he call `` chance '' processes. He compose for every imaginable kind of instrument , from standard orchestral string to `` prepared '' piano , alter by put nail , paper , wood , rubber band or other object between their string to make them sound percussive and otherworldly. He write electronic and tape work , and work that involve only spoken texts. His often impish scoring , in fact , might include radio , toy , the sound of water be sip or vegetable be chopped. On the Nature Of Sound His `` Europera 5 '' -- section of which be to be perform this weekend and next a part of a Museum of Modern Art Summergarden series in midtown Manhattan devote to Mr. Cage 's work -- juxtapose 19th-century operatic aria , instrumental music by Mr. Cage , radio broadcast and silent television pictures. And one of his most famous and provocative piece , `` 4'33 '' , '' be 4 minute and 33 second of silence , divide into three movements. Indeed , Mr. Cage consider virtually every kind of sound potentially musical. `` I think it be true that sound be , of their nature , harmonious , '' he tell an interviewer last month , `` and I would extend that to noise. There be no noise , only sound. I have n't hear any sound that I consider something I do n't want to hear again , with the exception of sound that frighten u or make u aware of pain. I do n't like meaningful sound. If sound be meaningless , I 'm all for it. '' Not surprisingly , Mr. Cage , his music and his theory of composition have always inspire debate. Traditionalists have dismiss him a a prankster , a charlatan or an anarchist , and although performance of his music take place uneventfully today , there be time in the 1960 's when his work evoke angry responses. At a New York Philharmonic performance of `` Eclipticalis With Winter Music , '' in 1964 , for example , a third of the audience walk out and member of the orchestra hiss the composer. `` I do what I feel it be necessary to do , '' he tell an interviewer. `` My necessity come from my sense of invention , and I try not to repeat the thing I already know about. '' Mr. Cage be , in fact , the son of an inventor , and if there be a single thread run through his composition and book , it be a sense of constant innovation , improvisation and exploration. Arnold Schoenberg , with whom he study and whose rigorous 12-tone style inhabit an end of the contemporary music continuum opposite the place occupy by Mr. Cage , once describe him a `` not a composer but an inventor of genius , '' a quotation that Mr. Cage always say pleased him. John Milton Cage Jr. be bear on Sept. 5 , 1912 , in Los Angeles , and spent part of his childhood in Detroit and Ann Arbor , Mich. , before move back to California. An entrepreneur from the start , he have his own weekly radio show on KNX in Los Angeles when he be 12 year old. He have start to study the piano by then , and his program feature his own performance and those by other musician in his Boy Scout troop. He graduate from Los Angeles High School a class valedictorian. He be ambivalent about his musical study at first. He do not regard himself a a virtuoso pianist , and throughout his life he frankly speak and write of his lack of traditional musical skill , go as far a proclaiming , in his book `` A Year From Monday '' : `` I ca n't keep a tune. In fact I have no talent for music. '' In 1930 , after two year at Pomona College , Mr. Cage go to Paris where he briefly work for Erno Goldfinger , an architect with tie to Marcel Duschamp and other Dadaists whose work would later influence him. He also throw himself into the study of contemporary piano work he have hear at a performance by the American pianist John Kirkpatrick. He paint and write poetry , and it be during a visit to Majorca during this first European sojourn that he compose his first piano pieces. Working a a Cook And Gardener The European trip be follow in 1931 by a drive across the United States. When he return to California , he take job a a cook and gardener. He also begin give lecture on modern art , keep a step ahead of his subject by do research at the Los Angeles Public Library. At around this time , he also be become increasingly interested in the music of Schoenberg , who have jettison the hierarchical system of tonal harmony that have prevail in Western music , and replace it with a system in which the 12 tone of the scale be give equal weight. This notion appeal to Mr. Cage , and in 1933 , after read that the pianist Richard Buhlig perform some of Schoenberg 's music , he seek Buhlig out and begin to study with him. He also develop a harmonic system of his own , distinct from Schoenberg 's , but similar in spirit , and use it to compose a Sonata for Two Voices and a Sonata for Clarinet. Later in 1933 , Mr. Cage travel to New York City to study harmony and composition with Adolph Weiss. He also study Oriental and folk music at the New School for Social Research with the iconoclastic composer Henry Cowell. By the time Mr. Cage return to California , late in 1934 , Schoenberg have leave Europe , where the Nazis have declare his music decadent , and have accept a teach post at the University of Southern California at Los Angeles. Schoenberg agree to teach Mr. Cage counterpoint , harmony and analysis free of charge , as long a Mr. Cage promise to consecrate himself to music. `` Schoenberg be a marvelous person , '' Mr. Cage say last month. `` He give his student little comfort. When we follow the rule in write counterpoint , he would say , 'Why do n't you take a little liberty ? ' And when we take liberty , he would say , 'Do n't you know the rule ? ' `` But Schoenberg show little interest in Mr. Cage 's own work. He decline to look at his piece , even such formal exercise a fugues. And when Mr. Cage 's early percussion work be perform , Schoenberg invariably say he be not able to attend. Eventually , Mr. Cage drift toward the world of dance. In 1937 , he join the modern dance ensemble at the University of California at Los Angeles a an accompanist and composer , and he form his own ensemble to play his early percussion works. In 1937 , he move to Seattle , where he work a composer and accompanist for Bonnie Baird 's dance class at the Cornish School. While in Seattle , he organize another percussion band , collect unusual instrument and tour the Northwest. It be also at this time that he meet and begin his lifelong collaboration with Merce Cunningham. He return to California in 1938 to join the faculty of Mills College. His work of this period be still fairly conventional , at least by his late standards. His `` Music for Wind Instruments '' and `` Metamorphosis '' ( both 1938 ) show a continue allegiance to Schoenberg 's 12-tone system , and his `` First Construction '' ( 1939 ) , for a percussion ensemble that use sleigh bell , thunder sheet and brake drum , explore layer of interlock rhythms. But Mr. Cage be also begin to explore new territory. His `` Imaginary Landscape No. 1 , '' compose in 1939 , use variable-speed turntable , a muted piano and a cymbal. The next year he write his first piece for prepared piano , `` Bacchanale. '' In 1942 , after brief stay in San Francisco and Chicago , Mr. Cage move to New York City , which remain his home base thereafter. He again assemble a percussion group , which give it first New York performance at the Museum of Modern Art in February 1943. The concert receive a great deal of attention , not all of it favorable. Among the listener who object to Mr. Cage 's eclectic instrumental arsenal , which include flower pot , cow bell and frequency oscillator , be Noel Straus , whose review in The New York Times say Mr. Cage 's music `` have an inescapable resemblance to the meaningless sound make by child amuse themselves by bang on tin pan and other resonant kitchen utensils. '' Soon after he arrive in New York , Mr. Cage undertake his first collaboration with Mr. Cunningham , `` Credo in Us , '' and in the mid-1940 's they tour extensively together. In 1947 , Mr. Cage be commission to write `` The Seasons '' for the Ballet Society. A graceful , consonant work with a pronounced Indian influence that reflect Mr. Cage 's grow interest in Eastern philosophy , `` The Seasons '' be one of his few score for traditional symphony orchestra. Mr. Cage 's attraction to Eastern philosophy begin around 1945 , when he begin an extensive study of Zen Buddhism at Columbia University. This interest have a profound and lasting effect on his work. `` The Seasons '' be an attempt to express the Indian view of the season a quiescence ( winter ) , creation ( spring ) , preservation ( summer ) and destruction ( autumn ) . The Sonatas and Interludes for Prepared Piano , an exhaustive , hourlong study of the instrument 's capability , be the Indian concept of `` permanent emotion , '' include the heroic , erotic , wondrous , mirthful and sorrowful. A Discovery Of 'I Ching' In 1950 , after return to the United States from a tour of Europe with Mr. Cunningham , Mr. Cage discover the `` I Ching , '' the Chinese `` book of change '' that one consults after toss a set of coins. This method give Mr. Cage the idea that lie at the heart of his `` chance '' compositions. If reading in the `` I Ching '' could be govern by the chance toss of a coin , why could n't musical composition ? Indeed , why could n't musical work be create use chance process with the audience look on , so that the composition and the performance be one and the same ? Among Mr. Cage 's early work use this principle be `` Music of Changes '' ( 1951 ) . The musical element of the piece -- pitch , duration , timbre , dynamic -- be determine by the performer use chart base on the `` I Ching '' and by toss coins. `` Imaginary Landscape 4 '' ( 1951 ) explore chance procedure in a different way : The work be score for 12 radio , operate by two performers. One performer change station , the other work the volume control. The dial turning be precisely notated , but what be hear depend on what be be broadcast during the performance. `` Europera 5 '' ( 1991 ) work similarly. As he continue write chance work , Mr. Cage develop a novel view of composition , in which he come to regard compose not a a way of impose order on nature , but a a way of create the circumstance in which art could adapt itself to it surroundings. Probably the pure example of this philosophy be Mr. Cage 's `` 4'33 '' '' ( 1952 ) , in which a performer stand silently on stage. Inevitably , listener be force to focus on nonmusical sound , or in the case of an unusually quite audience , on the quality of silence itself. Mr. Cage 's exploration repel listener and composer commit to music 's traditional quality , but attract experimenter like Earle Brown , Christian Wolff , Morton Feldman and David Tudor , with whom he collaborate on the Project of Music for Magnetic Tape. Mr. Cage 's first tape work be `` Imaginary Landscape No. 5 '' ( 1952 ) , compose for a dance piece by Jean Erdman. Mr. Cage 's method here be to tape 42 phonograph record , chop the tape into short piece , and to use chance operation to determine how the piece of tape should be reassembled. Pieces like `` Williams Mix '' ( 1952 ) and `` Fontana Mix '' ( 1958 ) use tape in even more complex and convoluted ways. But Mr. Cage do not abandon acoustical music , nor do he run out of unusual way to write pieces. In `` Water Music '' ( 1952 ) , almost a much a Cageian classic a `` 4'33 '' , '' he have a pianist pour water from one pot into another , and perform various other action use a radio , a whistle and a deck of cards. As his work , and the varied reaction to it , bring him increase notoreity , Mr. Cage come to be increasingly in demand a a lecturer , teacher and performer. He undertake tour of Europe and Japan with Mr. Tudor , one of his electronic music collaborator , and he continue to tour with the Merce Cunningham Dance Company. He teach class in experimental music in Darmstadt , Germany , and lecture on his theory of indeterminate composition at the Brussels Worlds Fair in 1958. And at the New School , in New York , he teach class on mushroom identification , another of his lifelong interests. Of Experiments In Later Works Mr. Cage 's major work since the late 1960 's include `` Hpschd '' ( 1969 ) , a collaboration with Lejaren Hiller for 7 harpsichord , 51 tape , film , slide and colored light ; `` Cheap Imitation '' ( 1969 , orchestrate 1972 ) , base on a piece by Satie , which keep the original rhythmic pattern but replace this French composer 's pitch with note select through chance procedure ; `` Etudes Australes '' ( 1974-5 ) , a virtuoso piano work with a score base on astronomical chart ; `` Roaratorio '' ( 1979 ) , an electronic piece contain thousand of sound mention in James Joyce 's novel `` Finnegans Wake , '' and the five `` Europera '' work , compose from 1987 to 1991. Mr. Cage 's book include `` Virgil Thomson : His Life and Music '' ( 1959 ) , write in collaboration with Kathleen O'Donnell Hoover ; `` Silence '' ( 1961 ) ; `` A Year From Monday '' ( 1967 ) ; `` M '' ( 1973 ) ; `` Empty Words '' ( 1979 ) , which he also regard a a performance piece , and read from at this year 's Summergarden concert ; `` Theme and Variations '' ( 1982 ) ; `` X '' ( 1983 ) , and `` I-IV , '' a collection of the Charles Eliot Norton Lectures he deliver at Harvard in 1988-89. He also amass a sizable catalogue of visual work -- photography , monotype , print , etching , painting and some of his more graphic score -- from 1969 to this year. In his late year , Mr. Cage be the recipient of many honors. His 60th , 70th and 75th birthday be celebrate with extensive concert series and tributes around the world , and this year 's celebration anticipate his 80th birthday be well under way. He be elect to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1978. He receive the New York Mayor 's Award of Honor for Arts and Culture in 1981 and , in 1982 , the French Government award Mr. Cage it high honor for distinguish contribution to cultural life , Commandeur de l'Ordre de Arts et de Lettres. Mr. Cage be a soft-spoken , mercurial man who remain keenly interested in new music. He make himself easily accessible to young composer and critic , and be often see at concert in downtown Manhattan. Mr. Cage 's marriage to Xenia Andreyevna Kashevaroff end in divorce in 1945. From 1970 until his death , he live with Mr. Cunningham. There be no immediate survivor .