March 10 , 1992 OBITUARY Menachem Begin , Guerrilla Leader Who Became Peacemaker By JAMES FERON Menachem Begin , the Israeli Prime Minister who make peace with Egypt , live much of his life in the opposition. A Jewish underground leader before Israel gain independence in 1948 , he openly fight the establish Zionist leadership of the struggle against British rule. Then for nearly three decade , he head Israel 's major opposition party. Ultimately and to many Israelis , surprisingly , his minority bloc oust the Labor Party , which have govern continuously in the three decade since statehood , and Mr. Begin , a party leader , become Prime Minister. He be to govern an ever more divided and troubled nation. Mr. Begin , who lead Israel from May 1977 until he resign a Prime Minister in 1983 , stretch the national mood from great pride to deep dismay. He guide the nation to a peace treaty with Egypt , the first such pact with an Arab country. But he also preside over a bitterly divisive war against Palestinian guerrilla in Lebanon. If the treaty with Egypt , which bring Mr. Begin a shared 1978 Nobel Peace Prize with President Anwar el-Sadat , represent a high point in his political leadership , the war in Lebanon in 1982 and the stalemate that follow , with it steady toll of dead and wound , be it low point. Started with the announced aim of evict Palestinian guerrilla from operate too close to Israel 's border with Lebanon , it bring Israeli troop to the outskirt of Beirut. It enmesh Israel in the lethal sectarian politics of Lebanon , and lead to a costly and indecisive occupation. The invasion in June 1982 be see by Israelis at first a a justified response to year of border harassment. But when the Israelis advance to the outskirt of Beirut and bomb and shell the Lebanese capital for 10 week , criticism and anguish arose. Massacres at Camps Deeply Affect Israelis Dissent reach a peak in the fall of 1982 , when Lebanese Christian militia unit enter Palestinian refugee district at Sabra and Shatila that be supposedly under Israeli guard and kill hundred of people. The massacre lead to an independent investigation order by the Israeli Government , which conclude that Israeli troop watch the kill from a distance and do nothing to stop it. Mr. Begin survive in office , but be shake politically. His medical problem -- he have suffer three heart attack -- become an increase burden. And in November 1982 , his wife of 43 year , Aliza , die while he be on a trip to the United States. Thereafter , Mr. Begin become increasingly listless , participate little in debate in Parliament , take less and less interest in politics and limit his public appearances. On Aug. 28 , 1983 , he announce that he plan to quit and on Sept. 15 he formally resign a Prime Minister. Mr. Begin become something of a recluse. He live with his daughter Leah in an apartment near the Jerusalem residence of his son , Benjamin , now a member of the Israeli Parliament and a leader in the Likud Party. He be rarely see in public and leave his house only for rare visit to a hospital and memorial service for his wife. Yehiel Kadishai , a close friend and longtime adviser , visit daily and enable Mr. Begin to keep up with correspondence. Mr. Begin also receive visit from a small circle of friends. When he become Prime Minister , Mr. Begin represent both political and stylistic change. He bring a new demeanor to the Prime Minister 's office with his remote manner , a sharp contrast to the earthy and informal style of his Labor Party predecessors. Unlike the bulk of Israeli politician , he be seldom see other than in suit and tie. Land and Ideology ; Legacy and Withdrawal And he move the country in a distinctly different ideological direction. Hours after his election victory , he visit an Israeli settlement in the occupied West Bank , which have be capture in the 1967 war , declare it part of `` liberated Israel. '' Labor Governments have avoid such declaration , but to Mr. Begin the West Bank be Judea and Samaria , Jewish land from biblical times. His Government do not formally annex the West Bank , a it do the Golan Heights , a Syrian promontory capture in 1967 after it long use a a base for shell northern Israel. But under Mr. Begin , the West Bank begin to be heavily settle by Israelis. He be also to return some Arab land take in battle , a strip of Syrian territory win in 1973 and a town on the Golan Heights take in 1967. But the most significant territorial withdrawal , and for Mr. Begin the most personally wrench , be in the Sinai Peninsula , which Israel return to Egypt in three stage from 1979 through 1982. Jewish settlement in Sinai be abandon despite intense protest by their residents. The Sinai withdrawal be the last stage of a process that begin with Mr. Sadat 's landmark visit to Jerusalem in November 1977 , six month after Mr. Begin take office. The Egyptian President , frustrate by the intransigence of Arab neighbor in the deal with Israel , have hint that he be prepare to go it alone in seek peace and have say he would even travel to even Jerusalem , in pursuit of that goal. Mr. Begin respond with an invitation. On a warm November evening , the wheel of the presidential aircraft , Egypt 01 , touch down at Ben-Gurion International Airport. Mr. Begin step forward and say : `` I be wait for you , Mr. President , and all the minister be wait for you. '' Sixteen month of arduous negotiation follow , include the marathon talk at Camp David , Md. , with the intercession of President Jimmy Carter. The process culminate in the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty sign in Washington on March 26 , 1979. But Mr. Begin 's wariness toward the Arabs , on behalf of what he consider Israel 's vital security interest , remain undiminished. In June 1981 , he order the bombing of an Iraqi nuclear reactor near Baghdad. This be follow in July by two week of bomb in Lebanon. In December , he push through Parliament a measure to annex the Golan Heights. This draw sharp criticism from Washington and other capital , but Mr. Begin hold his ground. His relation with the United States include many other difficult moments. When the Reagan Administration suspend a strategic cooperation pact with Israel and impose financial sanction because of the Golan annexation , Mr. Begin say Israel be be treat like a `` vassal state. '' His relation with Egypt also changed. After Mr. Sadat be shoot to death by Muslim extremist in October 1981 , his successor , President Hosni Mubarak , seem determine to calm the hostility toward Egypt in the rest of the Arab world because of it peace treaty with Israel. Relations between Egypt and Israel cool , especially after the invasion of Lebanon the follow year. The 1977 visit to Jerusalem by Mr. Sadat and the subsequent treaty give Mr. Begin one of the great satisfaction of his career. He explain his feeling in a forceful and eloquent speech in Parliament that also address deep concerns. `` Why be this peace treaty so important ? '' he asked. `` This be the first peace treaty Israel ever sign , the first peace treaty after five war in which we have lose 12,000 of our people. Our aim , our yearning and our dream be to smash this helix of hatred. We must sign this treaty because it be a human act of the high degree. '' At the White House signing , Mr. Begin say it be `` the third great day of my life '' -- after the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948 and the unification of Jerusalem in the 1967 war. The Israeli leader be seek to place the signing into the historical context of his life , a life that until 1977 have be spend almost entirely in opposition -- to the mainstream of Jews in his native Poland , to both the German and Russian invader of his homeland in World War II , to the establish leader of the Jewish military struggle against British rule in Palestine and to the decade of Labor Party government in Israel. A Zionism Forged By Bible and Holocaust He believe fiercely , and contentiously , that the Jews have a right to a national homeland and that it should range over the land of their biblical forebears. This be Zion and he be a dedicated Zionist , if a follower of the Zionist Revisionist organization found by Vladimir Jabotinsky. Mr. Begin be mark forever by the Holocaust , which have wipe out all vestige of his former life in Poland. The pursuit of those goal be a thread that run through his life. He be to he spend much time explain and try to justify what some consider extreme action and statements. The best-known of those occur in 1946 , when Irgun Zvai Leumi , the underground terrorist faction he head during the final year of the British mandate in Palestine , blow up a wing of the King David Hotel in Jerusalem , the headquarters of the British administrator of Palestine. The attack kill 90 people , among them Jewish and Arab employee as well a British officials. The most infamous incident be the Irgun 's attack on an Arab village , Deir Yassin , in April 1948 , in which more than 200 men , woman and child be killed. Two month after that assault , the freighter Altalena , load with arm and ammunition and 900 men recruit by the Irgun , come under fire from regular Jewish force loyal to David Ben-Gurion , by then Prime Minister , who fear that the new Government of Israel might be overthrow or that civil war might break out after the fight against the Arabs be over. Another , and sometimes rival underground faction , the Stern Gang , be head by Yitzhak Shamir , who would in time become Mr. Begin 's Foreign Minister , and Prime Minister on his resignation. Mr. Begin struggle fiercely against Mr. Ben-Gurion , the mainstream Zionist leader and head of the regular Jewish force in the fight for nationhood. After independence in 1948 , Mr. Ben-Gurion become Israel 's first Prime Minister , and their conflict explode frequently. From Coalition To Opposition From 1967 to 1970 , Mr. Begin serve in a war coalition , then withdraw when Israel begin to consider an American proposal that would have link withdrawal from the occupied territory with peace. In August 1970 he return to the political opposition. Mr. Begin , a brilliant speaker and writer , be also an enigma : often soft-spoken , mild- mannered and personable. Yet this slight but firmly build man , who dress in gray and never lose the hand-kissing tradition of his early year in Poland , be describe a have the flinty look of a movie terrorist. There be no doubt about his dramatic flair. Once during a speech in the immigrant quarter of Jerusalem , he begin to describe the `` guarantee '' for Israel that be be offer by American diplomat seek to encourage Arab negotiations. His voice rise and his manner grow intense. He point high and high , a if search for something , until he have everyone look skyward. `` Guarantees , guarantee -- maybe there you will find guarantee , '' he say , add , a he point to the ground , `` Not here ! '' Early in 1977 , with the Labor Government riddle by dissension and taint , in the view of some , by corruption , Mr. Begin finally achieve the political recognition that have so long eluded him. Though weary from a heart attack two month before the election , he emerge with an upset victory and be ask to form a government. Several thing bring about his victory : The Labor Party have become increasingly identify with worsen inflation , frequent strike and a stagnant economy. Its scandal lead to the creation of the Democratic Movement for Change , which draw a valuable 15 seat of 120 from Labor in the election , and briefly join the new Likud coalition. In addition , a `` second Israel '' of Jews from North Africa and the Middle East , the poor of the city and new town , have grow to become the nation 's majority , and these people be attract to Mr. Begin. Despite his European origin , they felt that he , too , have be outside the establishment , and he promise great militancy toward the Arabs. Mr. Begin retain power in 1981 after his right-wing Likud bloc emerge with a one-seat lead over the Labor alignment of Shimon Peres. His margin of success come from the religious party , which enable him to form a fragile governing coalition. The Old Country Proved a Cruel Home Menachem Wolfovitch Begin be bear on Aug. 16 , 1913 , in Brest , when it be still part of the czarist Russian Empire. The area be return to Poland in 1921 , occupy by the Soviet Union in 1939 soon after Hitler 's attack on Poland , overrun by the Nazis after Hitler turn on Stalin and attack the Soviet Union in 1941 , and cede to Moscow in 1945. Zionism be central to Mr. Begin 's childhood. His father , Dov Zeev Begin , have be educate in Berlin and travel widely for his father , a timber merchant. Dov Begin 's travel bring him into contact with Jewish nationalist , the Zionist `` heretic , '' a they be call by the traditionally minded. Menachem , the young of three child , develop an early interest in oratory and make his first speech at the age of 10 , in a mixture of Hebrew and Yiddish. At 15 he join Betar , the Zionist Revisionists ' youth movement , and be train in the use of weapons. Ten year later , with a law degree from Warsaw University , he head Betar , which by then have 70,000 member in 600 Polish communities. `` My friend and I labor to educate a generation to be prepare not only to toil for the rebuilding of a Jewish state but also to fight for it , suffer for it and , if need be , die for it , '' he say , paraphrase Jabotinsky. Mr. Begin flee from Warsaw ahead of the advance Germans in 1939 and be in Polish-controlled Vilna in 1940 when the Russians occupy the city , now Vilnius , Lithuania. He obtain a visa to go to Palestine but give it to a friend he think would have more trouble. The Russians soon arrest him , accuse him of be a Zionist and a British agent , and send him to Siberia. His wife , whom he have marry a year earlier , go on to Palestine , convince that she could do nothing to help her husband. Later , she become quietly influential in his political life while remain out of the limelight. Besides their son , Benjamin , they have two other child -- Hasia and Leah -- and eight grandchildren. In later year Mr. Begin recall the interrogation of his Siberian incarceration. They turn on the Russian Revolution , on Britain and Zionism , on Herzl and Jabotinsky. `` From my early youth , '' Mr. Begin say later , `` I have be teach by my father , who go to his death at Nazi hand voice his faith in God and sing 'Hatikvah , ' that we Jews be to return to the land of Israel -- not go , travel or come , but return. '' It be a tenet that be to sustain him throughout his life. Nearly four decade later , visit a Jewish settlement in the West Bank , he would chide reporter for call the area occupy ( `` These be liberated territory '' ) , for ask if they would be annex ( `` You annex foreign land , not your own country '' ) , and for reference to the West Bank ( `` Say Judea and Samaria , '' the territory ' biblical name ) . Though sentence to eight year in a labor camp , he be release by the Soviet Union in 1941 in an agreement with the Polish government-in-exile that free 1.5 million Poles. Mr. Begin find his sister , the family 's only other survivor , then join the Free Polish Army. That take him to Iran and to Palestine. Having learn English by listen to the BBC , he serve in the British Army in Palestine a a conscripted interpreter until the end of 1943. Then he take over the leadership of the Irgun underground in the battle for a Zionist homeland. Wanted by British With a $ 50,000 Bounty By 1946 the British authority be conduct an intensive hunt for the man they describe a the `` grim-faced , bespectacled Menachem Begin , '' place a price of $ 8,000 on his head. Later , it be raise to $ 50,000. The Irgun , often work with weapon and explosive purchase from the Arabs , set about break the grip of colonial rule. Mr. Begin , in his book `` The Revolt , '' explain the group 's action this way : `` The arrest of British officer in order to secure the annulment of a death 'sentence , ' the arrest of more officer which do not prevent the murder of our captive comrade , the whipping of officer in retaliation for the whipping of our young soldier , hanging in retaliation for hangings. '' In the first election for Parliament , in January 1949 , Mapai , the Labor Party , emerge with 44 seat ; the left-wing Mapam win 15 , the religious bloc , 16 , and Mr. Begin 's Herut Party , 14. Leading the opposition , Mr. Begin call for retaliatory raid against Arab irregulars. He fight bitterly against tie with West Germany and be suspend from Parliament for organize demonstrations. He be forever demand apology in Parliament and be ask to apologize in turn , sometimes for personal remark and sometimes for policy statements. He would demand preventive war , for example , only to hear an opponent say that `` anyone who do so be a criminal against the Jewish nation. '' A policy dispute would become personal. By the time of the 1956 war with Egypt , Mr. Begin 's party be the second strongest. With the Israeli move into Sinai , the party lose much of the stigma of extremism , for the war be view by many Israelis a the expression of a policy long advocate by Herut. In 1973 , Mr. Begin break an embargo on domestic criticism of the Government 's action in fail to accurately gauge Arab intention lead to the war. The Arab attack on Yom Kippur , he say , only underscore the need to retain occupied territories. He resist every pullback agreement , and in 1975 deride Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger for `` tell u to trade territory for legitimacy. '' `` We do n't need legitimacy , '' Mr. Begin said. `` We exist. Therefore we be legitimate. '' Although Mr. Begin do in time exchange territory , give up the Sinai and withdraw Jewish settlement in return for peace with Egypt , he begin a Prime Minister with familiar militancy. He visit a West Bank settlement , Elon Moreh , the day after the 1977 election and declare : `` We stand on the land of liberated Israel. There will be many Elon Morehs. There will be many , many settlement in the come weeks. '' In support the establishment of West Bank settlement , Mr. Begin make a distinction between those in territory within biblical Israel and those outside , like in Sinai. As Prime Minister , Mr. Begin become somewhat less outspoken and dramatic , learn to accept the necessary compromise of governing. He draw former opponent into the Cabinet : Moshe Dayan , Defense Minister in Labor Cabinets , become his Foreign Minister , only to resign in October 1979 over relation with the Arabs. Bitter and Painful Years : Lebanon , Wife 's Death In the 1950 's , Mr. Begin have call `` every German a Nazi , every German a murderer , '' but a Prime Minister he congratulate the West Germans for free a hijacked Lufthansa airliner in Mogadishu , Somalia , and he meet with the West German Ambassador. Politically , he survive a challenge from the Labor Party a year after he take office. He suffer from diabetes as well a a heart ailment , and there be rumor as early a mid-1979 , vigorously deny , that he be work on a reduce schedule. There be call in Parliament for his resignation , but none be successful and he survive many vote of confidence. While Israel under Mr. Begin return the Sinai to Egypt , it seem to strengthen it hold on the other occupied territory -- principally , the West Bank and the Golan Heights -- through the establishment of the settlements. The first settlement , similar to those under Labor Governments , be isolate defense post , with armed farmer till fields. Later settlement be build near Arab town , and then within them , such a in Hebron. By 1982 , about 30,000 Israelis live on more than 100 such settlements. New highway encourage commute from prefabricate town to job in Tel Aviv. Israel , under Mr. Begin , change the unit of currency from the pound , a vestige of British rule , to the shekel , a coin use by the ancient Hebrews. And Parliament , under his leadership , formally declare all of Jerusalem , a city divide into Jewish and Arab sector before the 1967 war , to be the nation 's undivided and eternal capital -- an act that be not recognize by most other countries. Mr. Begin 's party be narrowly return to power in 1981 in an election campaign mark by violence , the first such for Israel. The confrontation often pit Sephardim , the Jews from the Arab land who identify with Mr. Begin , against the formerly governing Ashkenazim , those from Europe. These clash , especially disruptive during the Lebanon war , bespeak a rift in Israel that be to deepen , and would come to fundamentally demark Israeli politics and society. Lebanon be Mr. Begin 's last war , perhaps the most bitter one for him , and the election his last as well .