April 7 , 1992 OBITUARY Isaac Asimov , Whose Thoughts and Books Traveled the Universe , Is Dead at 72 By MERVYN ROTHSTEINIsaac Asimov , the pre-eminent popular-science writer of the day and for more than 40 year one of the best and best-known writer of science fiction , die yesterday at New York University Hospital. He be 72 year old and live in Manhattan. He die of heart and kidney failure , say his brother , Stanley. Mr. Asimov be amazingly prolific , write nearly 500 book on a wide range of subject , from work for preschooler to college textbooks. He be perhaps best know for his science fiction and be a pioneer in elevate the genre from pulp-magazine adventure to a more intellectual level that deal with sociology , history , mathematics and science. But he also write mystery , as well a critically acclaim book about the Bible , physic , chemistry , biology , astronomy , limerick , humor , Shakespeare , Gilbert and Sullivan , ancient and modern history , and many other subjects. Mr. Asimov 's first book , 'Pebble in the Sky ' ( Ballantine ) , a science-fiction novel , be publish in 1950. His first 100 book take him 237 month , or almost 20 year , until October 1969 , to write. His second 100 , a milestone he reach in March 1979 , take 113 month , or about 9 1/2 year -- a rate of more than 10 book a year. His third 100 take only 69 month , until December 1984 , or less than 6 years. 'Writing be more fun than ever , ' he say in a 1984 interview. 'The longer I write , the easy it gets.' He once explain how he come to write 'Asimov 's Guide to Shakespeare ' ( Crown ) . It begin , he say , with a book call 'Words of Science. ' ' 'Science ' lead to 'Words on the Map , ' ' he remark , 'which take me to 'The Greeks , ' which lead me to 'The Roman Republic , ' 'The Roman Empire , ' 'The Egyptians , ' 'The Near East , ' 'The Dark Ages , ' 'The Shaping of England ' and then 'Words From History. ' It be an easy jump to 'Words in Genesis , ' which bring on 'Words From the Exodus. ' That lead me to 'Asimov 's Guide to the Old Testament , ' and then 'The New Testament. ' So what be leave except Shakespeare ? ' His usual routine be to awake at 6 A.M. , sit down at the typewriter by 7:30 and work until 10 P.M. In 'In Memory Yet Green , ' the first volume of his autobiography , publish in 1979 , he explain how he become a compulsive writer. His Russian-born father own a succession of candy store in Brooklyn that be open from 6 A.M. to 1 A.M. seven day a week. Young Isaac get up at 6 o'clock every morning to deliver paper and rush home from school to help out in the store every afternoon. If he be even a few minute late , his father yell at him for be a folyack , Yiddish for sluggard. Even more than 50 year later , he write : 'It be a point of pride with me that though I have an alarm clock , I never set it , but get up at 6 A.M. anyway. I be still show my father I 'm not a folyack.' He Learns to Read , Then Teaches Sister Isaac Asimov be bear Jan. 2 , 1920 , in the Soviet Union , near Smolensk , the son of Judah and Anna Rachel Berman Asimov. He be bring to the United States in 1923 and be naturalize in 1928. He teach himself to read before he be 5 year old , use the sign on his Brooklyn street. A couple of year later , with a little help from his father , he teach himself to read Yiddish. When he be 7 , he teach his younger sister to read. He skip several grade and receive a high-school diploma when he be 15. After discover science fiction on the magazine rack in his father 's store -- and overcome his father 's objection to fanciful subject matter -- he try write science fiction himself and sell his first story when he be 18. The story , 'Marooned Off Vesta , ' ran in the October 1938 issue of Amazing Stories. Three year later , in 1941 , he sell a story call 'Nightfall ' to Astounding Science Fiction , then the top magazine in the field. It be edit by John W. Campbell Jr. , whose ability to find talented writer be largely responsible for what be consider the Golden Age of science fiction in the 1930 's and 40's. Almost 30 year after 'Nightfall ' be publish , the Science Fiction Writers of America vote it the best science-fiction short story ever written. Astounding Science pay a cent a word , Mr. Asimov once recalled. 'So for a 12,000-word story I expect $ 120. I get a check for $ 150 and think Mr. Campbell have make a mistake. ' But when Mr. Asimov call to tell him , 'he say the story have seem so good to him he give me a bonus of one-quarter cent a word.' Mr. Asimov graduate from Columbia University in 1939 with a bachelor of science degree , and earn an M.A. in 1941 and a Ph.D. in chemistry there in 1948. The next year , he accept an offer from Boston University 's School of Medicine to teach biochemistry. 'I do n't feel impelled to tell them that I 'd never have any biochemistry , ' he recall in a 1969 interview. 'By 1951 I be write a textbook on biochemistry , and I finally realize the only thing I really want to be be a writer.' He be make an associate professor of biochemistry in 1955 and a professor in 1979 , although he stop teach in 1958 and only occasionally go back to the university to lecture. A Science Fiction Of Verve and Clarity Mr. Asimov 's science-fiction novel and story win many award : five Hugos , give by the fan , and three Nebula Awards , give by his fellow writers. His 'Foundation Trilogy ' ( all publish by Doubleday ) -- which take place in a future galactic empire and consists of 'Foundation ' ( 1951 ) , 'Foundation and Empire ' ( 1952 ) and 'Second Foundation ' ( 1953 ) -- be give a Hugo in 1966 a Best All-Time Science-Fiction Series. Among his nonfiction work , 'Asimov 's New Guide to Science ' be consider one of the best book about science for the layman. Reviewing 'Foundation 's Edge ' ( Doubleday ) , a sequel to the trilogy and the first of Mr. Asimov 's book to make the New York Times best-seller list , the critic Gerald Jonas say in The New York Times Book Review in 1982 : 'He write much good than he do 33 year ago -- yet he have lose none of the verve he bring to this series when he and the galaxy be much younger. What more could one ask ? ' 'Foundation 's Edge ' win a Hugo in 1983 a the best science-fiction novel of the year. In recent year , Mr. Asimov write 'Foundation and Earth ' ( 1986 ) and 'Prelude to Foundation ' ( 1988 ) . A final novel , 'Forward the Foundation , ' be to be publish by Bantam Books later this year. Mr. Asimov himself make no great claim for his work. 'I make no effort to write poetically or in a high literary style , ' he say in 1984. 'I try only to write clearly and I have the very good fortune to think clearly so that the writing come out a I think , in satisfactory shape. ' 'I never read Hemingway or Fitzgerald or Joyce or Kafka , ' he once wrote. 'To this day I be a stranger to 20th-century fiction and poetry , and I have no doubt that it show in my writing.' No Typist or Agent , And No Airplanes He write his first draft on his typewriter , and short article and final draft on a word processor , and he rewrite everything only once. 'It 's not out of conceit , ' he said. 'But I have lot of stuff I 'm committed to write and if I linger lovingly I wo n't be able to write at all.' Not everything , however , fell into place easily. He once do a child 's book in a day , but the Shakespeare book take two years. The book he consider his favorite , 'Murder at the A.B.A. ' ( 1976 ) , a mystery novel in which he himself be a character , take seven week ; 'The Gods Themselves ' ( 1972 ) , a science-fiction novel that win both the Hugo and the Nebula award , take seven months. 'I do all my own typing , my own research , answer my own mail , ' Mr. Asimov once said. 'I do n't even have a literary agent. This way there be no argument , no instruction , no misunderstandings. I work every day. Sunday be my best day : no mail , no telephones. Writing be my only interest. Even speak be an interruption.' Although he write about space travel through countless universe and light year , Mr. Asimov himself refuse to fly. 'Isaac say that he love to fly into space and span the galaxy , ' the editor Ben Bova once remarked. 'But only in his imagination.' Among Mr. Asimov 's other well-known science-fiction work be 'I , Robot ' ( 1950 ) , in which he invent his famous Three Laws of Robotics , which govern the relation of robot to their human master : robot may not injure a human or , by inaction , allow a human to be harm ; robot must obey human ' order unless do so conflict with the first law ; robot must protect their own existence unless do so conflict with the first two laws. Robot and galactic-empire theme eventually expand and intertwine in 14 novels. Secret of Success : It 's All in the Genes He also write many nonfiction work and magazine article on a wide range of subject and be the editorial director of a magazine name after him -- Isaac Asimov 's Science Fiction Magazine -- for which he write the editorial in each issue. He receive the James T. Grady Award of the American Chemical Society in 1965 and the American Association for the Advancement of Science-Westinghouse Science Writing Award in 1967. Recently Mr. Asimov say he have have a prostate operation and be cut back on his writing. He suspend his monthly column in Fantasy and Science Fiction magazine , to which he have contribute some 400 column and article over 33 years. Writing 10 or more book a year be standard procedure for Mr. Asimov , and he continue his busy pace after a heart attack in 1977 and triple bypass surgery in 1983. 'I have be fortunate to be bear with a restless and efficient brain , with a capacity for clear thought and an ability to put that thought into word , ' he once remarked. 'None of this be to my credit. I be the beneficiary of a lucky break in the genetic sweepstakes.' Mr. Asimov once tell an interviewer about sadly contemplate death and the end of conscious thought. But , he say , he cheer himself with the thought that 'I do n't have to worry about that , because there be n't an idea I 've ever have that I have n't put down on paper.' Mr. Asimov marry Gertrude Blugerman in 1942 ; they be divorce in 1973. In addition to his brother , of Roslyn Heights , L.I. , he be survive by his wife , Janet Jeppson , whom he marry in 1973 ; a son , David , of California ; a daughter , Robyn , of Manhattan , and a sister , Marcia Repanes of Queens. FROM THE YET TO BE TO THE LONG AGO Isaac Asimov , a self-confessed compulsive writer , produce nearly 500 book on a remarkable array of subject , reach out not only to distant galaxy but also to the distant past for inspiration. Here be a small sampling of his prodigious output. Pebble in the Sky 1950 I , Robot 1950 Foundation 1951 Foundation and Empire 1952 Second Foundation 1953 The Caves of Steel 1954 The End of Eternity 1955 The Naked Sun 1957 The Human Body 1963 Asimov 's Guide to the Bible 1968 , 1969 The Shaping of England 1969 ABC 's of Ecology 1972 Asimov 's Annotated Paradise Lost 1974 Asimov on Chemistry 1974 Lecherous Limericks 1975 Animals of the Bible 1978 In Joy Still Felt 1980 Counting the Eons 1983 The Roving Mind 1983 The Robots of Dawn 1983 Robots and Empire 1985 Foundation and Earth 1986 Prelude to Foundation 1988 Nemesis 1989 Asimov Laughs Again 1992