December 9 , 1992 OBITUARY William Shawn , 85 , Is Dead ; New Yorker 's Gentle Despot By ERIC PACE William Shawn , the shy , strong-willed editor who run The New Yorker for a third of this century , die yesterday morning at the apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan where he have live since 1950. He be 85 year old. He die of a heart attack , say his son Wallace Shawn , the actor. After Mr. Shawn succeed the magazine 's founding editor , Harold Ross , in 1952 , he quietly but firmly preside over a shift from it original flippancy to a more serious tone , which , he insist , merely mirror `` a new awareness '' among writer and readers. In his quiet , considerate , infinitely courteous way , Mr. Shawn remain the virtual dictator of the magazine 's editorial policy through his 35-year tenure , which be unusually long for a chief editor in the hectic and turbulent magazine industry. A chief reason that Mr. Shawn stay so long in his post -- one of the most influential in American literature and journalism -- be the abide support of The New Yorker 's owner , Raoul Fleischmann of Fleischmann 's Yeast , who be a co-founder of the magazine and become it chairman , and his son Peter F. Fleischmann , also a longtime New Yorker executive. But in 1985 , while the young Mr. Fleischmann be chairman and a major stockholder , the magazine be sell for $ 142 million to Advance Publications , a portion of the vast publishing empire of the Newhouse family. At the time , S. I. Newhouse Jr. pledge not to tamper with The New Yorker 's special identity. In January 1987 , however , Mr. Newhouse announce that Mr. Shawn be retire -- although in fact he be force out -- and , be replace by Robert A. Gottlieb , then 55 , who have be president and editor in chief at Alfred A. Knopf , the book-publishing house that be another part of the Newhouse empire. Five year later , in July 1992 , Mr. Gottlieb be replace by Tina Brown. The New Yorker staff do not take happily to the prospect of Mr. Shawn 's departure. More than 150 of the magazine 's writer , editor and cartoonist , feel that Mr. Shawn have be poorly treat by the new owner , sign a letter call on Mr. Gottlieb not to take the job. In due course , however , Mr. Gottlieb take over Mr. Shawn 's duty and turn out to be far more a protector of Mr. Shawn 's vision than a destroyer of it. Later in 1987 , Mr. Shawn become a consulting editor for another prestigious book-publishing concern , the independently own Farrar , Straus & Giroux , a position he hold at his death. The Editor As Artist In his decade of edit The New Yorker , Mr. Shawn work with infinite patience and painstaking attention to detail. A perfectionist , he once say ruefully , `` Falling short of perfection be a process that just never stops. '' His mental rigor , apply to edit , win him repeat praise from New Yorker writers. `` He know when to leave a strong piece alone , '' the author and critic Renata Adler once said. `` If there really be weak part , though , he invariably find them ; then of course you can fix them in your own way. '' Mr. Shawn 's quiet graciousness be so seductive that Brendan Gill once say the typical New Yorker writer become convinced that any change the editor demand `` will cost Shawn a much pain a they do him -- indeed , that the correction be be make , at no matter what expense of spirit , only in order to bring a masterpiece from near-perfection to perfection. '' The short-story writer and novelist J. D. Salinger call Mr. Shawn the `` most unreasonably modest of born great artist-editors. '' As the Shawn era progress , The New Yorker earn new respect for what become a continual outpouring of report and commentary on such matter a the environment , poverty , racial strife , the Vietnam War and nuclear disarmament. `` Better than any other editor of our time , he have be able to measure the distance of our national fall from grace , '' Mr. Gill once say , voice the admiration that generation of New Yorker writer felt for Mr. Shawn. But Mr. Gill acknowledge wryly that `` at time , one heard grumbling , in the corridor of the magazine and out in the world , '' about the amount of gloom in the magazine. Helping to Shape Public Opinion Under Mr. Shawn , The New Yorker 's literary and reportorial style continue to exercise a powerful influence on writer around the country , a they have under Mr. Ross. One much-cited example be Truman Capote 's 1965 best seller , `` In Cold Blood , '' which come out first in The New Yorker and encourage other write that straddle the line between fact and fiction. But in Mr. Shawn 's day , The New Yorker 's nonfiction writing also come to help shape public opinion and discussion about important issues. James Baldwin 's writing underscore the force of black grievance , for instance , and Rachel Carson 's lent urgency to concern about the environment. The New Yorker send the political philosopher Dr. Hannah Arendt to attend the 1961 trial of Adolf Eichmann in Jerusalem , and her coverage add to the continue controversy about the Holocaust. A New Yorker review of Michael Harrington 's 1963 book , `` The Other America , '' help draw attention to the work and thereby to the whole issue of poverty in the United States. `` Shawn change The New Yorker from a smarty-pants parish tip sheet into a journal that alter our experience instead of just posture in front of it , '' John Leonard , a book critic for The New York Times , observe in 1975. The Shawn era also have it disappointments. Mr. Shawn himself observe regretfully in a 1979 interview that during his time a editor there have be fewer `` out-and-out humorist than in the 1920's. '' The Shawn era also include some disappointment on The New Yorker 's business side -- from which Mr. Shawn stay largely aloof. Average circulation per issue climb , for instance , from about 485,000 for 1974 to a peak of about 510,000 for 1983 but then drop back toward 500,000 for 1984 -- the year before the magazine be sold. Somewhat similarly , the number of page of advertising in The New Yorker rise in the late 1970 's and early 1980 's to a peak of almost 4,500 page for 1981 and then sag in the next three year to about 3,500 page for 1984 , And advertising revenue fell from 1984 to 1985 and from that year to 1986 -- that be , during Mr. Shawn 's last two full year at the editorial helm. Mr. Shawn 's decade at the New Yorker also include an apparent permutation in his own writing : it seem to rise from humble spoofery to occasional height of Olympian solemnity. In 1936 , three year after join the magazine , he contribute a fey piece of fantasy , `` The Catastrophe , '' in which a meteor `` land , nice and tidy , on all five borough of Greater New York. '' `` The only New Yorkers who escape be those who chance to be at Miami Beach , '' he write , `` and there they remain , shake their head and try to find someone who would cash their checks. '' Forty-three year later , in an introduction to `` Janet Flanner 's World , '' a collection of article by the correspondent know a Genet , he write this sober analysis of the reporter 's craft : `` New information resides nowhere until it have be identify , objectify , assemble , and communicate by one or another kind of reporter ; and every reporter set out on every quest more or less in the dark. At first , there be little to go on except instinct ; but at last , a fragment after fragment fall into place , information materializes , and some light , with luck , be cast. '' A Serious Man With Humor Mr. Shawn make a sober impression himself , with his aldermanic good manner and his dark suits. But he relish good humorous writing , he play jazz expertly on the Steinway in his apartment -- and , among editor and writer , he be sometimes the subject of anecdote and amusement. That be because of his many mild eccentricity and his highly unlikely credential for run a magazine that in some way be the embodiment of upper-middle-class New York sophistication. He dislike crowd , fast driving , air conditioning and self-service elevators. ( When the elevator at The New Yorker 's office at 25 West 43d Street be automate , one be leave in manual operation to accommodate him. ) He be short and physically unimposing , he generally avoid night life , and his idea of a power lunch be orange juice and cereal in the Rose Room at the Algonquin Hotel. He be a college dropout who cut his journalistic teeth on an obscure New Mexico newspaper. And a certain unabashed flatness in his speech forever proclaim his upbringing in Chicago. Yet while the chuckle continue , and while the editor come and go at other magazine , Mr. Shawn 's reign continue , more or less serenely and unchallenged , until he have far exceed Mr. Ross 's 26-year tenure a editor. Mr. Shawn 's durability have several interrelated cause in addition to the support of the Fleischmann family , which own much of The New Yorker 's stock ; Raoul Fleischmann leave him $ 100,000 in his will. As an editor , Mr. Shawn be enormously skillful ; he be a gifted , though idiosyncratic , editorial administrator ; and the respect and affection that other editor and writer have for him be unusually warm. In his editing , Mr. Shawn have high standard : once , the story go , he be discuss an idea for some intellectually lofty writing by Dr. Arendt , and she suggest that The New Yorker 's reader would not be interested. But he reply that he do not care : the writing would be good for them. One of his strength be his sternly logical mind , which never seem to rest -- with the result , another story have it , that once , when he be learn to drive a car , he complain to the instructor : `` If one be disengage the gear , one ought to have to let the clutch out , instead of push it in. To me , 'in ' represent engagement and 'out ' represent disengagement. '' But there be criticism , too. The writer Dorothy Parker complain in the 1960 's that much of the write appear then seem `` to be about somebody 's childhood in Pakistan. '' The personality piece be sometimes call too long and lack in irreverence ; it fiction be belittle by some a favor fragile stylists. In 1965 , the essayist Tom Wolfe contend in the New York Herald Tribune that Mr. Shawn have make The New Yorker `` the most successful suburban woman 's magazine in the country. '' Discretion And Decorum As an editorial administrator , Mr. Shawn play his card close to his chest : for year he avoid hold meeting , prefer to deal with his assistant and writer one by one. He be so secretive that Mr. Fleischmann , when ask at the 1974 New Yorker stockholder ' meeting whether Mr. Shawn have a deputy , have to reply cautiously : `` I do n't believe so. '' ( Formally speaking , Mr. Shawn do not , but when he be absent from the magazine , his place be take by Gardner Botsford , another editor. ) Mr. Shawn also have a strong sense of propriety. Mr. Gill report in his memoir that once Mr. Shawn , find himself in an elevator with a tipsy writer who be talk loutishly in front of a woman , tell the elevator operator , `` Please stop. I must get off at once. '' Some New Yorker people have suggest that Mr. Shawn 's notion of decorum might stem partly from his bourgeois upbringing in Chicago , where he be bear on Aug. 31 , 1907 , the son of Benjamin W. Chon , a well-to-do cutlery merchant of Central European origin , and Anna Bransky Chon. ( Mr. Shawn change his name early in his career. ) After school in Chicago , he spend two year at the University of Michigan , then drop out and set off for New Mexico because , he later say , `` I think I 'd like the climate. '' In the central New Mexico town of Las Vegas , a health resort and livestock trading center , he go to work a a $ 30-a-week reporter on a local newspaper , The Las Vegas Optic. After several month , he return to Chicago , where he work a an editor for a news service and marry a news paperwoman , Cecille Lyon. The young couple spend a year or so in Europe ; in Paris , by some account , Mr. Shawn work a a piano player. He try his hand a a writer and a a composer of music , largely for ballet. Talk of the Town At $ 2 an Inch Mr. Shawn have long be a fascinated reader of The New Yorker , and in time the Shawns move to New York. Once there , he begin do reporting assignment for the magazine 's Talk of the Town section. `` I be pay $ 2 an inch when the piece appear , '' he later said. `` It be practically starvation. After a while they let me come into the office and work. '' As time pass , the boyish-looking reporter become know a a prodigy of conscientiousness and organization. In 1935 , he turn his hand to editing , although he still want to write. Mr. Shawn work extremely hard in those day , but he also enjoy relaxing. `` About once a month we 'd have a party and about 30 or 40 people would show up , '' The New Yorker veteran E. J. Kahn Jr. write in his book `` About the New Yorker and Me. '' `` Shawn be our star. He 'd be our piano player. '' He be also quite good a an editor in the '30 's , but it be after the outbreak of World War II , the New Yorker contributor James Thurber write in his memoir `` The Years With Ross , '' that Mr. Shawn really come to the fore. By Mr. Thurber 's account , St. Clair McKelway , who have have the title of manage editor and edited nonfiction , leave to join the armed force , and another New Yorker executive , Ik Shuman , suggest that Mr. Shawn replace him. `` What the hell make you think he could handle the job ? '' Mr. Ross splutter , accord to Mr. Thurber. `` Dismiss it from your mind. '' 'A Creature Of the 30's' But Mr. Shawn get the job , and he and Mr. Ross get on famously , although , a the New Yorker writer E. B. White once put it , Mr. Ross `` be a creature of the 20 's , when everyone be kick up his heels. '' `` Shawn be a creature of the 30 's , when men be peddle apple , '' he said. The Ross-Shawn collaboration prove highly fruitful : Mr. Thurber 's appraisal be that `` without Shawn 's hard work and constant counsel , Ross would never have make the distinguished record he do a editor during the war. '' As the war go on , Mr. Gill recall in his book `` Here at The New Yorker , '' `` Shawn work something like 18 hour a day , seven day a week ; he be a phenomenon of apparently imperturbable industry. '' He be also , a Mr. Ross once put it , `` peerless a an idea man , '' and he manage to sell Mr. Ross on the idea of devote one whole New Yorker issue to `` Hiroshima , '' John Hersey 's 31,347-word piece about the obliteration of that city by the atomic bomb and the fate of it inhabitants. The `` Hiroshima '' issue be a striking departure from The New Yorker 's traditional format and , a The Herald Tribune observe at the time , from `` it usual content of quip , cartoon and causticism. '' The issue be an enormous critical success. In the postwar year , Mr. Shawn remain indispensable to Mr. Ross. One evening in 1948 , Mr. Thurber write in his memoir , Mr. Ross mention Mr. Shawn so often , during a conversation with H. L. Mencken and George Jean Nathan , that Mr. Nathan ask `` Who be Shawn ? Who be Shawn ? '' By 1951 , when Mr. Ross 's health be fail , he `` have make it clear to some of u that he want Bill Shawn to succeed him '' and `` devoutly hop he would , '' Mr. Thurber reported. And Mr. Gill write that `` none of u suppose that there be a chance of the editorship 's go to anyone but Shawn , '' although , he say , Gustave Lobrano , who be Mr. Ross 's deputy in charge of fiction and also have the title of manage editor , be disappoint not to get the job. The actual choice be make by Raoul Fleischmann , who be then the magazine 's publisher. From the Magazine To Books Mr. Shawn 's longstanding tie to New Yorker writer continue after he step down as editor in 1987 and begin work with Farrar , Straus & Giroux , where he bring in a number of books. Jonathan Galassi , the editor in chief at Farrar , Straus , say one of the book on which Mr. Shawn have do the most intensive editing for Farrar , Straus be Charlayne Hunter-Gault 's `` In My Place , '' a memoir publish last month , about her life in the South from her birth to her become , in 1961 , one of the first black student to enter the University of Georgia. It be Mr. Galassi who have bring Ms. Hunter-Gault to Farrar , Straus to publish her first book , and he say she have ask to have the book edit by Mr. Shawn , who have hire her to work at The New Yorker a a staff writer year earlier. Mr. Shawn 's son Wallace say yesterday that in his last year Mr. Shawn have mainly be engage in `` do his own writing. '' Asked what Mr. Shawn be write , Wallace Shawn say `` We do n't ask him , really , but I think it be fiction. '' He also say the family do not know where the manuscript be , and add , `` Unless he destroy it , I 'm sure it 'll turn up. '' Asked what Mr. Shawn think of Tina Brown 's first month a chief editor of the New Yorker , Wallace Shawn say his father have never give any indication of his view of the magazine 's current direction. Then he pause a moment , and say of his father , `` You know , if he have live for another couple of year , we might well have have a discussion on the subject. '' And he add , `` I learn today from my mother that he be plan to have lunch with Tina Brown , and I know that he still wish everyone at the magazine very , very well. '' In addition to his wife of 64 year and his son Wallace , of Manhattan , Mr. Shawn be survive by another son , Allen , of North Bennington , Vt. , a composer who teach at Bennington College ; a daughter , Mary Shawn of Langhorne , Pa. , and two grandchild .