A transgender pioneer and activist who be a fixture of Greenwich Village street life. By SEWELL CHAN Marsha P. Johnson be an activist , a prostitute , a drag performer and , for nearly three decade , a fixture of street life in Greenwich Village. She be a central figure in a gay liberation movement energize by the 1969 police raid on the Stonewall Inn. She be a model for Andy Warhol. She battle severe mental illness. She be usually destitute and , for much of her life , effectively homeless. When she die at 46 , under murky circumstance , in summer 1992 , Johnson be mourn by her many friend , but her death do not attract much notice in the mainstream press. In the year since , however , interest in her legacy have soared. She have be praise for her insistent call for social and economic justice ; for work on behalf of homeless street youth ostracize by their family for be gay or otherwise not conform to traditional idea about gender ; and , later , for her advocacy on behalf of AIDS patients. Some have call her a saint. Many transgender people have also come to hail Johnson , and her longtime friend and colleague Sylvia Rivera , a pioneer heroes. ( The term transgender be not in wide use in Johnson’s lifetime ; she usually use female pronoun for herself , but also refer to herself a gay , a a transvestite or simply a a queen. ) “Marsha P. Johnson could be perceive a the most marginalized of people — black , queer , gender-nonconforming , poor , ” say Susan Stryker , an associate professor of gender and women’s study at the University of Arizona. “You might expect a person in such a position to be fragile , brutalize , beat down. Instead , Marsha have this joie de vivre , a capacity to find joy in a world of suffering. She channel it into political action , and do it with a kind of fierceness , grace and whimsy , with a loopy , absurdist reaction to it all.” Johnson be bear Malcolm Michaels Jr. on Aug. 24 , 1945 , in Elizabeth , N.J. , the fifth of seven child in a working-class family. Her father , Malcolm Michaels Sr. , work on the assembly line at a General Motors factory in Linden. Her mother , the former Alberta Claiborne , be a housekeeper. Johnson be around 5 when she begin to wear dress , but felt pressure to stop because of other children’s aggression. Later , Johnson say in an interview toward the end of her life , she be sexually assault by another boy , who be around 13. She begin attend the Mount Teman African Methodist Episcopal Church a a child and practice her Christian faith throughout her life ; later , she be draw to Catholicism and visit house of worship of other faith frequently. She graduate from Thomas A. Edison High School in Elizabeth in 1963 , and promptly move to New York City , she later recall , with $ 15 and a bag of clothes. It be not an easy time to live outside the sexual mainstream. Although New York State downgrade sodomy from a felony to a misdemeanor in 1950 , persecution of gay people and criminalization of their activity be still common. Same-sex dancing in public be prohibited. The State Liquor Authority ban bar from serve gay people alcoholic beverages. People could be charge with sexual deviancy for cross-dressing. Police enforcement be often arbitrary. Johnson with her friend and fellow activist Sylvia Rivera outside City Hall in New York at a rally for gay right around April 1973. In the year since her death , Johnson’s legacy have soared. She have be praise for her insistent call for social and economic justice ; for work on behalf of homeless street youth ostracize for not conform to traditional idea about gender ; and for her advocacy on behalf of AIDS patients. Diana Davies , via New York Public Library After arrive in New York , Johnson alternate between go by her give name , Malcolm , and a persona she have create , Black Marsha. She engage in prostitution and be often arrest — she stop count after the 100th time , she later say — and be once , in the late 1970s , even shot. She could often be find in seedy hotel near Times Square , include the Dixie Hotel ( now the Hotel Carter ) on West 43rd Street. “The one that use to make the most money be the boy that could wear their own hair , with just a little bit of makeup , ” she later recalled. Johnson be a key figure in the disturbance that follow a police raid at the Stonewall Inn , a gay bar on Christopher Street , early in the morning of June 28 , 1969. Many legend have grow around the event — often characterize a a riot , but more recently describe a a rebellion or uprising — but the evidence suggest that Johnson be among the “vanguard” of those who resist the police , accord to David Carter , the author of “Stonewall : The Riots That Sparked the Gay Revolution.” She be 23 at the time. Stonewall help to galvanize a more assertive , even militant , gay-rights movement. It prompt the first gay pride parade , in 1970. The same year , Johnson join Rivera in found Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries , or STAR , to advocate for young transgender people — and , for a time , house , clothe and fee them , from a tenement at 213 East Second Street. STAR grow out of the Gay Liberation Front , which advocate for sexual liberation and push to align gay right with other social movements. Her goal , she declare in an interview for a 1972 book , be “to see gay people liberate and free and to have equal right that other people have in America , ” with her “gay brother and sister out of jail and on the street again.” She add , in a reference to the radical politics of the time , “We believe in pick up the gun , start a revolution if necessary.” The 1970s be a time of great visibility for Johnson. Tall and slender , she have a knack for command attention. Her outfit — red plastic high heel ; slipper and stocking ; shimmer robe and dress ; costume jewelry ; bright wig ; plastic flower and even artificial fruit in her hair — be often assemble from scavenge or discard materials. “I be no one , nobody , from Nowheresville , until I become a drag queen , ” she say in a 1992 interview. Among those who notice be Warhol. He take Polaroids of Johnson and include her in “Ladies and Gentlemen , ” a 1975 portfolio of screenprints depict drag queen and transgender reveler at The Gilded Grape , a nightclub. Johnson be also part of a drag performance group , Hot Peaches , that begin perform in 1972. She tell anyone who ask — include , once , a judge — that her middle initial stood for “pay it no mind.” The surname come from a Howard Johnson’s restaurant where she like to hang out. Yet life be never easy for Johnson. She have the first in what she say be a series of breakdown in 1970 , and be in and out of psychiatric institution after that. ( “I may be crazy , but that don’t make me wrong , ” she often said. ) She be generally know for her warmth and charisma , but she also could get into physical scrap and be frighten to others. “She would wander , start off talk about one thing and end up mile away ; people would say that drug have ruin her mind , that she be a permanent space cadet , ” the historian and author Martin Duberman write in “Stonewall , ” add that Johnson’s mind have “concentrated wonderfully” when she be organize STAR. In 1980 , a pivotal year for Johnson , she be invite to ride in the lead car of New York’s annual Gay Pride Parade , and begin live at the home of a close friend , the gay activist Randy Wicker , in Hoboken , N.J. She care for Wicker’s lover , David Combs , before he die of AIDS , in 1990. Grieving for friend , she could sometimes be find prostrate before a statue of the Virgin Mary at the Catholic Community of Saints Peter and Paul in Hoboken. She be also an AIDS activist , attend protest by and meeting of ACT UP , the AIDS advocacy organization. In a June 26 , 1992 , interview , Johnson say she have be H.I.V.-positive for two years. “They call me a legend in my own time , because there be so many queen go that I’m one of the few queen leave from the ’70s and the ’80s , ” she said. Several day later , she be see for the last time. On July 6 , 1992 , her body be pull from the Hudson River , near the Christopher Street piers. Her death be quickly rule a suicide , a determination that many of her friend and acquaintance questioned. Later in 1992 , the authority reclassify the cause , to drown from undetermined cause , and in 2012 , they agree to take a fresh look at the case , which officially remain open. Johnson have be the subject of several film project , include work by Reina Gossett and Sasha Wortzel and documentary in 2012 by Michael Kasino and in 2017 by David France. France’s film , “The Death and Life of Marsha P. Johnson , ” focus in part on the effort of Victoria Cruz , a transgender activist and a volunteer with the New York City Anti-Violence Project , to investigate the case. Johnson’s ability to mix flamboyant joy with determined activism be a central part of her legacy. “As long a gay people don’t have their right all across America , ” she once say , “there’s no reason for celebration.” Correction March 8 , 2018 An early version of this article misstate the year in which the authority declare the cause of Johnson’s death to be undetermined , and agree to take a fresh look at the case. The cause be declare to be undetermined in 1992 , not 2002 , and the authority agree to take a new look in 2012 , not 2002. Sewell Chan be an international news editor at The Times .