January 25 , 1993 OBITUARY Thurgood Marshall , Civil Rights Hero , Dies at 84 By LINDA GREENHOUSE , Special to The New York Times Thurgood Marshall , pillar of the civil right revolution , architect of the legal strategy that end the era of official segregation and the first black Justice of the Supreme Court , die today. A major figure in American public life for a half-century , he be 84 year old. Toni House , the Court 's spokeswoman , say Justice Marshall die of heart failure at Bethesda Naval Medical Center in Maryland at 2 P.M. Justice Marshall , who retire from the High Court in 1991 , have be schedule to administer the oath of office to Vice President Al Gore on Wednesday , but his fail health prevent him from do so. Thurgood Marshall be a figure of history well before he begin his 24-year service on the Supreme Court on Oct. 2 , 1967. During more than 20 year a director-counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund , he be the principal architect of the strategy of use the court to provide what the political system would not : a definition of equality that assure black Americans the full right of citizenship. Landmark Triumph in 1954 His great legal victory come in 1954 with the Supreme Court 's decision in Brown v. Board of Education , which declare an end to the `` separate but equal '' system of racial segregation then in effect in the public school of 21 states. Despite the year of turmoil that follow the unanimous decision , the Court leave no doubt that it be bring an end to the era of official segregation in all public institutions. Many question linger after so monumental a transformation , and the Court continue to confront issue involve the legacy of segregation even after Justice Marshall retired. As a civil right lawyer , Mr. Marshall devise the legal strategy and head the team that bring the school desegregation issue before the Court. An experienced Supreme Court advocate by that time , he argue the case himself in the straightforward , plain-spoken manner that be the hallmark of his courtroom style. Asked by Justice Felix Frankfurter during the argument what he mean by `` equal , '' Mr. Marshall reply , `` Equal mean get the same thing , at the same time , and in the same place. '' He win many other important civil right case , include a challenge to the whites-only primary election in Texas. This device be commonly use by white Southern politician to disenfranchise blacks. He also win a major Supreme Court case in which the Court declare that restrictive covenant that bar black from buy or rent home could not be enforce in state courts. 'Heroic Imagination ' In a Ruthless World Mr. Marshall , who be bear and rear in Baltimore , be exclude from the all-white law school at the University of Maryland. Later he bring successful lawsuit that integrate not only that school but also several other state university systems. He receive his legal education at the law school of Howard University in Washington , D.C. , the nation 's pre-eminent black university , where he graduate first in his class in 1933 and make the personal and intellectual connection that shape his future career. Years later , the University of Maryland name it law library for him , and the City of Baltimore honor him by place a bronze likeness , more than eight foot tall , outside the Federal courthouse. `` To do what he do require a heroic imagination , '' Paul Gewirtz , one of Justice Marshall 's former law clerk , write in a tribute publish after the Justice retire from the Court. The article by Mr. Gewirtz , the Potter Stewart Professor of Constitutional Law at Yale Law School , continue : `` He grow up in a ruthlessly discriminatory world -- a world in which segregation of the race be pervasive and take for grant , where lynching be common , where the black man 's inherent inferiority be proclaim widely and wantonly. Thurgood Marshall have the capacity to imagine a radically different world , the imaginative capacity to believe that such a world be possible , the strength to sustain that image in the mind 's eye and the heart 's longing , and the courage and ability to make that imagined world real. '' Yet Justice Marshall be not satisfy with what he have achieve , believe that the Constitution 's promise of equality remain unfulfilled and that his work be therefore unfinished. A Voice of Anger And Disappointment For much of his Supreme Court career , a the Court 's majority increasingly draw back from affirmative action and other remedy for discrimination that he believe be still necessary to combat the nation 's legacy of racism , Justice Marshall use dissent opinion to express his disappointment and anger. In 1978 , for example , in the Bakke case , in which the Court find it unconstitutional for a state-run medical school to reserve 16 of 100 place in the entering class for black and other minority student , Justice Marshall file a separate 16-page opinion trace the black experience in America. `` In light of the sorry history of discrimination and it devastating impact on the life of Negroes , '' he write , `` bring the Negro into the mainstream of American life should be a state interest of the high order. To fail to do so be to insure that America will forever remain a divided society. '' He dissent in City of Richmond v. Croson , a 1989 ruling in which the Court declare unconstitutional a municipal ordinance set aside 30 percent of public contracting dollar for company own by black or member of other minorities. The Court majority call the program a form of state-sponsored racism that be no less offensive to the Constitution than a policy officially favor whites. In his dissenting opinion , Justice Marshall say that in reach that conclusion `` a majority of this Court signal that it regard racial discrimination a largely a phenomenon of the past , and that government body need no longer preoccupy themselves with rectify racial injustice. '' He add : `` I , however , do not believe this nation be anywhere close to eradicate racial discrimination or it vestiges. In constitutionalize it wishful thinking , the majority today do a grave disservice not only to those victim of past and present racial discrimination in this nation whom government have seek to assist , but also to this Court 's long tradition of approach issue of race with the utmost sensitivity. '' 'Great Dissenter ' As Political Prophet Although he write a number of important majority opinion for the Court , his most powerful voice be in dissent , and not only in the area of racial discrimination. Like his friend and close ally , Justice William J. Brennan Jr. , who retire the year before he do , Justice Marshall believe that the death penalty be unconstitutional under all circumstances. He dissent from all decision in which the Court upheld application of the death penalty , and he write more than 150 dissent opinion in case in which the Court have refuse to hear death penalty appeals. In an article publish after his retirement , Kathleen M. Sullivan , a Harvard Law School professor , call Justice Marshall `` the great dissenter. '' `` We may read his eloquent admonition in dissent a prophecy for another ( perhaps distant ) era when the political pendulum swing again , '' Professor Sullivan wrote. `` With his departure go part of the conscience of the Court -- a reminder of the human consequence of legal decisions. '' While the phrase `` first black Supreme Court Justice '' be attach so often to his name that it appear to be part of his official title , it be a partial definition at best , scarcely encompass the unusual range of legal experience that Justice Marshall bring to the Court. By the time President Lyndon B. Johnson name him to succeed Justice Tom C. Clark , who have retire , Mr. Marshall have argue 32 case before the Supreme Court and win 29 of them. He argue 14 of those case a a private lawyer and 18 a Solicitor General of the United States , the Federal Government 's chief advocate in the Supreme Court. President Johnson have name him to that position in 1965 , two year before nominate him to the Supreme Court. From 1961 to 1965 , Thurgood Marshall be a Federal appeal court judge , name by President John F. Kennedy to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit , in Manhattan. He write 112 opinion on that court , none of which be overturn on appeal. Several of his dissent opinion be eventually adopt a majority opinion by the Supreme Court. He have at first be hesitant to accept President Kennedy 's offer of a seat on the appeal court , fear that his ally in the civil right movement would think that he be desert the struggle. `` I have to fight it out with myself , '' he say in an interview some year ago. `` But by then I have build up a staff -- a damned good staff -- an excellent board , and the backing that would let them go ahead. And when one have an opportunity to serve the Government , he should think twice before pass it up. '' The Thurgood Marshall whom the public saw in his old age be a gruff , lumber figure , his pace slow by extra pound and shortness of breath , his eyesight impair by glaucoma. Outspoken and impolitic , he stir up minor storm by make cut remark in public , highly unusual for a Supreme Court Justice , about major public figures. `` I would n't do the job of dogcatcher for Ronald Reagan , '' he say in an interview in 1989. The next year , refer to President Bush , he say in a televised interview : `` It 's say that if you ca n't say something good about a dead person , do n't say it. Well , I consider him dead. '' Behind the Mask , A Fine Storyteller In the courtroom Justice Marshall 's face be an inscrutable mask. He say little during the argument session , growl occasionally at lawyer who be struggle lamely through their argument and sometimes train his sarcasm on his own colleagues. During a death penalty argument in 1981 , William H. Rehnquist , then an Associate Justice , suggest that the inmate 's repeat appeal have cost the taxpayer too much money. Justice Marshall interrupt , say , `` It would have be cheap to shoot him right after he be arrest , would n't it ? '' But those who know him well say that behind the mask be a man with an earthy sense of humor , a spellbind storyteller with an anecdote from his own long life for every occasion. Justice Brennan , in a tribute to his friend publish in the Harvard Law Review , write about Justice Marshall 's storytelling abilities. `` The locale be vary -- from dusty courtroom in the Deep South , to a confrontation with General MacArthur in the Far East , to the drafting session for the Kenyan Constitution , '' Justice Brennan wrote. `` They be bring to life by all the trick of the storyteller 's art : the fluid voice , the mobile eyebrow , the sidelong glance , the pregnant pause and the wry smile. '' The story be mean not only to entertain but also to serve `` a deep purpose , '' Justice Brennan said. `` They be his way of preserve the past while purge it of it bleak moment , '' he said. `` They be also a form of education for the rest of us. Surely , Justice Marshall recognize that the story make u -- his colleague -- confront walk of life we have never known. '' Many of his story recall the hostility , the harassment and , not infrequently , the danger he have face a a civil right lawyer , travel some 50,000 mile a year throughout the South represent black client and unpopular causes. One story he tell be of be arrest on a trumped-up charge of drunken drive while leave a Tennessee town in which he and a colleague have just win an acquittal for a black defendant. As Justice Marshall recount the incident in an interview , he be bring before a magistrate , who tell him : `` If you 're not drunk , will you take my test ? Will you blow in my face ? I 'm a teetotaler and I can smell the least bit of whisky. '' `` He be a short man , '' recall Justice Marshall , who be himself 6 foot 2 inch tall and weigh well over 200 pounds. `` I put my hand on his shoulder and breathe just as hard a I could into the man 's face. '' The case be dismissed. `` We drive to Nashville , '' the Justice added. `` And then , boy , I really want a drink ! '' Thurgood Marshall be bear in Baltimore on July 2 , 1908. His mother , the former Norma Williams , be a teacher. His father , William Marshall , have once work a a Pullman car waiter and later become a steward at the exclusive , all-white Gibson Island Club on Chesapeake Bay. A great-grandfather have be take a a slave from the Congo to the Eastern Shore of Maryland , where the slaveholder eventually free him. Mr. Marshall be name for his paternal grandfather , who have choose the name `` Thoroughgood '' when he enlist a a private in the Union Army during the Civil War. His grandson later explain that he adopt the spell `` Thurgood '' in grade school because he `` get tired of spell all that out. '' He describe himself a a `` hell-raiser '' in school , a circumstance that give him exposure to the Constitution and lifelong respect for it. `` Instead of make u copy out stuff on the blackboard after school when we misbehave , our teacher send u down into the basement to learn part of the Constitution , '' he once recalled. `` I make my way through every paragraph. '' In high school year in Baltimore , he work a a delivery boy for a woman 's clothing store after classes. He wait on table to help pay the tuition at Lincoln University in Chester , Pa. , where he say he `` major in hell-raising. '' He be expel once for haze freshman , but after be readmitted he become a star debater and graduate with honor in 1930. His mother want him to become a dentist , a safe and lucrative career for a black professional in those day , but he be determine to become a lawyer. Enrolling at Howard University Law School mean a long daily commute from Baltimore because he could not afford housing at the school. His mother pawn her wedding and engagement ring to pay the law school 's entrance fees. At Howard he meet a man who would influence the course of his life , Charles Hamilton Houston , then the law school 's vice dean. Mr. Houston , a Harvard Law School graduate who later serve a chief counsel to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and who become the first black lawyer to win a case before the Supreme Court , imbue his student with the goal of use the law to attack institutional racism. `` Charlie Houston insist that we be social engineer rather than lawyer , '' Justice Marshall say in an interview publish in the American Bar Association Journal in 1992. The Justice often credit Mr. Houston , who die in 1950 at the age of 54 , a his mentor. Referring to the 1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision , he say in the bar association interview : `` The school case be really Charlie 's victory. He just never get a chance to see it. '' A Basic Strategy To End Segregation After earn his law degree Mr. Marshall open a law office in Baltimore. The nation be in the fourth year of the Depression. He find himself handle civil right case for impoverished client and be soon $ 1,000 in debt. But his courtroom victory , include his successful challenge to segregation at the University of Maryland Law School , begin to be noticed. In 1936 Mr. Houston , by then the chief counsel of the N.A.A.C.P. , recruit him for a $ 2,600-a-year job on the organization 's legal staff in New York. Two year later , when Mr. Houston return to Washington , Mr. Marshall succeed to the chief counsel 's title but continue to work closely with his mentor. Pursuing a long-range strategy to eradicate segregation , the two men concentrate first on graduate and professional school , believe that white judge be most likely to be offend by segregation in that setting and to sympathize with the ambitious young black college graduate who be the plaintiff in the cases. As success mount , the two turn their attention to segregation in public high school and elementary schools. `` Under Marshall , the N.A.A.C.P. 's legal staff become the model for public interest law firm , '' Mark Tushnet , one of the Justice 's biographer who be also one of his law clerk , write in the American Bar Association Journal. `` Marshall be thus one of the first public interest lawyers. His commitment to racial justice lead him and his staff to develop way of think about constitutional litigation that have be enormously influential far beyond the area of segregation and discrimination. '' In it public school case , the initial focus of the N.A.A.C.P. , and later of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund , which become a separate entity in the 1940 's , be to seek to equalize the resource available to the all-black school in segregated systems. Mr. Marshall persuade the organization 's board to abandon that approach and to refuse to take on any case that do not challenge the fact of segregation itself. The new policy be controversial within the N.A.A.C.P. and prompt resignation by several black lawyer on whom the organization have rely to handle case in the South. Mr. Marshall be not deter , and take on many of the case himself. He travel constantly and be in charge of as many a 450 case at a time. `` I be on the verge of a nervous breakdown for a long time , but I never quite make the grade , '' he once said. Robert L. Carter , an associate of Mr. Marshall 's from those day who later become a Federal district judge in New York , recall their travel through the South in an article publish in The Harvard Law Review. `` Having grow up in Maryland , Marshall have a slight Southern accent , '' Mr. Carter wrote. `` But when our opponent be Southern lawyer , which be virtually all the time , his accent would become much more pronounced. Before and after the case be call , Marshall would joke with the oppose counsel or exchange some pleasantry , all in a Southern accent so broad that he sound a if he have live all his life in the deep rural South. The practice irritate me at first. The very lawyer Marshall 's Southern drawl would put at ease be defend a system we detested. '' Mr. Carter write that he gradually understand that his friend `` be attempt to communicate to these men that , although we be on opposite side of an emotionally charge lawsuit , we be lawyer represent our client and have no personal quarrel with each other. '' 'The Right Man And the Right Place' By 1961 , when President Kennedy name him to the Federal appeal court , Thurgood Marshall be the best known black lawyer in the United States. A group of Southern senator hold up his confirmation for month , and he serve initially under a special appointment make during a Congressional recess. Six year later , President Johnson say that place Judge Marshall on the Supreme Court be `` the right thing to do , the right time to do it , the right man and the right place. '' Liberals still dominate the Court in the closing year of Chief Justice Earl Warren 's tenure , and Justice Marshall fit in comfortably with such colleague a Justices Brennan and William O. Douglas. In his early year on the Court , Justice Marshall cast only a handful of dissent votes. Inexorably , the ideological landscape changed. By the time Justice Marshall announce his retirement , on June 27 , 1991 , he have serve longer than all but one of the sitting Justices -- Byron R. White , who be name by President Kennedy in 1962 -- and be more liberal than any of them. In his final term he dissent in 25 of 112 cases. Among Justice Marshall 's important majority opinion for the Court be Amalgamated Food Employees Union v. Logan Valley Plaza , in 1968 , which hold that a shopping center be a `` public forum '' much like an old downtown city street , from which the private owner could not exclude picketers. His majority opinion in Stanley v. Georgia , in 1969 , hold that the private possession of pornography could not be subject to prosecution. `` If the First Amendment mean anything , '' he write in that case , `` it mean that a state have no business tell a man , sit alone in his own house , what book he may read or what film he may watch. '' He write the majority opinion in Bounds v. Smith , a 1977 case hold that state prison system be constitutionally oblige to provide inmate with `` adequate law library or adequate assistance from person train in the law. '' A Vigorous Dissent In a Schools Case One of his best known dissent be a 63-page opinion in a 1973 case , San Antonio School District v. Rodriguez. The majority in that case hold , by a 5-to-4 vote , that the Constitution 's guarantee of equal protection be not violate by the property tax system use by Texas and most other state to finance public education. Under the system district with generous tax base can afford to provide good school than less wealthy districts. In his dissenting opinion , Justice Marshall accuse the majority of an `` unsupportable acquiescence in a system which deprive child in their early year of the chance to reach their full potential a citizens. '' He argue that the right to an education should be regard a a `` fundamental '' constitutional right , and that state policy that have the effect of discriminate on the basis of wealth should be subject to especially search judicial scrutiny. `` In my judgment , '' he write , `` the right of every American to an equal start in life , so far a the provision of a state service as important a education be concern , be far too vital to permit state discrimination on ground as tenuous a those present by this record. '' Justice Marshall have often say that he do not plan to retire , so his decision at the end of the 1990-91 term take both the Court and the country by surprise. One person familiar with the Court recall that when Justice Marshall inform his colleague of his plan , at the Justices ' final private conference of the term , even the member of the Court who have clash with him long and often on matter of law and policy be deeply moved. Exclaiming `` Oh , Thurgood ! '' Chief Justice Rehnquist embrace Justice Marshall in a bear hug. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wept. Justice Marshall , a few day shy of his 83d birthday , give health a the reason for his retirement. At a news conference the next day he be ask , `` What 's wrong with you , sir ? '' `` What 's wrong with me ? '' Justice Marshall replied. `` I 'm old. I 'm get old and come apart. '' Justice Marshall 's first wife , the former Vivien Burey , whom he marry in 1929 , die of cancer in February 1955. In December of that year he marry Cecilia Suyat , know a Cissy. They have two son , Thurgood Jr. , legislative-affairs coordinator for the Office of the Vice President and previously a lawyer on the staff of the Senate Judiciary Committee , and John , a member of the Virginia state police .