November 1 , 1993 OBITUARY Federico Fellini , Film Visionary , Is Dead at 73 By PETER B. FLINT Federico Fellini , whose deeply personal film be vivid , sometimes bizarre portrait of the human condition , die yesterday at the Umberto I Hospital in Rome. He be 73. The cause be cardiac arrest , the Reuters news agency report , cite Dr. Maurizio Bufi , the chief of the hospital 's intensive care unit. Mr. Fellini have suffer a stroke in August and have be in a coma since he have what have be variously describe a a heart attack or heart failure on Oct. 17. Reuters say his condition deteriorate in the last hour before his death , and he develop a high fever and kidney problems. Four of Mr. Fellini 's movie win Oscars for best foreign-language film : 'La Strada ' in 1956 , 'The Nights of Cabiria ' in 1957 , '8 1/2 ' in 1963 and 'Amarcord ' in 1974. In March , he receive an honorary Oscar in recognition of his cinematic accomplishment a a director and screenwriter. Before his heart trouble lay him low this year , the director have reportedly be make plan to begin work on his 21st feature film next year , 'Block Notes of a Director : The Actor.' Throughout his career , Mr. Fellini focus on his personal vision of society and his preoccupation with the relationship between men and woman and between sex and love. An avowed anticleric , he be also deeply concern with guilt and alienation. Fellini film be spice with artifice ( mask , masquerade and circus ) , startle face , the rococo and the outlandish , the prism through which he sometimes view life. But a Vincent Canby , the chief film critic of The New York Times , observe in 1985 , 'What 's important be not the prism , though they be arrest , but the world he show u : a place whose spectacularly grand , studio-built artificiality make u see the interior truth of what be take to be the 'real ' world outside , which be a circus.' The concept of all Fellini movie originate in the mind of 'the Maestro , ' a his associate and compatriot fondly call him , in his memory , dream , fantasy and fancies. He be often the protagonist of his film , and his most celebrated alter ego be Marcello Mastroianni , in 'La Dolce Vita , ' '8 1/2 ' and 'City of Women.' Mr. Fellini write all his script , usually with two dialogue writer , and supervise every creative detail , include the final editing. He be a perfectionist who repeatedly reshot many scene in a process that usually take two years. He keep producer away from his film until they be complete , explain : 'I do not need a producer. I need only a good production manager. I need only a man who will give me money.' Devoted to Movies , Not to Commerce He study his own movie many time but seldom saw other movie , say that most of them reflect commerce rather than art. His devotion to movie over money be reflect in his uncommon willingness to surrender a large share of the potential profit from many of his film to their financial backers. He liken his craft to apply a thermometer to a troubled world and find a high fever. 'I 'd like very much to make a confident picture , ' he once tell an interviewer. 'I would like to be as good a nature , which with a shower produce flower and grass to cover the destruction. But we be surround by human fragmentation , by pessimism , and it be difficult to talk of other things.' Mr. Fellini say he seek to liberate viewer from 'overidealized concept of life. ' In a lighter vein , he remark , 'I make picture to tell a story , to tell lie and to amuse.' Over the decade , Fellini film become increasingly original and subjective , and consequently more controversial and less commercial. His style evolve from neo-realism to fanciful neo-realism to surrealism , in which he discard narrative story line for free-flowing , freewheel memoirs. He describe his approach in this way : 'When I start a picture , I always have a script , but I change it every day , I put in what occur to me that day , out of my imagination. You start on a voyage ; you know where you will end up , but not what will occur along the way. You want to be surprised.' His life center on film making. 'When I be not make movie , ' he confide , 'I feel I be not alive.' A Series of Scenes Difficult to Forget Fellini movie have many unexpected and indelible sequences. 'La Dolce Vita ' open with a huge statue of Jesus , with arm outstretched , be tow inexplicably by a helicopter above the rooftop of Rome. The film '8 1/2 ' end with a quixotic film director lead all his contentious associate , real and imagined , alive and dead , in a dance of joyful reconciliation. 'I Vitelloni ' ( 'The Loafers ' ) , the third feature he direct , be an autobiographical tragicomic tale of five provincial youth who punctuate their aimless street life with pranks. 'La Dolce Vita ' be a sensational and sobering scan of the decadent 'sweet life ' of Rome 's cafe society , with it sexual promiscuity , search for exotic gratification and consume boredom. The film shock many Italians and be proscribe by the Roman Catholic Church , but it become a huge success in Italy and around the world. 'La Strada ' ( 'The Road ' ) , be a poetic tragedy about a simple-minded waif who serve a the clown , cook and concubine for a boorish , brutish strongman. 'The Nights of Cabiria ' deal with a sentimental , eternally hopeful prostitute who wistfully dream of romance and respectability. Mr. Fellini 's most clearly autobiographical confession , '8 1/2 , ' be an innovative romantic satire-fantasy about an egomaniacal film maker 's moral and creative midlife crisis , his malaise and inability to make a movie. He title it '8 1/2 ' because it be his seventh directorial feature in addition to three short films. It be his favorite movie. 'Amarcord ' ( 'I Remember ' ) be a paean to youth and the memory of a year in the life of a provincial Italian town in the 1930's. Many Movies , Even More Awards In addition to Oscars , Fellini movie win hundred of award , include many top citation at international film festival and five first prize from the New York film critics. His other movie , also with evocative score by Nino Rota , include 'Juliet of the Spirits ' ( 1965 ) , his first color feature , which center on a neglected wife obsess by dream and spirit ; 'Fellini Satyricon ' ( 1969 ) , an epic of decadence and the wandering of a homosexual youth in ancient Rome 's disintegrate society ; 'The Clowns ' ( 1970 ) , and 'Fellini's Roma ' ( 1972 ) . Others be 'Fellini 's Casanova ' ( 1976 ) , a spectacular but joyless saga of the 18th-century philanderer 's conquest across Europe ; 'Orchestra Rehearsal ' ( 1979 ) , the most political Fellini film , which use an orchestra a a metaphor for a fragmenting society , and 'City of Women ' ( 1979 ) , a feminist fantasy in which the hero search incorrigibly for the perfect woman. Later film also include 'And the Ship Sails On ' ( 1983 ) , a flamboyant succession of mostly comic commentary on art and self-absorbed artist ; 'Ginger and Fred ' ( 1986 ) , whose central character be an Italian dance couple who choose their name in honor of the American dance team and who be reunite on a television variety show , and 'Intervista ' ( 1987 ) , a mock documentary describe by Mr. Canby in a review a 'a magical mixture of recollection , parody , memoir , satire , self-examination and joyous fantasy. ' 'Tutto Fellini , ' a retrospective of his film , start on Friday and be to continue through Dec. 21 at Film Forum in Greenwich Village. Scoffed at Questions About Meaning Mr. Fellini be impatient with interviewer who suggest that his film have be inspire by work he have not read and who press him with question about the meaning of his imagery. 'Meaning , always mean ! ' he scoffed. 'When someone asks , 'What do you mean in this picture ? , ' it show he be a prisoner of intellectual , sentimental shackles. Without his meaning , he feel vulnerable.' Admirers say Fellini film be resplendent and exhilarating , and reflect a deepening and an enhancement of his art. They also believe that his later movie show mature , self-critical insights. After the mid-1960 's , his film often stress the bizarre , the garish and the grotesque. Detractors praise some sequence , but variously term the work excessive , simplistic and self- obsessed. Nonetheless , the consensus be that he make brave and original movie about important issues. Mr. Canby praise Mr. Fellini for a dazzling inventiveness and skill and an 'insatiable curiosity about and fondness for the human animal , especially those who maintain only the most tenuous hold on their dignity or sanity. ' At his top form , he 'somehow bring out the best in u , ' Mr. Canby wrote. 'We become more humane , less stuffy. ' Hailing Mr. Fellini 's 'very special , personal kind of cinema , ' the critic conclude , 'one of Fellini 's great gift be his ability to communicate a sense of wonder , which have the effect of make u all feel much young than we have any right to.' Discovering Life Through Films Federico Fellini be bear on Jan. 20 , 1920 , in Rimini , an Adriatic port and resort in north-central Italy. His upbringing be provincial , religious and middle class. His father , Urbano , be a prosperous seller of coffee and other grocery specialty whose frequent travel leave his wife , Ida , a the main parent for Federico , his brother , Riccardo , and his sister , Maddalena. The film maker , fancifully recount his youth , repeatedly tell interviewer that he run away from home at the age of 7 or 8 to join a circus , but later he smilingly acknowledge he have fabricate the brief episode 'to help journalist ' explain his fascination for circuses. The youth attend religious boarding school , where his chief talent be draw and his chief adversary be the rigid friar who often punish him for break minor rules. In 1985 , he tell a New York audience that his love of film making originate in Rimini 's primitive movie house , which , he say , have 200 seat and stand room for 500. Of 1930 's American movie , he recall , 'I discover there exist another way of life , a country of wide-open space , of fantastic city that be a cross between Babylon and Mars. ' He be speak at a gala Fellini tribute offer by the Film Society of Lincoln Center. At the age of 17 or 18 , accord to his vary account , he leave home for Florence , where he work for several month a a proofreader and cartoonist. He go on to Rome , enrol at the University of Rome 's law school , but he do not attend class and use his student status to avoid conscription while he work a a cartoonist and short-story writer for a satirical publication , Marc' Aurelio. He later use his cartoon talent to draw character and scene for his movies. At 19 , he join a vaudeville troupe , travel across Italy and work primarily a a gag writer while perform utility tasks. The year , he recall , 'was perhaps the most important year of my life. ' 'I be overwhelm by the variety of the country 's physical landscape and , too , by the variety of it human landscape , ' he said. 'It be the kind of experience that few young men be fortunate enough to have : a chance to discover the character of one 's country and , at the same time , to discover one 's own identity.' Back in Rome , he write radio script and start collaborate on film scripts. In 1943 , after a four-month courtship , he marry the actress Giulietta Masina , later the star of many Fellini film , include 'La Strada , ' 'The Nights of Cabiria , ' 'Juliet of the Spirits ' and 'Ginger and Fred. ' She be a major inspiration for his life and work , and be his only survivor. His effort to avoid the World War II draft appear doom in 1943 when he be order to undergo a medical examination. But accord to Ephraim Katz 's 'Film Encyclopedia , ' his record be destroy in a bombing. Later , by hide in Rome 's slum , he elude German Occupation troop , who regularly search the city for Italian men to replenish the armed force or to toil in slave-labor camps. Present at the Start Of a Renaissance In 1944 , soon after the Allies liberate Rome , he and several friend open the Funny Face Shop , a highly prosperous arcade that provide Allied troop with caricature , portrait , photo and voice recording for their families. The film director Roberto Rossellini visit the shop and ask him to collaborate on a documentary about the Nazis ' occupation of Rome. The venture evolve into 'Open City ' ( 1945 ) , a benchmark neo-realistic movie that ignite Italy 's postwar film renaissance. Mr. Fellini be the assistant director of 'Open City ' and a co-writer and assistant director of Mr. Rossellini 's second celebrated antiwar film , 'Paisan ' ( 1946 ) , and his controversial religious film , 'The Miracle ' ( 1948 ) , in which Mr. Fellini be co-star with Anna Magnani. He also become know a Mr. Rossellini 's idea man. After several stint a a co-writer or assistant director for Pietro Germi and Alberto Lattuada , Mr. Fellini make his directorial debut in 1951 , collaborate with Mr. Lattuada on 'Variety Lights , ' a comedy-drama about the ups and down of a troupe of third-rate travel vaudevillians. ( It be not release in the United States until 1965. ) His first solo directorial effort be the 1951 'White Sheik , ' release here in 1956 , a broad lampoon of Italy 's adult comic-strip industry. Both movie be critical and commercial failure , but they be later re-released and praised. Determined to direct film , Mr. Fellini struggle financially to complete his next project , 'I Vitelloni , ' which become a major success in Italy and abroad. He consolidate his international prestige with 'La Strada.' The film maker be an exuberant , articulate , bearlike man with an expressive face , a whimsical charm and a spontaneous , demonstrative manner. He often gesture with both hand , even while drive one of his favorite motor cars. Tolerant Overseer Of Sets of Babel On movie set , he savor his power a the ringmaster of a Felliniesque world. Jauntily wear a wide-brimmed , usually black hat , he dominate the scene , alternately improvise , quip and clowning. Some director insist on silence on the set , but he prefer a touch of chaos. He like to shoot scene sequentially , but he usually do not care in what language performer speak because he dub most dialogue , often use other actor to do so because he believe the voice of most people do not match their looks. Over the year , he direct thousand of nonprofessional actors. He be very demand of performer , usually cajole them to get what he want , and he coax many professional to give the best performance of their careers. For decade , the Fellinis have a small apartment in Rome for convenience , but their principal home be a modest seaside house he build in 1965 in the suburb of Fregene. He read widely in his youth but later concentrate on newspaper article , which provide grist for his imagination. Asked once by a friend when he plan to take a vacation , he reply quickly : 'Making a movie be my vacation. All the rest , the travel about to premiere , the interview , the social life , the endless argument with producer who do n't understand me , that be the work.' He be survive by his wife. A POET WHO SANG A SONG OF HIMSELF Federico Fellini be a poet of the cinema whose work , illuminate by unforgettable image , be intensely autobiographical. These be some of his film and when they be make , follow by the date of release in the United States. The White Sheik 1951 ( 1956 ) I Vitelloni 1953 ( 1956 ) La Strada 1954 ( 1956 ) Nights of Cabiria 1956 ( 1957 ) La Dolce Vita 1960 ( 1961 ) Boccaccio '70 1962 ( 1962 ) 8 1/2 1963 ( 1963 ) Il Bidone 1955 ( 1964 ) Variety Lights 1950 ( 1965 ) Juliet of the Spirits 1965 ( 1965 ) Fellini Satyricon 1969 ( 1969 ) The Clowns 1970 ( 1970 ) Amarcord 1973 ( 1974 ) Orchestra Rehearsal 1978 ( 1979 ) City of Women 1979 ( 1979 ) And the Ship Sails On 1983 ( 1983 ) Ginger and Fred 1986 ( 1986 ) Intervista 1987 ( 1992 ) Voices of the Moon 1990 ( 1993 )