April 24 , 1993 OBITUARY Cesar Chavez , 66 , Organizer of Union For Migrants , Dies By ROBERT LINDSEY Cesar Chavez , the migrant worker who emerge from the poverty of an agricultural valley in Arizona to find America 's first successful union of farm worker , be find dead yesterday in San Luis , Ariz. He be 66. Mr. Chavez , who live in Keene , Calif. , and be in Arizona on union business , die in his sleep , the local police said. An autopsy be planned. Blending the nonviolent resistance of Gandhi with the organizational skill of his mentor , the social activist Saul Alinsky , Mr. Chavez capture worldwide attention in the 1960's. Leading an initially lonely battle to unionize the field and orchard of California , he issue a call to boycott grape that soon become a cause celebre. Mr. Chavez , who be describe by Robert F. Kennedy in 1968 a `` one of the heroic figure of our time , '' be widely acknowledge to have do more to improve the lot of the migrant farm worker than anyone else. Fighting grower and shipper who for generation have defeat effort to unionize field worker , and later fight rival unionist , Mr. Chavez for the first time bring a degree of stability and security to the life of some migrant workers. Largely because of him , the California Legislature in 1975 pass the nation 's first collective bargaining act outside Hawaii for farm worker , who be largely exclude from Federal labor law coverage. `` For the first time , '' Mr. Chavez say when ask to describe the union 's achievement , `` the farm worker get some power. '' Asked what have motivate his stubborn fight , he say , `` For many year I be a farm worker , a migratory worker , and , well , personally -- and I 'm be very frank -- maybe it 's just a matter of try to even the score. '' But he ultimately fail to realize his dream of forge a nationwide organization. In most of America , farm worker continue to toil for low wage , without job security , vulnerable to exploitation. Even in California he find it difficult to translate the early triumph of what he call La Causa into a viable labor organization. The union that Mr. Chavez found , the United Farm Workers of America , become trouble by dissent and other problem and be unable to organize more than 20 percent of California 's 200,000 farm workers. The tactic that he use so effectively in the 1960 's and early 70 's -- strike and boycott , fasting and the long march -- eventually lose their magic. And , a the United Farm Workers be no longer see a a social cause but a a conventional labor union , he be disappoint by the disaffection of politician and other supporters. Gains From Unionization In 1965 , when he form the union , farm worker in California average less than $ 1.50 an hour. They have no fringe benefit , no seniority right and no stand to challenge abuse by employer or exploitative labor contractors. Unionization bring sharp pay increases. For the first time , migrant worker be eligible for medical insurance , employer-paid pension , unemployment insurance and other benefit , and they have a mechanism to challenge employer abuses. And the union 's impact extend far beyond it membership. The threat of unionization by Mr. Chavez raise agricultural wage throughout California. Born On Arizona Farm Cesar Estrada Chavez be bear on March 31 , 1927 , near Yuma , Ariz. , the second of five child of Juana and Librado Chavez. His father 's parent migrate from Mexico in 1880. His early year be spend on the family 's 160-acre farm. But in the seventh year of the Depression , when he be 10 , the family fell behind on mortgage payment and lose it farm. Along with thousand of other family in the Southwest , they seek a new life in California. They find it pick carrot , cotton and other crop in arid valley , follow the sun in search of the next harvest and the next migrant ' camp. Mr. Chavez never graduate from high school , and once count 65 elementary school he have attend `` for a day , a week or a few months. '' Beginning with the Industrial Workers of the World at the turn of the century , union try for decade to organize immigrant unskilled worker , first Chinese , then Japanese and late Filipinos and Mexican-Americans , on whom California grower depended. But the field hand , their organize drive vulnerable to the competition of other poor migrant seek work , find themselves fight not only powerful grower , but also the police and government officials. In 1939 Mr. Chavez 's family settle in San Jose. His father become active in a successful effort to organize worker at a dried-fruit packing plant , give Mr. Chavez his first glimpse of worker take collective action. After World War II , in which he serve two year in the Navy , Mr. Chavez resume his life a a migrant. He marry Helen Fabela in Delano , which he later make famous far beyond it dusty corner of the San Joaquin Valley. Besides his wife he be survive by eight child , 27 grandchild , a great-grandchild , three brother and two sisters. The pivotal role in Mr. Chavez 's emergence a a labor leader be play by Mr. Alinsky , the Chicago-based organizer who describe himself a a `` professional radical. '' In the early 1950 's he help Mexican-Americans organize into a political bloc. Mr. Alinsky send an aide to recruit potential leader , and among the first people he meet be Mr. Chavez , then work in a San Jose apricot orchard. Mr. Chavez join Mr. Alinsky 's Community Service Organization , register Mexican-Americans to vote and help them deal with government agencies. But he later criticize the organization a dominate by non-Hispanic liberal , and in 1958 he quit , go to Delano and form the National Farm Workers Association. Five Years of La Huelga By 1965 Mr. Chavez have organize 1,700 family and persuade two grower to raise wage moderately. His fledge union be too weak for a major strike. But 800 worker in a virtually moribund A.F.L.-C.I.O. group , the Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee , strike grape grower in Delano , and some of the member of his group demand to join the strike. That be the beginning of five year of La Huelga -- `` the strike '' -- in which the frail labor leader , who be 5 foot 6 inch tall , become familiar to people in much of the world a he battle the economic power of the farmer and corporation in the San Joaquin Valley. With it charismatic leader , song-filled meeting and the fundamental appeal of it struggle , depict a a downtrodden minority battle an exploitative oligopoly , Mr. Chavez 's organization remind many old-timer of the industrial battle that they have wag generation earlier. He be shy and not an outstanding public speaker. But he show a humility that , with his shyness and small stature , pierce dark eye and facial feature that hint at Indian ancestor , give him an image a a David take on the Goliaths of agriculture. Mr. Chavez 's style be monastic , almost religious. He say his life be dedicate only to better the life of the exploited farm workers. He be a vegetarian , and his weekly salary of $ 5 be a virtual vow of poverty. Articles about him often speak of his `` saintly '' and even `` messianic '' qualities. Soon , priest and nun , college student and unionist from around the country march with Mr. Chavez. Supporters send money for La Causa. Most of the farm worker who enlist have meager resource and be ask to pay only the due they could afford , often only a few cent a month. Borrowing from Gandhi , Mr. Chavez sometimes go on fast or invite arrest to call attention to his battle with the growers. But he run the union along authoritarian lines. With music and singing and hundred of flutter flag bear the union 's symbol of a black eagle on a field of red , union rally have the quality of ritual. Typically , Mr. Chavez arrive late at the rally , appear to a roar of approval after a musical group have play and other speaker warm up the audience. In 1968 he begin his most visible campaign , urge Americans not to buy table grape produce in the San Joaquin Valley until grower agree to union contracts. The boycott prove a huge success. A public opinion poll find that 17 million Americans have stop buy grape because of the boycott. On July 30 , 1970 , after lose million of dollar , grower agree to sign. It be probably the high point in the union 's history. More successful boycott and organize success follow , but soon many of the large grower , in an effort to stave off Mr. Chavez 's union , invite the International Brotherhood of Teamsters to organize their workers. Mr. Chavez complain that the teamster be sign `` sweetheart contract , '' and before long his hard-won gain in Delano seem to be slip away. More grower , many charge that the United Farm Workers be poorly run and undependable , sign with the teamsters. But two thing keep his dream alive : First , the teamster ' leader , smart from charge of corruption , make a truce. Second , Edmund G. Brown Jr. , a Democrat who have march with the farm worker before his election a Governor in 1974 , win adoption of the state Agricultural Labor Relations Act , a landmark bill establish collective bargaining for farm worker and grant the union concessions. Among these concession be a `` good standing clause , '' which in effect permit union leader to deny work in the field to any worker who challenge their decisions. The teamster virtually abandon the fight against Mr. Chavez in 1977. In the year that follow , the United Farm Workers sign occasional contract with grower but never attain the dominance that Mr. Chavez envisioned. A decade after the Delano strike , few than 10 percent of the grape in that community be harvest by his union 's members. In the mid-1970 's Mr. Chavez , who have build a commune-style union headquarters call La Paz in a former sanitarium in Keene , near Bakersfield , begin to complain that `` spy '' be try to undermine the union. This occur after Mr. Chavez befriend Charles Dederich , the founder of Synanon , a drug rehabilitation organization. Some Chavez associate say Mr. Dederich advise him to be autocratic. Soon , Mr. Chavez purge the union of non-Hispanic officials. After Mr. Brown 's departure from the governorship in 1983 , Mr. Chavez battle with the successor Republican administration of George Deukmejian , whose campaign be back by the growers. In 1983 , Mr. Chavez , express determination to recapture the union 's momentum , revive the use of the boycott , direct at nonunion table grape and Salinas Valley lettuce. By the end of 1985 grower say the high-tech boycott be have little effect on sale .