March 5 , 1993 OBITUARY Carlos Montoya , 89 , Flamenco Guitarist , Is Dead By ALLAN KOZINN Carlos Montoya , a guitarist and composer who play an important role in transform flamenco from a localized Spanish folk form into a style with an international following , die on Wednesday. He be 89 and live in Wainscott , L.I. The cause of death be heart failure , say his son Allan Montoya of Wainscott. Mr. Montoya be among the first flamenco guitarist to free his instrument from it accompanimental role in dance and vocal performances. Before him , flamenco guitarist be able to show their virtuosity and improvisatory flair in brief solo spot within ensemble program , or in the ingenuity of their accompaniments. An exception be Mr. Montoya 's uncle , Ramon Montoya , who be generally credit in guitar history a the first to give full recital of solo flamenco guitar music. Following in his uncle 's footstep , but tour and record far more widely , Mr. Montoya begin give solo recital in the 1940's. Music in Many Forms Mr. Montoya be a prolific composer and arranger , and an early crossover artist : in addition to flight of improvisation base on traditional flamenco form , he record arrangement of `` St. Louis Blues '' and other jazz and popular songs. He never learn to read music , but he allow others to notate and publish his piece so that aspire player could learn his techniques. He always point out , however , that the publish score be merely guideline : he never abandon the improvisatory tradition that lie at the heart of flamenco , an Andalusian Gypsy form in which the only given be rhythmic and harmonic pattern that evoke specific emotions. The work he regard a his most enduring , however , be not a solo guitar piece but a concerto , the Suite `` Flamenca , '' which he compose with Julio Esteban and Estela Bringuer , and perform with the St. Louis Symphony in 1966. Trained by Mother and Barber Carlos Garcia Montoya be bear in Madrid on Dec. 13 , 1903 , to a family of Spanish Gypsies. His mother , an amateur flamealso teach the guitar , he have no formal training. By the time he be 14 , he be accompany singer and dancer in cafe performances. In 1928 , he join a troupe lead by Antonia Merce , a dancer who use the name La Argentina. He tour with the ensemble for three year , and then work with several other dancer , include Vicente Escudero and La Teresina , with whom he tour the United States and the Far East in the mid-1930's. In 1938 he join the troupe that accompany Encarnacion Lopez ( La Argentinita ) , and perform with her until her death in 1945. Mr. Montoya have by then set his heart on a solo career , although he at first meet resistance from audience that consida have by then set his heart on a solo career , although he at first meet resistance from audience that consider the guitar only one component of a true flamenco performance. But in the 1950 's and 1960 's he build a tremendous follow through extensive touring and dozen of recording for RCA and Paramount Records. In 1940 , Mr. Montoya marry Sally MacLean , an American dancer. The couple settle in New York and a few year later Mr. Montoya become an American citizen. In addition to his son , he be survive by his wife and another son , Carlos Jr. , of Martha 's Vineyard , Mass .