January 7 , 1993 OBITUARY Dizzy Gillespie , Who Sounded Some of Modern Jazz 's Earliest Notes , Dies at 75 By PETER WATROUS Dizzy Gillespie , the trumpet player whose role a a found father of modern jazz make him a major figure in 20th-century American music and whose signature moon cheek and bent trumpet make him one of the world 's most instantly recognizable figure , die yesterday at Englewood Hospital in Englewood , N.J. Mr. Gillespie , who be 75 , have be suffer for some time from pancreatic cancer , his press agent , Virginia Wicks , said. In a nearly 60-year career a a composer , band leader and innovative player , Mr. Gillespie cut a huge swath through the jazz world. In the early 40 's , along with the alto saxophonist Charlie ( Yardbird ) Parker , he initiate be-bop , the sleek , intense , high-speed revolution that have become jazz 's most enduring style. In subsequent year he incorporate Afro-Cuban music into jazz , create a new genre from the combination. In the naturally effervescent Mr. Gillespie , opposites existed. His playing -- and he perform constantly until nearly the end of his life -- be meteoric , full of virtuosic invention and deadly serious. But with his endlessly funny aside , his huge variety of facial expression and his natural comic gift , he be as much a pure entertainer a an accomplished artist. In some way , he seem to sum up all the possibility of American popular art. From Carolina To the Big Bands John Birks Gillespie be bear in Cheraw , S.C. , on Oct. 21 , 1917. His father , a bricklayer , lead a local band , and by the age of 14 the young Gillespie be practice the trumpet. He and his family move to Philadelphia two year later , and Mr. Gillespie , though he think about enter Temple University , quickly begin a succession of professional jobs. He work with Bill Doggett , the pianist and organist , who fire him for not be able to read music well enough , and then Frank Fairfax , a big-band leader whose orchestra include the trumpeter Charlie Shavers and the clarinetist Jimmy Hamilton. Mr. Gillespie be listen to the trumpeter Roy Eldridge , copy his solo and emulate his style , and be soon perform with Teddy Hill 's band at the Savoy Ballroom on the basis of his ability to reproduce Mr. Eldridge 's style. According to legend , it be Mr. Hill who give Mr. Gillespie his nickname because of his odd clothing style and his fondness for practical jokes. Mr. Gillespie begin cultivate his personality , put his foot up on music stand during show and regularly crack jokes. But by May 1937 he be also record improvisation with the Hill band and help the performance by set riff behind soloists. Two year later , Mr. Gillepsie be consider accomplished enough to take part in a series of all-star recording with Lionel Hampton , Benny Carter , Coleman Hawkins , Ben Webster and Chu Berry. He solo on `` Hot Mallets. '' That year , 1939 , he join Cab Calloway 's band , one of the lead black orchestra of the era. Though a dance band , it musician , who include the bassist Milt Hinton and the guitarist Danny Barker , like to experiment. Mr. Gillespie would work on the harmonic substitution that eventually become be-bop. Mr. Gillespie be a regular soloist with the band , and by then his harmonic sensibility be begin to take shape. Joining With Parker To Mold New Style It be while tour with the Calloway band in 1940 that Mr. Gillespie meet Charlie Parker in Kansas City. And it be with him that Mr. Gillespie begin formulate the style that be eventually call be-bop. Along with a handful of other musician , include Thelonious Monk and Kenny Clarke , Mr. Gillespie and Mr. Parker would regularly experiment. On live recording of the period , especially the two solo on the tune `` Kerouac , '' record in 1941 at Minton 's Uptown Playhouse , a club in Harlem , can be hear his increase interest in harmony , sleeker rhythm and a divergence from the style of Mr. Eldridge. Mr. Gillespie be blunt about his relationship with Mr. Parker , call him `` the other side of my heartbeat , '' and freely give him credit for some of the rhythmic innovation of be-bop. At the same time that Mr. Gillespie be experiment with the new style , he be regularly arrange and record for Mr. Calloway , include one of his good improvisation on `` Pickin ' the Cabbage , '' a piece he compose and arranged. In September 1941 , at the State Theater in Hartford , Mr. Gillespie be involve in an incident that shape his reputation and his career. Mr. Calloway saw a spitball thrown on stage and think Mr. Gillespie have do it ; the two men fight , and Mr. Gillespie pull a knife and put a cut in Mr. Calloway 's posterior that require 10 stitch to close. Mr. Gillespie be fire from that job , but spend the next several year work with some of the big name in jazz , include Coleman Hawkins ( who record the first version of Mr. Gillespie 's classic `` Woody 'N ' You '' ) , Benny Carter , Les Hite ( for whom he record `` Jersey Bounce , '' consider the first be-bop solo ) , Lucky Millinder , Earl Hines , Ella Fitzgerald and Duke Ellington. For Mr. Millinder he make `` Little John Special , '' which include a riff of Mr. Gillespie 's that be later flesh out into the composition `` Salt Peanuts , '' one of his best-known pieces. The early 40 's be a turbulent time for jazz. Be-bop be slowly make itself felt , but at the same time a series of dispute between record company and the musician ' union result in a recording ban , so Mr. Gillespie and Mr. Parker be rarely recorded. In 1943 Mr. Gillespie lead a band with the be-bop bassist Oscar Pettiford at the Onyx Club on 52d Street in Manhattan. And in 1944 , the singer Billy Eckstine take over part of the Earl Hines band and create the first be-bop orchestra , of which few record performaces exist. Mr. Gillespie be the music director , and the band feature his `` Night in Tunisia. '' It be in 1945 that Mr. Gillespie begin to break out. He undertake an ambitious recording schedule , record with the pianist Clyde Hart and with Mr. Parker , Cootie Williams , Red Norvo , Sarah Vaughan and Slim Gaillard. And he begin series of his own recording that have since become some of jazz 's most important pieces. Recording under his own name for the first time , he make `` I Ca n't Get Started , '' `` Good Bait , '' `` Salt Peanuts '' and `` Be-bop , '' during one session in January 1945. He follow it up with a recording date feature Mr. Parker that include `` Groovin ' High , '' `` Dizzy Atmosphere '' and `` All the Things You Are. '' These recording , with their tight ensemble passage , precisely articulate rhythm and dissonance a part of the palate of jazz , be to influence jazz forever. Though Mr. Gillespie enjoy play for dancer , this be music that be mean first and foremost to be listen to. It be virtuosic in a way not hear before , and it be music that send music student scurry to their turntable to learn the improvisation by heart. They be also the recording that capture Mr. Gillespie at his most impressive. His line , jag and angular , always seem off balance. He use chromatic figure , and be not afraid to resolve a line on a vinegary , bitter note. And his improvising be eruptive ; suddenly , a line would bolt into the high register , only to come tumble down. Mr. Gillespie do more than just record in 1945. He put together the first of his big band , and then form a quintet with Mr. Parker that Mr. Gillespie call `` The height of perfection in our music. '' It include Bud Powell on piano , Ray Brown on bass and Max Roach on drums. Later that year , Mr. Gillespie reform the big band , call the Hepsations of 1945. Despitea tour of the South that be almost catastrophically unsuccessful , the band stay together for the next four years. Another Revolution : Afro-Cuban Jazz It be with this big band , whose name become the Dizzy Gillespie Orchestra , that Mr. Gillespie create his second revolution in the late 1940's. An old friend , the Cuban trumpeter Mario Bauza , who have make it possible for him to join the Calloway orchestra , introduce Mr. Gillespie to the Cuban conga player Luciano ( Chano Pozo ) Gonzales. `` Dizzy use to ask me about Cuban rhythms all the time , '' say Mr. Bauza. `` I introduce him to Chano Pozo , and they write 'Manteca. ' It be a good marriage of two cultures. That be the beginning of Afro-Cuban jazz. That blow up the whole world. '' Mr. Gillespie quickly produce the sketch for `` Cubana Be '' and `` Cubana Bop , '' which be finish by the composer and arranger George Russell and include some of the first modal harmony in jazz. And in `` Manteca , '' Mr. Gillespie 's collaboration with Mr. Pozo , he create a work that be still perform and quote regularly , by both Latin orchestra and by jazz musicians. Without the sophisticated arrangement and the conjunction of Latin rhythm and jazz harmony that Mr. Gillespie provide , both jazz and Latin music would be radically different today. The band 's high moment , however , be when Mr. Gillespie -- in a move that characterize his career -- hire some of the young be-boppers on the scene. Among them be the pianist John Lewis , vibraphonist Milt Jackson , bassist Ray Brown and drummer Kenny Clarke , who go on to form the Modern Jazz Quartet. `` It be an incredible experience because so much be go on , '' Mr. Lewis recalled. `` Not only be he use these great be-bop arrangement but he be so encouraging. It be my first job , a formative experience. '' Mr. Gillespie 's be the last great evolutionary big band , and during it tenure he hire the best soloist , from Jimmy Heath , James Moody and Sonny Stitt to John Coltrane and Paul Gonzalves. Arrangements like `` Things to Come , '' with their exhilarating precision , be be-bop and orchestral landmark , with dense harmony and flashy rhythms. And it be with his big band that Mr. Gillespie fully develop the other side of his musical personality. With song like `` He Beeped When He Should Have Bopped , '' `` Ool Ya Koo '' , `` Oo Pop A Da '' and others , he begin popularize the Bohemian , Dadaesque aspect of be-bop. Mr. Gillespie be a keen popularizer , and with his sense of comedy manage to make his show into an extraordinary mixture of entertainment and esthetics. In so do , he be follow in the path of his ex-bandleader , Mr. Calloway , as well a Louis Armstrong and Fats Waller. From then on , he cultivate an audience that go beyond the average jazz fan , and it be this reputation that help in his late career. And at the same time , be-bop fashion make an appearance , with Mr. Gillespie , in thick glass and a beret , lead the way. The big-band business slow down considerably in the late 1940 's and early 50 's , and Mr. Gillespie team with Stan Kenton 's orchestra a a featured soloist. Then he begin use a small group again. He form his own record company in 1951 , Dee Gee , which fold soon after. Mr. Gillespie and Mr. Parker record for Verve , with Mr. Monk , and he and Mr. Parker perform at Birdland in Manhattan the next year. He tour Europe and in 1953 join Mr. Parker , Mr. Powell , Mr. Roach and the bassist Charles Mingus for a concert at Massey Hall in Toronto that become legendary for it disorganization and for acrimony among performers. It be also in 1953 that someone fell on Mr. Gillespie 's trumpet , and bent it. When he play the misshapen instrument , Mr. Gillespie find he could hear the sound more clearly , and so decide to keep it. Along with those cheek , it become his trademark. During the 1950 's Mr. Gillespie record with with Stan Getz , Stuff Smith , Sonny Stitt , Mr. Eldridge and others. In 1956 , he form another big band and , at the behest of the United States State Department , tour the Middle East and South America. In 1957 , Mr. Gillespie preside over `` The Eternal Triangle , '' a recording that include Mr. Stitt and Sonny Rollins and some of the hard trumpet blow ever recorded. Through the 1960 's and 70 's , Mr. Gillespie tour frequently , play up to 300 show a year , sometimes with an electric bassist and a guitarist , sometimes with a more traditional group. And in 1974 he sign with Pablo Records and begin record prolifically again. He win Grammies in 1975 and 1980 , and he publish his autobiography , `` To Be or Not to Bop , '' in 1979. In the last decade , Mr. Gillespie 's career seem recharge , and he become ubiquitous on the concert circuit a a special guest. He form a Latin big band that perform with Paquito De Rivera , among others , and he constantly shuffle the personnel of his small groups. Last year , in honor of his 75th birthday , Mr. Gillepsie play for four week at the Blue Note club in Manhattan , a stint that feature perhaps the great selection of jazz musician ever bring together for a tribute. The month cover his career , from small group , to Afro-Cuban jazz to a big band. As usual , he be his witty amiable self , in command of both the audience and his trumpet. Mr. Gillespie be survive by his wife of 52 year , Lorraine. Seeking the Best Of a Huge Output Dizzy Gillespie 's record output be immense , span nearly 60 year and comprise hundred of albums. Not all of his important recording have be issue on CD , but the vinyl version be worth hunt for. Afro Cuban Jazz Verve The Be-Bop Revolution RCA Bird and Diz Verve The Development of an American Artist Smithsonian Diz and Getz Verve Dizzy and the Double Six of Paris Phillips Dizzy at Newport Verve Dizzy on the French Riviera Phillips Dizzy 's Diamonds Verve Duets Verve The Gifted Ones ( with Roy Eldridge ) Pablo Live at the Royal Festival Hall Enja Oscar Peterson and Dizzy Gillespie Pablo Portrait of Duke Ellington Verve Shaw Nuff Musicraft Sonny Side Up ( with Sonny Stitt ) Verve