February 8 , 1993 OBITUARY Arthur Ashe , Tennis Star , Is Dead at 49 By ROBIN FINN Arthur Ashe , a tennis champion who spend his year in the sport fight discrimination and then spend the final year of his life seek to broaden public awareness on the subject of AIDS , die Saturday. He be 49. A New York Hospital administrator , Judith Lilavois , say Ashe die at 3:13 P.M. of pneumonia , a complication of AIDS. He be admit to the hospital on Friday. Yesterday , Virginia Gov. L. Douglas Wilder say that Ashe 's body would lie in state at the executive mansion in Richmond tomorrow from 5 to 9 P.M. Ashe 's wife , Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe , say that her husband 's funeral would be Wednesday at 1 P.M. at the Arthur Ashe Youth Center in Richmond , where he be bear , and that he would be bury at Woodland Cemetery. Ashe be the only black man to win Wimbledon and the United States and Australian Opens. Militant in his conviction but mild in his manner , this slim , bookish and bespectacled athlete never think himself a rebel and preferred information to insurrection. Dedicated to Helping Others Since he believe his singular success carry inherent responsibility , Ashe , during his decadelong professional tennis career and beyond it , dedicate himself to dismantle the barrier of poverty , privilege , racism and social stereotyping. Even the fact of his own mortality become a cause celebre , and Ashe , in the headline again , conduct his final campaign against the ravage of AIDS. Ashe , who say he believe he contract H.I.V. , the virus that cause AIDS , through a transfusion of tainted blood during his second round of heart-bypass surgery in 1983 , first learn of his infection after he enter New York Hospital for emergency brain surgery in September 1988. He be hospitalize after he suffer paralysis of his right arm , the one that serve up 26 ace the day he become the 1968 United States Open champion. The surgery and a subsequent biopsy reveal the presence of toxoplasmosis , a parasitic infection link to AIDS. In recent week , Ashe have be hospitalize with pneumocystis pneumonia , accord to an AIDS researcher. Two week ago , he stay in Manhattan , where he live , rather than travel to Boston to receive an award. He appear short of breath in a videotape that he make to be show in the place of his appearance. But Ashe be as passionate a ever , speaking of a visit to South Africa he have make and how a young boy have tell him that he be the first free black man he have ever seen. Disclosed Illness Under Duress Ashe choose not to publicize his condition , prefer to protect his family 's privacy and be well aware of the inevitable demand such a disclosure would place on a man of his celebrity. He do not disclose his condition until April 8 , 1992 , and then only after be tell that USA Today intend to publish an article about his illness as soon a it could confirm it. But after make his public admission , Ashe spend the rest of his day campaign for public awareness , include a speech on the floor of the United Nations on World AIDS Day on Dec. 1. When he make his reluctant admission , Ashe say : `` I have good day and bad days. My ratio of good day to bad day be about six to one. I do n't think anybody in my stage of this would be able to go through with no bad days. But I do n't want to go public now because I be not sick. '' Sick , in Ashe 's terminology , mean be bedridden and nonfunctional. As an avid golfer , prominent speaker , occasional columnist for The Washington Post , television commentator for HBO and ABC , author of a three-volume history of the black athlete in America , and a noted participant in countless civic project and protest , Ashe hardly go into retreat in the four year that follow his AIDS diagnosis. Compiling the 1,600-page treatise `` A Hard Road to Glory , '' publish in 1988 , be a major project. Ever in icy control on the tennis court , Ashe be just as assiduous about remain in control of himself and his emotion in his off-court life. Foundation Fights AIDS Just before be stricken by a mild heart attack , his third , last September , Ashe assemble tennis luminary at the United States Open to begin a 15-month , $ 5 million fund-raising effort on behalf of his namesake foundation to combat AIDS. With that project safely in the work , he travel to Washington , where he be part of a group whose member be arrest while protest the Bush Administration 's treatment of Haitian refugees. For Ashe , the handcuff be nothing new ; this longtime friend to Nelson Mandela and the first black athlete to be grant a visa ( but not hotel accommodation ) to compete in South Africa , in 1973 , be arrest in 1985 a he protest South Africa 's policy of apartheid. But devote himself to become a human billboard in the fight against AIDS be something Ashe always understand he would eventually accept with his usual poise. Only the fact that the timing of his public pledge to help eradicate AIDS be beyond his control bother him. As the father of a daughter -- Camera , now 6 -- Ashe do n't want his limited time to be spend work overtime , which happen to be his only way of work , to help halt the spread of this disease. He do not want his to become a one-issue existence. But once the announcement be a fait accompli , Ashe 's initial anger dissipate and he seem almost relieve : nothing like a valid cause to set Ashe 's competitive juice simmering. `` The foundation be something I always know I want to do , long before I go public on April 8 , '' say Ashe , who continue to refer to that date a the beginning of his life a an AIDS activist and the end of his relatively `` unfettered '' existence a a former tennis champion with a sport , business and family agenda. Gonzalez Is Role Model The shy yet eloquent Ashe , who list the tennis star Pancho Gonzalez a his only sport idol , do not set out to become a role model for young black athletes. But because he dare to stand by his conviction , that be precisely what happened. Unlike baseball 's Jackie Robinson , who act a conduit for the rite of passage of a stream of deserve black baseball player , Ashe be the only prominent black tennis player of his era. It be a position that leave him feel ostracize at time , he say , by both black and whites. `` It 's an abnormal world I live in , '' he tell Sports Illustrated 's Frank Deford in 1966. `` It 's like I 'm float down the middle. I 'm never quite sure where I am. It do bother me that I 'm in this predicament , but I do n't dwell on it , because I know it will resolve itself. '' But Ashe serve a a beacon for future generation of black tennis players. `` He 's always be for black player someone to look up to and someone who say , 'You can do it , it do n't matter where you come from or how you look , ' `` say Zina Garrison-Jackson , a product of Houston 's public park system who reach a career-high ranking of No. 4 in the world in 1989. `` Arthur show you what be possible to be accomplish , '' she said. `` I always want to follow in his footstep , and nobody can forget that he make the footstep : I can really appreciate the time that he make his breakthrough in. It be hard then for a minority player to break in , especially in our sport , but he do it to the hilt. '' According to Pam Shriver , a many-time Grand Slam double champion and herself a frequent commentator on a wide range of topic , Ashe 's example of grace under pressure be not lose on the woman player campaign for equality in their workplace. `` He be a voice for all the minority , and that go for woman , too , '' she said. `` He bring a level of conscience to the game , whether he be speak on South Africa or inner-city minority or exclusionary policy anyplace. Arthur 's influence on tennis do n't fade after he leave the sport. '' Began Tennis at Age 7 Arthur Ashe , the son of a parks policeman , be bear in Richmond on July 10 , 1943. His mother die when he be 6. His father die in 1989. He play his first tennis at the age of 7 on the court at Brookfield Park , the segregate playground adjacent to his home. By the time he be 14 , he have find a patron in Dr. Walter Johnson , a Lynchburg , Va. , physician with two decade of experience in assist black tennis prodigies. Ashe reach the semifinal of the junior national championship on his first attempt in 1958. He win the indoor single title in 1960 and 1961 , and complete his high school year at Sumner High School in St. Louis in order to train full-time there with Richard Hudlin. In 1962 , a the fifth-ranked junior in the nation , Ashe receive a full scholarship to U.C.L.A. While a student there , he attract the attention of Gonzalez and Pancho Segura , both of whom help refine Ashe 's serve-and-volley game and the unflappable temperament that vault him to three Grand Slam tournament single titles. They also encourage his penchant for experimentation : At one time , Ashe accumulate 16 variation of the backhand in his stroke repertory. In 1963 , he join the United States Davis Cup Team , and by 1966 , the year of his graduation from U.C.L.A. with a Bachelor of Science degree in business administration , he be describe by the renowned tennis teacher , Harry Hopman , a `` the most promising player in the world. '' Ashe , while still a 25-year-old amateur fulfil a three-year Army stint , usher in the Open era by win the 1968 United States Open at Forest Hills. He defeat Tom Okker in the final , mark the first time a black man have win a Grand Slam event , one of the sport 's four major tournaments. In 1970 , he win the Australian Open. In 1975 , make his final-round opponent even more manic than usual by calmly close his eye and meditate through every changeover , he defeat Jimmy Connors in the Wimbledon final. Ashe also collect double title at the Australian and French Opens and Wimbledon. The Grand Slam title and ensue endorsement contract help make Ashe , who earn $ 1,584,909 in prize money , tennis 's first black millionaire , but wealth do n't distract him from the social issue of his day. In 1973 , on his third attempt , he be grant a visa to South Africa , and help integration effort there. In 1974 he help find the Association of Men 's Tennis Professionals , a player union , and serve a it president until 1979. He play on the Davis Cup team for 10 year , win three championship , and later serve a it captain from 1981-84 after heart problem force his retirement in 1980. Ashe suffer his first heart attack in July 1979 , just after conduct a clinic for underprivileged child in New York City. In December of that year , he undergo a quadruple-bypass operation , and in 1983 he undergo a double bypass , at St. Luke-Roosevelt Hospital. Ashe discover he have AIDS 18 month after Federal health official recommend the testing of any patient who have receive blood transfusion between 1978 and 1985. In 1988 , the same year he learn he have AIDS , Ashe help create inner-city tennis program for youth in Newark , Detroit , Atlanta , Kansas City and Indianapolis. He be induct into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport , R.I. , in 1985 , and last year Mayor David N. Dinkins , a longtime friend , proclaim Aug. 30 , the date of Ashe 's kickoff for his $ 5 million AIDS fund-raiser , Arthur Ashe Day in New York City. Ashe serve on the board of director of Aetna Life & Casualty and the United States Tennis Association , a chairman of the National Heart Association in 1981-82 , and have recently rejoin the Board of Trustees of the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases. He also hold corporate post with Head Sports USA and Le Coq Sportif USA. A memorial service will be hold in New York City on Friday. Details have not be completed. Chronology : `` Arthur Ashe in the Spotlight '' Aug. 1 , 1963 : Becomes the first black to be name to a United States Davis Cup team. June 21 , 1965 : Leads U.C.L.A. to the N.C.A.A. tennis championship. Aug. 25 , 1968 : Becomes the first black to win United States men 's single championships. Sept. 9 , 1968 : Wins the first United States Open title. Dec. 12 , 1968 : Is ranked No. 1 by the United States Lawn Tennis Association. June 30 , 1969 : Is ban from South African championships. Jan. 26 , 1970 : Becomes the first black to win the Australian Open. Nov. 24 , 1973 : Becomes the first black to reach final of the South African Open. 1974-1979 : President of the Association of Tennis Professionals. July 5 , 1975 : Becomes the first black to win the men 's single title at Wimbledon. Dec. 21 , 1979 : Undergoes quadruple bypass heart surgery. April 16 , 1980 : Announces his retirement from competitive tennis. Sept. 7 , 1980 : Named captain of the Davis Cup team. The United States win championship under him in 1981 and 1982. June 21 , 1983 : Undergoes double bypass heart surgery. March 21 , 1985 : Named to the International Tennis Hall of Fame. 1988 : His three-voloume history `` A Hard Road to Glory : A History of the African Athlete '' be published. April 8 , 1992 : Announces he contract the AIDS virus from a blood transfusion during heart bypass surgery. He say he test positive for H.I.V. three and a half year earlier while hospitalize for a bacterial invection in his brain. ( Source : The Associated Press )