March 4 , 1993 OBITUARY Albert Sabin , Polio Researcher , 86 , Dies By HAROLD M. SCHMECK Jr. Dr. Albert B. Sabin , the pioneer researcher on virus and viral disease who develop the vaccine that be the main defense against polio in the United States and much of the rest of the world , die yesterday at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington. He be 86 year old and live in Washington. The cause of death be congestive heart failure , the hospital said. He be best know for develop the live-virus polio vaccine , take orally. It become generally prefer over the alternative killed-virus vaccine develop by Dr. Jonas Salk after a sometimes intense clash between the rival camp and their principals. Although the Salk polio vaccine , which be inject , prove to be effective in sharply reduce the number of poliomyelitis case in the United States , after it go on the market in 1955 , Dr. Sabin persist in his effort to develop a vaccine base on a living virus , which he believe would be superior. Dr. Sabin 's vaccine , which contain harmless , or attenuate , polio virus , be develop by him and his co-worker at the University of Cincinnati. Before come into wide use in this country , the vaccine be test in million of people in 1958 and 1959 in the Soviet Union , where it prove widely successful. In the United States the vaccine be test earlier on prisoner who volunteer for the experiment and before that on Dr. Sabin himself and member of his family. Its virtue , include delivery in syrup or a sugar cube instead of by injection , become accept in the United States after the test abroad. It be license in 1961 and eventually become the vaccine of choice in most part of the world , although a few country still use the Salk-type vaccines. The Sabin vaccine receive a temporary setback when public health official report that a few child , about one in a million inoculate , be develop polio because of the virus. Dr. Sabin , however , never admit that his vaccine be responsible. `` He be so strong-willed he think he could will it away , '' Dr. Joseph L. Melnick of the Baylor College of Medicine at Houston say yesterday from Geneva. Dr. Melnick describe Dr. Sabin a `` one of the world 's great virologists. '' For Governments , A Straight-Talker The development of the Sabin polio vaccine be the culmination of 20 year of research on the nature , transmission and epidemiology of the three closely related virus type that cause poliomyelitis , which be more frequently call infantile paralysis when Dr. Sabin be a young scientist. The disease be a dreaded cause of paralysis and death , especially in young people. Dr. Sabin also be an adviser to the government of the United States and other nation on important health issues. A scholarly look man whose hair turn white in middle age , he continue a full working and travel schedule into his 70's. Scientists who know Dr. Sabin well say he be eloquent and extremely difficult to defeat in a scientific argument. These talent apparently persist all his life , a do a tendency to speak the truth a he saw it without diplomatic considerations. In the swine flu episode of 1976 , when the Federal Government fear an epidemic , he first support but later denounce the Federal policy of vaccinate all adult against the flu virus , which bore a strong chemical resemblance to the virus that have cause the disastrous pandemic of 1918-1919. Dr. Sabin make Federal official unhappy by say he doubt there be a much danger from the swine flu a the public be be lead to believe. He argue that the vaccination campaign should await evidence that the virus be indeed reappear in the population. As it turn out , the fear epidemic never do materialize and vaccination be follow by serious illness in several hundred people. In 1980 , at the age of 74 , Dr. Sabin go to Brazil to help that country cope with polio outbreak but soon find government door close to him because of his outspokenness. In particular , he say the Brazilian Government have falsify data in the early 1970 's to give the World Health Organization , a United Nations agency , a falsely optimistic picture of polio eradication in that country. He estimate that in 1980 there be 10 time as much polio in Brazil a be be report and that efficient vaccination effort be be block by bureaucratic interference. Soon thereafter he be tell by the Brazilian Government that his advice be no long needed. In the early year of his research on the polio virus , Dr. Sabin be credit with the first demonstration that it could grow in human nerve tissue outside the human body. Through research on monkey he develop a method for determine how the polio virus enter the human body. It have be widely think that the polio virus enter the victim through the nose to the respiratory system. But Dr. Sabin prove that the virus first invade the digestive tract and later attack nerve tissue. He be also among the scientist who identify the three type of polio virus. After Poland , A Quick Transition Albert Bruce Sabin be bear Aug. 26 , 1906 , in Bialystok , Poland , then a part of Imperial Russia. He and his family immigrate to the United States in 1921 , at least partly to escape the persecution of Jews. He attend high school in Paterson , N.J. , after take a six-week cram course in English from two cousins. After graduation from high school he first plan a career in dentistry because an uncle , a dentist , offer to finance his college education if he would enter that profession. Dr. Sabin say year afterward that he study dentistry for three year and then `` could n't stand it any long '' because he have become captivate by the possibility of medical research. He graduate from New York University in 1928. With the aid of scholarship , fellowship and odd job , he attend the university 's medical school and , while there , find time to do research on pneumococcus bacterial infections. He be award an M.D. degree in 1931. That summer , a polio epidemic in New York influence his choice of a research career on polio and other infectious disease of the human nervous system. Before enter full-time research in that field , however , he train in pathology , surgery and internal medicine at Bellevue Hospital , through 1933. He spend the next year in research at the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine in London. In 1935 he return to New York to join the research staff of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research , now Rockefeller University. In 1939 Dr. Sabin move to the University of Cincinnati and it Children 's Hospital Research Foundation to conduct research on viruses. Wide Research As Army Officer After the United States enter World War II , Dr. Sabin become a consultant to the Army on viral diseases. Later , a a lieutenant colonel in the Medical Corps , he study disease affect American troop throughout the world. He isolate the virus that cause sandfly fever , a nonfatal epidemic disease that be cause illness among troop in Africa. Later he show that an ordinary mosquito repellent would provide protection against the infection by ward off the insect that carry the disease. He help develop a vaccine against dengue fever , a debilitating but usually nonfatal disease that be strike many troop in the South Pacific. He also study the parasite that cause toxoplasmosis , as well a the virus that cause encephalitis , inflammation of brain tissue. Late in World War II , a vaccine he have develop against Japanese encephalitis virus be give to about 70,000 American troop prepare for the invasion of Japan. A decade after the war , Dr. Sabin be the first to identify a virus call echo 9 a a cause of human intestinal illness. At the end of the war , Dr. Sabin return to the University of Cincinnati to continue work on polio. He develop a live-virus vaccine that be first test in 1954. By that time , however , the killed-virus polio vaccine develop by Dr. Salk have already be develop , test and be be put into use. Public health expert in the United States decide the Sabin vaccine should be give it first major trial abroad , so that people already protect by the Salk vaccine could not be accidentally include in the study and thus confuse the results. In this country , the Sabin vaccine be first use on a large scale in 1960 in Cincinnati , where it be give to 180,000 schoolchildren. Two year later all three constituent of the vaccine , one against each of the three major polio virus type , be license by the United States Public Health Service. Whereas the Salk vaccine have to be give by injection and require later booster shot to insure long-term immunity , the Sabin live-virus vaccine could be take by mouth and provide lifetime protection against polio. Moreover , the harmless virus of the vaccine seem to be `` catch '' : It spread beyond the recipient to protect even some people who have not receive the vaccine at all. From Bitter Rival , A Word of Praise Although the Salk vaccine continue to have adherent , the Sabin vaccine replace it a the prime defense against polio in this country. A sharp rivalry between Dr. Salk and Dr. Sabin persist thereafter. Asked about the Salk vaccine at the age of 84 , Dr. Sabin declare the killed-virus preparation to be `` pure kitchen chemistry. '' `` Salk do n't discover anything , '' he said. Dr. Salk , for his part , attribute such comment to professional jealousy. `` Albert Sabin be out for me from the very beginning , '' he said. `` I remember in Copenhagen in 1960 , he say to me , just like that , that he be out to kill the kill vaccine. '' But Dr. Salk issue a statement yesterday praise Dr. Sabin 's endure contribution to the control of polio. In 1970 Dr. Sabin become president of the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel but step down in November 1972 because of a heart condition for which he have open heart surgery. In the latter part of his career , Dr. Sabin 's interest in virus lead him into research on the relationship between human cancer and viruses. Although he think at one time that he and co-worker have discover a virus that cause several type of human cancer , he later conclude that the virus in question be not a factor in human malignant disease. Dr. Sabin be elect to the National Academy of Sciences in 1951 and receive numerous other honor , include the Bruce Memorial Award of the American College of Physicians in 1961 , the Feltinelli Prize of the Accademia dei Lincei of Rome in 1964 , the Lasker Clinical Science Award in 1965 and the United States National Medal of Science in 1971. Throughout his long career he be note for diligence , hard work and long hour as well a brilliance in research. `` A scientist who be also a human be can not rest while knowledge which might be use to reduce suffer rest on the shelf , '' he once said. Dr. Sabin be marry to Sylvia Tregillus in 1935 ; she die in 1966. He marry Jane Warner , but the marriage end in divorce. In 1972 , he marry Heloisa Dunshee de Abranches. In addition to his wife , he be survive by two daughter from his first marriage , Deborah Sabin of Yakima , Wash. , and Amy Horn of Palo Alto , Calif. , and three grandchild .