January 7 , 1994 OBITUARY Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. , a Democratic Power in the House for Decades , Dies at 81 By MARTIN TOLCHIN , Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES WASHINGTON , Jan. 6 Democrats and Republicans today bid a warm farewell to Thomas P. ( Tip ) O'Neill Jr. , the gregarious and irrepressibly liberal Bostonian who symbolize the Democratic Party through much of the 1980 's a Speaker of the House. Mr. O'Neill , 81 , die Wednesday night of cardiac arrest at Brigham and Women 's Hospital in Boston. Since his retirement from the House in 1987 , he have live in Washington and Harwich Port , Mass. , on Cape Cod. President Clinton issue a statement today pay tribute to `` a beautiful life well live , '' and order Government flag lower to half-staff until Mr. O'Neill 's burial on Monday. `` Tip O'Neill be the nation 's most prominent , powerful and loyal champion of work people , '' the President 's statement said. `` He love politics and government because he saw politics and government could make a difference in people 's lives. And he love people most of all. '' The current Speaker of the House , Thomas S. Foley of Washington , call Mr. O'Neill `` the model of what a representative and a leader of the American people should be. '' Today , the capital 's Republicans largely agreed. `` Partisanship be put aside , and we could be the best of friend , '' the House minority leader , Robert H. Michel of Illinois , say of Mr. O'Neill today on the ABC-TV News program `` Good Morning America. '' The Senate Republican leader , Bob Dole of Kansas , be one of Mr. O'Neill 's most biting political critic in the 1980's. But today , on the CBS News program `` This Morning , '' Mr. Dole call his old rival `` the Congressman's Congressman. '' Mr. O'Neill , he say , `` certainly will go down in history a one of the great political leader of our time. '' He be also one of the last and least reconstructed liberal from the cadre of Roosevelt-era New Dealers who lead Congress and the nation through most the 1960 's and 1970's. A Proud Liberal , Fashionable or Not Mr. O'Neill be an old-style politician and proud of it , a House Speaker comfortable with power , who cling to his brand of liberalism long after it cease to be fashionable , even among his fellow Democrats. An early opponent of the Vietnam War , Mr. O'Neill take strong position on many controversial issues. He be the Congressional leader who push hard for the impeachment of President Richard M. Nixon and later , a Speaker , put his prestige on the line for Congressional reform. Mr. O'Neill be the Speaker from 1977 to 1987 , during the Presidencies of Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan , both of whom ran against entrench Washington official and consider Mr. O'Neill the ultimate insider. But although he reach the height of political power and mingle easily with national and world leader , Mr. O'Neill be perhaps best know for his advice to colleague to attend carefully to their constituent , because , a he put it , `` All politics be local. '' He be a large , joyous , generous-spirited man with a bulbous nose , yellow white hair that flop over his forehead and an ever-present cigar. He be a rabid sport fan , frequently attend baseball game and box match , a skilled poker player and a devote but struggle golfer. To Mr. O'Neill , who speak of the Democratic Party with near-religious fervor , the party be the one of the city , the work people , the poor , the needy , the unemployed , the sick and the disinherited. `` And no way be we ever go to let them down , '' he would insist. He oppose a balanced budget because , he say , it would `` dismantle the program that I 've be work for a an old liberal. '' When President Reagan persuade Congress to curtail many of Mr. O'Neill 's favorite social program , the Speaker lament that the Democrats have be too successful at their work. He say the Democratic program have create a broad middle class whose member have forget the many benefit they have receive from government -- in education and housing , for example -- and want to pull up the ladder behind them. Republicans make Mr. O'Neill a target of their 1980 and 1982 campaign , portray him a a bloated old pol with outdated liberal ideas. They produce a television commercial that feature an actor who resemble the Speaker laugh off warning that his car be low on fuel , until the vehicle finally grind to a halt. The announcer then proclaim , `` The Democrats have run out of gas. '' Mr. O'Neill remain steadfast. `` I have n't change my philosophy , '' he frequently tell reporter , with whom he meet daily. He make no apology for the kind of politics he have master in Boston. As Speaker , he reward friend and punished enemy with the help of a long memory but few grudges. O'Neill and Carter : Different Democrats Mr. O'Neill 's become Speaker the year Mr. Carter take office a President. About all they have in common be their political party. Mr. Carter , an emotionally taut Georgian with a scant power base among Democrats , have reach the White House a an anti-politician , an outsider who publicly disdain Washington insider personify by the gregarious Speaker , who have work his way up from ward politics. `` Our first conversation , '' the Speaker recall , `` he tell me how he have handle the Georgia Legislature , by go over their head directly to the people. '' Mr. O'Neill say he respond by refer to the 289 House Democrats in the majority. `` I say : 'Hey , wait a minute. You have 289 guy up there who know their district pretty well. They run against the Administration , and they would n't hesitate to run against you. ' `` He say , 'Oh , really ? ' `` The two men do not speak the same language. Mr. O'Neill say he have once tell the President , `` Keep your left hand high. '' But the Speaker find that Mr. Carter be no boxing fan and be unfamiliar with the boxer 's classic defensive posture. `` He do n't know what I be talk about , '' Mr. O'Neill said. But a a loyal Democrat Mr. O'Neill felt morally bind to help Mr. Carter whenever possible. An autographed photograph from the President be inscribe , `` To my friend Tip O'Neill , thanks for another lesson in good politics , Jimmy Carter , June 1977. '' But in 1980 , when the Republicans win the White House and the Senate , and cut deeply into the House Democratic majority , the Speaker privately blame the President , believe him inept. Today , Mr. Carter say in a statement that Mr. O'Neill `` personify the fine of American politics. '' `` Of all the people I have know , Tip O'Neill know best how to enjoy politics , '' he said. O'Neill and Reagan : Different Irishmen Mr. O'Neill never shy from wield power , although he frequently lament that the power of the Speaker have decline since the day of Sam Rayburn , the Texas Democrat whose word become law during his 17 year in the post , end in 1961. That be when a Speaker could get bind commitment from committee chairman ; it be before the diffusion of power that Mr. O'Neill himself work to bring about. From 1981 to 1987 , Mr. O'Neill lead the loyal opposition to President Reagan , a man with whom he share an Irish heritage , an interest in sport and an outgoing personality. But the two men have a profound philosophical disagreement about government : the Speaker regard government a the solution to many social problem , a an agent of social change ; Mr. Reagan regard it a a problem in itself , interfere in the life of Americans and impede economic and social progress. The Speaker also find Mr. Reagan to be appallingly ignorant of the intricacy of government ; indeed , he call him the most ignorant man who have ever occupy the White House. Publicly , Mr. O'Neill call Mr. Reagan `` Herbert Hoover with a smile '' and `` a cheerleader for selfishness. '' Early in his time a Speaker , when his bill for a new House code of ethic be in trouble , he lumber to the well of the House and cut through the debate on the crucial provision , a limitation on outside income. The speech be vintage O'Neill. Sure , he say , he know what it be to be strapped. Was n't he the one who have fight for a raise of $ 12,900 a year in Congressional pay ? But in exchange he have promise the American people `` the strong code of ethic that this country have ever seen. '' The issue , after Watergate , he thunder , be `` restore public confidence in this Congress a an institution , restore confidence in it membership. '' He look out at an audience that include the 80 Democrats for whom he have campaign the previous fall , the score of member he have appoint to the nine select and special committee over which he have jurisdiction , and the more than 200 beneficiary of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Fund , for which he have be the chairman. His listener know that the Speaker have a great voice in their committee assignment , the scheduling of floor action on bill , the disbursing of campaign money and the small favor that can make or break a Congressional career. Mr. O'Neill call in his chits. The result be a foregone conclusion. The vote be 344 to 79. Four year later , when 44 Democrats join in vote to overturn a ruling of the chair , the kind of parliamentary decision that be the lifeblood of the House , Mr. O'Neill write them that he be `` extremely disappointed '' and obliquely warn that `` disciplinary measure '' be under consideration. Such measure could affect a member 's committee assignments. He add that he felt that such measure be unnecessary. No future Democratic vote against the judgment of the chair be noted. Tip ( a in Foul Tip ) Tastes Politics at 15 Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. be bear on Dec. 9 , 1912 , in a working-class area of Cambridge , Mass. , which later become part of his Congressional district. His father be a member of the Cambridge City Council. His mother die when he be a child , and his father remarried. He pick up the nickname Tip from a baseball player , James Edward O'Neill of the old St. Louis Browns , who have the knack of hit foul tip until the pitcher walk him. So Mr. O'Neill 's boyhood friend give him the name. The Speaker be an inveterate fan of the Boston Red Sox. Educated in Roman Catholic school , he break into politics at 15 , campaign for Al Smith in his 1928 Presidential campaign against Herbert C. Hoover. `` All I know be that Al Smith be an Irish Catholic and we have be suppress all our life , '' he said. Four year later , he help get out the vote for Franklin D. Roosevelt. `` You 'd have Mrs. Murphy ready to get into an automobile to take her to the poll , '' he recalled. `` And then you 'd go to the next house , Mrs. Sweeney , and you 'd have the car come for Mrs. Sweeney. We walk the street to get the vote out. '' As a senior at Boston College , Mr. O'Neill lose his first campaign , for the Cambridge City Council , by 150 votes. But he be elect to the Massachusetts House of Representatives in 1936 , where he rise to Speaker , and where he remain until 1952 , when he be elect to the United States House. He win the seat vacate by John F. Kennedy on Kennedy 's election to the Senate. It be also the seat once hold by James M. Curley , the Boston politician whose career be the basis of the Edwin O'Connor novel `` The Last Hurrah. '' A Protege Of a Future Speaker Mr. O'Neill and his wife , Mildred , decide not to move their family to Washington when Mr. O'Neill be first elect , and they do not go back on this agreement until Mr. O'Neill become Speaker , a quarter century later. Until then , Mr. O'Neill room with Representative Edward P. Boland , Democrat of Massachusetts , his close friend. Their refrigerator be say to be stock almost exclusively with beer. In Washington , Mr. O'Neill become a protege of Representative John W. McCormack of Massachusetts , the Democratic whip who go on to become House Speaker in 1962. Mr. McCormack introduce him to the House power structure a part of the informal `` board of education '' meeting that Speaker Rayburn hold after hour for Congressional leader and friends. By his second term in the House , Mr. O'Neill have win a coveted seat on the Rules Committee. Mr. O'Neill 's opposition to the Vietnam War in 1967 , when he be a leader of the Rules Committee , be a decision affect by the anti-war feeling of his own child ( three boy and two girl ) as well a among the intellectual community at Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in his own district. His blue-collar constituent , who make up the bulk of his support , be overwhelmingly in favor of the American role in the war. But Mr. O'Neill write in his autobiography , `` Man of the House '' ( Random House , 1987 ) , that he have come to the conclusion that the conflict be a civil war and that American involvement in it be morally wrong. When President Lyndon B. Johnson call him to the White House to explain his change of position , Mr. O'Neill recall , he tell the President , `` In my heart and in my conscience I believe your policy be wrong. '' Johnson accept his position , Mr. O'Neill say , when he find out that the Congressman have not change it for political reasons. But his opposition to the war do eventually reap some political dividend : he win the trust and support of young House member who share his position on Vietnam , and they become important ally a Mr. O'Neill rise in power. In 1971 , have support Hale Boggs of Louisiana a majority leader , Mr. O'Neill be select by Mr. Boggs to be majority whip , an appointive post. After Mr. Boggs die in a plane crash in Alaska in 1972 , Mr. O'Neill be elect majority leader. Mr. O'Neill , a the whip under Speaker Carl Albert of Oklahoma , be the Democrats ' strong man ; he do the difficult things. He be instrumental in bring change that strip the committee chairman of their autocratic power , and he be the Democratic leader who push hard for the investigation and impeachment of President Nixon , who resign before a vote on impeachment be held. Mr. O'Neill be elect Speaker by acclamation in December 1976 , when he be 64 , and take office the next month. `` The wonder of it be that such a decent , compassionate man could rise to the top of a place like this , '' say Representative Benjamin S. Rosenthal , Democrat of Queens. But Mr. O'Neill be not without lapse of judgment. He be among many House member who accept favor from Tongsun Park , the South Korean lobbyist and intelligence agent. In 1973 and '74 , Mr. O'Neill permit Mr. Park to sponsor two lavish birthday party in his honor , thereby bolster Mr. Park 's prestige. Similarly , some question Mr. O'Neill 's judgment when he intervene in an application for Federal money make by James P. Wilmot , who have be chairman of the Democratic Party 's Finance Committee. The Speaker telephone the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development , Carla A. Hills , in July 1975 , ask when there would be a decision on Mr. Wilmot 's request for $ 2.2 million in annual rent subsidy for a housing project. Such inquiry tend to be view a request for special consideration. In any event , Mr. Wilmot get his subsidies. Although he have close tie to the Kennedy family , Mr. O'Neill remain neutral in the party 's Presidential nomination fight between Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and President Carter in 1980. He play a role behind the scene at the Democratic National Convention , however , negotiate an agreement that lead to Mr. Kennedy 's reluctant endorsement of the President. Financial Security From a Book Until his retirement , the O'Neills maintain their home in Cambridge , enable the Speaker to keep in touch with the city 's intellectual community as well a it neighborhoods. A Saturday morning ritual when Mr. O'Neill be in Cambridge consist of stop at the Chinese laundry , the Italian food store and the Star Market in Porter Square. In retirement , Mr. O'Neill divide his time between a house in Harwich Port on Cape Cod and an apartment in Washington and spend some holiday at a condominium in Florida. The Speaker 's old son and namesake , Thomas P. O'Neill 3d , a former lieutenant governor of Massachusetts , be in public relation in Boston. Another son , Christopher , be a Washington lawyer , and a third , Michael , be in business in Cambridge. One daughter , Susan , have her own business in Washington , and another , Rosemary , be a political officer for the State Department. Mr. O'Neill be also survive by his wife and eight grandchildren. A family spokeswoman say the funeral would be hold next Monday at St. John 's Church in Cambridge , Reuters reported. On Saturday and Sunday , his body will lie in state in Boston 's State House. After suffer colon cancer , which lead to a colostomy , Mr. O'Neill make public service advertisement in which he join athlete and movie star in talk candidly about have cancer. Unlike some politician who amass a fortune , Mr. O'Neill retire from the Speakership in relatively modest circumstances. His book , `` Man of the House , '' however , write with William Novak , become a best seller that make him financially secure. Mr. O'Neill also make commercial for a credit card company and a motel chain. Mr. O'Neill 's book be a treasure trove of story , include some about his political campaign for the Cambridge City Council while he be a senior at Boston College. He finish ninth in a field of 60 candidate , of whom the top eight be elected. The race teach him a lifelong lesson. He have not campaign in his own neighborhood , which he have take for grant and where he make a poor showing. In a post-mortem on the campaign , Mr. O'Neill 's father tell him what he have learn in a lifetime of politics : `` All politics be local . ''