April 24 , 1994 OBITUARY The 37th President ; In Three Decades By JOHN HERBERS To million of Americans , Richard Milhous Nixon be the most puzzling and fascinating politician of his time. He be a man of high intelligence and innovative concept whose talent , especially in international affair , be widely respect by both friend and foe. Yet he be so motivate by hatred and fear that he abuse his power and resort to lie and cover-ups. Almost constantly in the public eye from the time he enter politics in 1946 , he propel himself into a career that culminate a generation later when he become the first President to travel to Communist China and the first to resign from office. Over the decade , he evoke conflict emotion among million of Americans. Many felt an intense dislike for him on the ground that he rise to power through what they regard a demagoguery and defamation of his opponents. But among many others he inspire an intense loyalty , particularly among those who identify with his humble beginning and with his hostility toward intellectual , liberal , socialist and others he regard a archenemies. Mr. Nixon wear his hatred on his sleeve , and some of the most revealing information about his character and motivation come from his friend and associates. 'Richard Nixon go up the wall of life with his claw , ' say Bryce Harlow , one of his Presidential aides. His career , drive by such tenacity , be a tumultuous roller-coaster ride of victory , crisis , defeat , revival , triumph , ruin and , in late life , re-emergence a an elder statesman of the world who travel widely , write copiously and offer advice freely. 'No one , ' he tell an interviewer in 1990 , 'had ever be so high and fall so low.' Mr. Nixon 's political life span the cold war. He begin in politics a an ardent anti-Communist , and he spend his last year crusade for American political support and financial aid to Boris N. Yeltsin 's Russia. A Resignation , Not a Confession Mr. Nixon never receive the honor and accolade he would have earn have he not resign the Presidency in the face of certain impeachment for the cover-up of a cheap political burglary of Democratic office in the Watergate complex and other illegal act of domestic espionage , all document by Oval Office tape recordings. Still , he never confess to the 'high crime and misdemeanor ' of which he be accuse in article of impeachment , which be approve by the House Judiciary Committee and which precipitate his resignation in 1974. 'When the President do it , that mean it be not illegal , ' he tell David Frost in a celebrated television interview three year after he be pardon by his successor , Gerald R. Ford. So strong be the stigma of the Watergate scandal that it tend to obscure Mr. Nixon 's accomplishments. In foreign affair these include establish relation with Communist China , initiate detente and nuclear arm control treaties with the Soviet Union , and open the way for Egypt to break with the Soviet bloc ( and subsequently to make peace with Israel ) . In the domestic arena , his record appear well through the prism of subsequent event , some scholar say , than it do at the time. In his Administration , an expansion of the food stamp program go a long way toward stamp out hunger in America. The Environmental Protection Act authorize vast resource and regulation for clean the country 's air , land and water. In fact , many of the Government regulation and expenditure for social program that Ronald Reagan cut when he become President in 1981 be the product of the Nixon Administration rather than of the Democratic Presidents Mr. Reagan blamed. Perhaps more important be Mr. Nixon 's reshaping of the Supreme Court through his appointment of a Chief Justice and three Associate Justices. He appoint candidate for their ideological persuasion , particularly on such issue a judicial restraint , tough law enforcement and relaxation of school desegregation rules. As a result , the nine-member Court be transform from the 'liberal Warren Court ' to a body that be often split on the great issue of the day but more attuned to conservative causes. A Push for Peace , A Bungled Burglary Yet his accomplishment be mar to some extent by his method , his motif and his ambiguities. Carrying out the 'peace with honor ' agreement to end the long divisive war in Southeast Asia take five year from the time he be elect to office on a peace pledge , year in which American society be scar by riot and rebellion against the effort to force peace through bombing and incursion into new territory. By the end of 1968 , 30,610 Americans and untold Vietnamese have die in the war ; over the next five year another 27,557 Americans and even more Vietnamese died. The men who negotiate the peace , Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho , be select for the Nobel Peace Prize ; Mr. Tho declined. In all matter Mr. Nixon centralize power in himself and a few aide in the White House and seek to broaden the authority of the executive branch at the expense of Congress and the courts. He try to use the bureaucracy against political foes. He enter his second term by interpret his crush defeat of George McGovern a a mandate to scale back domestic government , even though some of the program involve grow out of the first Nixon term. But that effort be barely under way early in 1973 when the Watergate disclosure weaken him. Watergate in it broad sense -- not only the burglary of Democratic headquarters and subsequent effortsat a cover-up , but also the corruption of Federal agency for illegal purpose -- have such an impact on politics and government that it remain a promontory on the landscape of American history. In Watergate 's wake Congress pass a proliferation of legislation intend to restore ethic to election and government , to make government more open to the public , and to restrain agency from abuse individual right at home and abroad. Citizens seem to be so offend by Watergate that for several year they vote heavily against candidate of Mr. Nixon 's party whether or not they have anything to do with the scandals. A result , Democrats sweep Congress in 1974 and Jimmy Carter be elect President in 1976. The contest between Mr. Carter and President Ford be so close that many student of politics believe Mr. Ford would have win have he not pardon Mr. Nixon , an act that prevent the kind of criminal prosecution that send many Nixon aide to prison. It be Mr. Nixon 's personality and character that most catch the attention of Americans a , always accompany by controversy , he go from Southern California to the House of Representatives , to the Senate , to the White House a Dwight D. Eisenhower 's Vice President , to the Presidency , and to private citizen a the first President to have resign the office. In year between , he be defeat in a race for the Presidency by John F. Kennedy in 1960 and , two year later , in a bid for Governor of California by Edmund G. ( Pat ) Brown. No public figure have be more observed , discussed and psychoanalyze in public , yet few profess to understand him. 'Though he be a remote and private man , we have all be draw into his life story , ' Garry Wills , author of 'Nixon Agonistes , ' write after the resignation. 'Decade by decade , crisis by crisis , we be unwilling intruder on his most intimate moment -- we saw him cry , sweat , tremble , saw him angry , hurt , vindictive. The tape even let u eavesdrop on those embarrass conversations. Although no one really know him , we all know too much about him. He be too vividly present , and yet not present at all -- a collection of quirk , and not a person ; a conspicuous absence.' On another level , there be those who assert that the apparent Nixon enigma stem not from his character but from his fruitless effort a President to persuade the people to take a more pragmatic view of government , particularly in foreign affair , a view that neither the right nor leave be quite prepared to adopt. Calling the Nixon era 'a golden age of diplomacy , ' William Tucker , a writer and magazine editor , write in 1981 : 'The Nixon approach be always hat by the far left and far right -- group that despite doctrinal difference see the world in term of absolute right and wrong. The right hat Nixon because he have abandon the anti-Communist cause ; the left be unforgiving of the former Richard Nixon , and resentful because he turn out to be such a constructive diplomat. Watergate have little to do with it.' Americans do not know who Richard Nixon be in part because he have no fixed ideology , no particular place on the political spectrum. He be a loner who have no lasting alliance with other prominent Republican leaders. At one time or another he be at cross-purpose with Dwight Eisenhower , Barry Goldwater , Nelson Rockefeller , Ronald Reagan , Earl Warren and others. His life be a series of contradictions. He preach the Protestant ethic of hard work and moral living and be prim in dress and manner. Yet the White House tape that come to light in the Watergate investigation , as well a the testimony of some of his associate , show that he could be profane , amoral and power-driven. A Faith of Peace , A Policy of Force Reared a a Quaker , Mr. Nixon say he be strongly influence by that faith of peace and contemplation. Yet he consider politics combat and election campaign an 'arena. ' A foundation of his foreign policy be to appear ready to use military force anywhere in the world. Like Lincoln and Jackson , he identify with the common people , side with 'middle America ' against the well-to-do. But his own style of living be extravagant , with two expensive home in California and Florida subsidize by wealthy friend and the Federal Government. He enter the White House promising to decentralize authority but almost immediately consolidated it in himself and a few aide at the expense of his Cabinet. He invite crisis and , until the Watergate scandal close in , thrive on them , but he felt depress after a victory , a he write in his book 'Six Crises.' He enter politics by falsely brand his opponent for a House seat a an ally of Communists and their sympathizers. Yet a President he open relation with the Communist Government of China and establish a rapport with Soviet and other Communist-bloc leader that no previous President have achieved. Some Nixon observer have seek to explain him a an early practitioner of 'the new politics , ' in which the dominant ingredient be a weak party structure and the mass appeal of television. California set the trend. There , Mr. Nixon be able to run for Congress without work his way up through party rank , a be the custom in most other state in 1946. Six year later , Mr. Nixon discover in his celebrated 'Checkers ' speech that on television he could move audience without be subject to question and checking of his facts. Thereafter , he use television whenever he could and become a master of the control broadcast that convey the image he desired. None of this , however , explain Richard Nixon. He be a man of enormous complexity. Many volume have be write about him in an effort to penetrate his core. He himself provide the best clues. 'They 'll Never Give Us Credit' Kenneth W. Clawson be communication director for Mr. Nixon and a loyalist who stay with him to the end. Shortly after Mr. Nixon resign and return to San Clemente , Calif. , he send for Mr. Clawson , who have grow up in Appalachia and admire the Nixon style and determination. Mr. Clawson find 'the Old Man ' depressed and nurse a bout of phlebitis , his leg prop on his desk. 'They 'll never give u credit , ' he say to Mr. Clawson , who write of the conversation in The Washington Post in 1979. 'Even now they try to stomp u , you know , kick u when we 're down. They 'll never let up , never , because we be the first threat to them in years. And , by God , we would have change it all , change it so they could n't have change it back in a hundred year , if only . . .' There be no explanation of who 'they ' be , and no need for one. They be the liberal , the intellectual , journalist , those bear to privilege , the anti-Nixon people in his own party , those Mr. Nixon have count a his enemy over many years. 'What start the process , really , be the laugh , slight and snub when you be a kid , ' Mr. Nixon said. 'Sometimes it 's because you be poor , or Irish or Jewish or Catholic or ugly or simply that you be skinny. But if you be reasonably intelligent and if your anger be deep enough and strong enough , you learn you can change those attitude by excellence , personal gut performance , while those who have anything be sit on their fat butts. 'Once you learn that you 've get to work hard than anybody else , it become a way of life a you move out of the alley and on your way. In your own mind you have nothing to lose , so you take plenty of chance , and if you do your homework many of them pay off. It be then you understand , for the first time , that you really have the advantage because your competitor ca n't risk what they have already. It 's a piece of cake until you get to the top. You find you ca n't stop play the game the way you 've always play it because it be a part of you and you need it as much a an arm and a leg.' Patting his swollen leg , he add : 'So you be lean and mean and resourceful , and you continue to walk on the edge of the precipice because over the year you have become fascinate by how close to the edge you can walk without lose your balance. This time there be a difference. This time we have something to lose.' That short conversation provide a thread that run through Mr. Nixon 's entire life , a life live on the precipice and , for the most part , sustain by skill , determination and a good bit of luck. EARLY YEARS Quaker Church , Football Field , Role in War , Taste of Politics The future President be bear Jan. 9 , 1913 , in Yorba Linda , Calif. , then a farm community of 200 people near Los Angeles. His ancestor on both side be farmer , artisan and tradesman who come to America from Ireland in the 18th century. Francis Anthony Nixon , Richard 's father , be bear on a farm in Ohio , leave home at the age of 14 to earn a living and arrive in California several year later , in 1907. He find a job a a trolley-car motorman in the Quaker community of Whittier , where he meet Hannah Milhous , whose family have come there from Indiana in 1897. Frank and Hannah be marry in 1908. After work in his father-in-law 's orchard and in several other job , Frank buy a general store and fill station in 1922. Richard be the second of five sons. 'It be not an easy life , but it be a good one , ' Richard Nixon recall in his memoir , 'centered around a loving family and a small , tight-knit Quaker community.' Childhood friend of Mr. Nixon 's say he rarely smiled. In 'The Presidential Character , ' publish in 1972 , James David Barber cite a 'lifelong propensity for feel sad about himself , with his Duke Law School roommate 's observation that 'he never expect anything good to happen to him , or to anyone else close to him , unless it be earned. ' ' He daydream of faraway place ; work hard at win good grade in school ; lecture his brother to be more conscientious ; play football with zest even though he be not good at it ; pursue music , act and debate and compete for leadership position in school , and go four time a week to a strict Quaker church. He be close to death and illness at an early age. A young brother , Arthur , die of tubercular encephalitis when Richard be 12. When Richard be 20 , his old brother , Harold , die of tuberculosis after a 10-year illness that drain the family resources. At the age of 3 , Richard topple from a horse-drawn buggy , and the wheel run over his head , inflict a deep gash in his scalp that leave an ugly scar. 'Out of his childhood Nixon bring a persistent bent toward life a painful , difficult , and , perhaps a significant , uncertain , ' Mr. Barber wrote. Some student of his career conclude that a an adult , Mr. Nixon would make his investment in life not in value but in manage himself so he could accomplish his next goal. And in the process , he be not as enigmatic a he be often pictured. Rather , his behavior be consistent with his view of the world and be perhaps more predictable than that of most politicians. After he have become famous and serve a Vice President , his mother be ask if her son have change over the years. 'No , ' she replied. 'He have always be exactly the same. I never know a person to change so little.' The Upward Ladder : Fighting to Win After graduation from high school , the young Nixon want to go to Harvard or Yale. But there be no money for that. So he stay four more year in the community he wish desperately to escape and enter Whittier College. There he sharpen his debating talent , be elect president of the freshman class and of the student body for three year , and take act lessons. But it be his football coach , Wallace Newman , who influence him the most. 'I admire him and learn more from him than any man I have ever know aside from my father , ' Mr. Nixon said. In his memoir he say of Mr. Newman , 'He have no tolerance for the view that how you play the game count more than whether you win or lose. He use to say , 'Show me a good loser and I 'll show you a loser. ' ' Graduating from Whittier second in his class , Mr. Nixon win a scholarship to the Duke University Law School in Durham , N.C. There , he be so short of spend money that he spend most of his time in study. He be elect president of the Duke Bar Association and graduate third in his class. Mr. Nixon try to get a job in one of the big New York law firm , particularly Sullivan & amp ; Cromwell , but he receive no encouragement. The Federal Bureau of Investigation also turn him down. He go back to California and be admit to the bar in November 1937 ; he almost immediately join the firm of Wingert & amp ; Bewley in Whittier. In his spare time , he become active in civic group , teach Sunday school and act in a little theater group. It be in the theater that he meet Thelma Catherine Ryan , call Pat because she be bear March 16 , a day before St. Patrick 's Day , in 1912. When they meet , she be teach typing and shorthand at Whittier High School. They be marry two year later , June 21 , 1940 , in a Quaker ceremony. When the United States enter World War II in 1941 , Mr. Nixon take a job in Washington a a lawyer with the Office of Price Administration , an experience he loathe and would cite in later year a evidence of the failure of government bureaucracy. After seven month he apply for and be grant a Navy commission. He become an operation officer with the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command , charge with establish cargo bases. A Politician Is Born , Midwifed by Committee At war 's end he be surprise to receive a letter from a committee of California Republicans ask if he be interested in run for Congress. Although there have be little indication that Mr. Nixon have want to make politics his career , he jump at the chance. The five-term incumbent be Jerry Voorhis , a liberal in the Truman tradition who have vote for Federal control of tideland oil and have work for cheap credit and for public power ; the conservative of Southern California want him out. Mr. Nixon return to California and , in compete with other candidate for the committee 's endorsement , say the issue would be 'New Deal government control in regulate our life ' versus 'individual freedom and all that initiative can produce. ' 'I hold with the latter viewpoint , ' he said. 'I believe that return veteran , and I have talk to many of them in the foxhole , will not be satisfy with a dole or a Government handout.' That Mr. Nixon have little opportunity for contact with serviceman in the foxhole be not important ; he demonstrate a political ability to say what his audience want to hear. He win the committee 's endorsement and the primary. But when the campaign for the 1946 general election begin , Mr. Nixon be far behind his opponent. To overcome that , he develop a technique he would use time and again : discredit your opponent. Mr. Nixon issue a statement billing himself a a 'clean , forthright young American who fight for the defense of his country in the stinking mud and jungle of the Solomons ' while his opponent 'stayed safely behind the front in Washington.' This be couple with another statement say he represent no special interest or pressure group and add , in reference to the Political Action Committee of the Congress of Industrial Organizations : 'I welcome the opposition of the PAC with it Communist principle and huge slush fund.' Mr. Voorhis 's defense , that the PAC have not endorse him and that it be not Communist , do not deter Mr. Nixon , and when he arrive in Washington at the age of 34 , Representative Nixon receive a cold shoulder from some member of Congress who believe he have unseat a colleague unfairly. The slight do not escape the notice of Mr. Nixon , who be already begin to see himself confront by enemies. Fame and Alger Hiss , Politics and the Pink Lady It be the Alger Hiss case that make Richard Nixon a national celebrity. In August 1948 , Mr. Hiss , a highly regarded former State Department official , be accuse by Whittaker Chambers , a former Communist and then a senior editor at Time magazine , of have give Mr. Chambers secret Government document for delivery to the Soviet Union in 1937 and 1938. Mr. Hiss deny the charge before the House Committee on Un-American Activities and swore he do not know 'a man name Whittaker Chambers. ' Because of Mr. Hiss 's excellent credential and Government record , the matter might have be drop have Mr. Nixon not doggedly pursue it a head of a special subcommittee. Mr. Hiss finally acknowledge that he have know Mr. Chambers a 'George Crosley , ' a freelance writer he have befriend in the 1930's. He continue to deny , however , that he have be a Communist or have pass secret documents. After Mr. Hiss file a libel suit against Mr. Chambers , the rumpled , rotund editor produce from a pumpkin on his Maryland farm five roll of microfilm of document that he say have be pass to him by Mr. Hiss. They lead to Mr. Hiss 's indictment on a charge of perjury , and after two trial he be convict in 1950. The episode be an embarrassment to Democrats who have defend Mr. Hiss. Mr. Nixon win wide praise for his persistence and astuteness in the case , but he emphasize the enemy he made. 'The Hiss case prove beyond any reasonable doubt the existence of Soviet-directed Communist subversion at the high level of American government , ' Mr. Nixon write in his memoirs. 'But many who have defend Hiss simply refuse to accept the overwhelming evidence of his guilt. Some turn their anger and frustration on me.' The Hiss case make Richard Nixon famous , but it also turn him , he write , 'into one of the most controversial figure in Washington , bitterly oppose by the most respected and influential liberal journalist and opinion maker of the time.' In 1950 , Senator Sheridan Downey , a Democrat , unexpectedly choose to retire. Mr. Nixon , who have have his eye on the Senate seat for a couple of year , be support by major California newspaper and be unopposed in the Republican primary. The Democrats , however , be split in a bitter primary contest in which Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas emerge the winner to face Representative Nixon. Mrs. Douglas be a former Broadway and motion picture actress who be marry to the actor Melvyn Douglas. She be a popular liberal , a Fair Dealer who have enthusiastically support the Truman program. From the begin Mr. Nixon set out to discredit his opponent 's loyalty to the American system. He distribute more than half a million pink flier that say in part : 'During five year in Congress , Helen Douglas have vote 353 time exactly a have Vito Marcantonio , the notorious Communist party-line Congressman from New York. How can Helen Douglas , capable actress that she be , take up so strange a role a a foe of Communism ? And why do she when she have so deservedly earn the title of 'the pink lady ' ? ' In fact , Mrs. Douglas be denounce by pro-Communist group a a 'capitalist warmonger , ' and it be in this campaign that Mr. Nixon be first call 'Tricky Dick , ' an epithet bestow by The Independent Review in an editorial and pick up by Mrs. Douglas in her campaign. The extreme charge against Mrs. Douglas turn out to be overkill : Mr. Nixon win the race by 680,000 votes. But the campaign would supply Democrats with anti-Nixon ammunition for year to come. NATIONAL SCENE A Young Man And a War Hero : A G.O.P Ticket With Balance It seem strange to some that Dwight Eisenhower , a war hero run for President a a moderate , picked Richard Nixon a his run mate in 1952. But politically it make sense. Eisenhower be repute within the party to be the candidate of the 'Eastern liberal establishment. ' He need someone from the West or Middle West who could appeal to disappoint conservatives. Further , the retired general knew , a Mr. Nixon later write , 'that to maintain his above-the-battle position he need a running mate who be willing to engage in all-out combat and who be good at it.' And in many way Mr. Nixon himself project a moderate image a a spokesman against corruption in government. At 39 , he be young , bright and an effective speaker. He first catch the attention of Eisenhower supporter in address a Republican dinner in New York three month before the nominating convention. Former Gov. Thomas E. Dewey of New York , twice the party 's Presidential nominee and Eisenhower 's chief backer , be report to have tell Mr. Nixon after his speech : 'Make me a promise. Do n't get fat , do n't lose your zeal , and you can be President some day.' A Speech About Checkers , A Spot Secured The 1952 campaign be barely under way when , on Sept. 18 , a sudden crisis loomed. The New York Post and other newspaper disclose that 78 wealthy California businessmen have quietly raise a fund of $ 18,235 to defray political expense for Senator Nixon. Although establishment of such a fund would later seem mild , the news at the time stun much of the country. Many Democrats and some Republicans , include Eisenhower 's close adviser , demand that Mr. Nixon resign from the ticket on ethical grounds. Eisenhower himself be silent for several day , finally say only : 'Nothing 's decided. Nixon have get to be clean a a hound 's tooth. ' Each want the other to make the decision. After Mr. Nixon tell the general by telephone that it be time for the head of the ticket to make a decision , the Eisenhower people be convince that Mr. Nixon have to go. But the general give him the opportunity to state his case on national television. By any measure , his defense be a virtuoso performance. He maintain that he have do nothing wrong , disclose his mortgage and other financing to show he be in fact in debt , attack Communism and ask people to tell the Republican National Committee whether they think he should resign. His most moving , and best remember , remark be in reference to his wife and a dog name Checkers. 'Pat and I have the satisfaction that every dime that we 've get be honestly ours , ' he said. 'I should say this -- that Pat do n't have a mink coat. But she do have a respectable Republican cloth coat.' Then he say a man in Texas have give the family a cocker spaniel , 'black and white and spotted. ' 'And our little girl , Tricia , the 6-year-old , name it Checkers. And you know , the kid love the dog , and I just want to say this right now , that regardless of what they do about it , we 're go to keep it.' Public response be overwhelmingly pro-Nixon. Eisenhower ask him to meet him on the campaign trail in Wheeling , W.Va. When the Nixon plane land , the general hop aboard. 'General , you do n't need to come out to the airport , ' the surprised Mr. Nixon said. 'Why not , ' say the general , flash his famous grin , 'You 're my boy.' After the Republican victory , Mr. Nixon turn out to be an active Vice President under a President who prefer to operate quietly. President Eisenhower be willing to delegate more task than most of his predecessor , and the energetic Mr. Nixon have a knack of keep himself in the limelight , no manner how menial the assignment. Probably his most important role be in foreign affairs. He visit 56 country a a good-will envoy , but , more important , he serve on the National Security Council , at the heart of policy decision and intelligence. He be close to Secretary of State John Foster Dulles , whose policy of 'brinksmanship ' fit perfectly with Mr. Nixon 's idea of bold and even risky action abroad. Mr. Nixon 's travel abroad generate far more news than most trip by Vice Presidents. Unlike most , he be not content to engage in ceremony and quiet diplomacy. He invite crowd to engage him in dialogue , however tense relation might be between their country and his. Thus Mr. Nixon 's 1958 trip in South America turn out to be one of the 'Six Crises ' he would recall in his book. He manage session of crowd-mingling and argumentative discussion in Venezuela and Argentina with few problems. But in Peru crowd of student and others have be work into an anti-Yankee , anti-Nixon frenzy by speaker and signs. 'Are You Afraid Of the Truth ? ' When a rock thrown from a crowd in Lima graze the Vice President 's neck and hit a Secret Service agent in the teeth , Mr. Nixon shake his fist at the crowd and ask , 'Are you afraid to talk to me ? Are you afraid of the truth ? ' He leap onto the trunk of his car shouting : 'Cowards ! Are you afraid of the truth ? ' In a late confrontation someone spat in his face. 'I felt an almost uncontrollable urge to tear the face in front of me to piece , ' he write later. 'I at least have the satisfaction of plant a healthy kick on his shins. Nothing I do all day make me feel better.' Such confrontation pay off in public acclaim. On his return to the United States , he be greet by cheer crowd a a conquering hero. And there be the celebrated 'kitchen debate ' with the Soviet leader , Nikita S. Khrushchev , while Mr. Nixon be on a trip to Moscow in 1959 to open an American exhibit at a fair. In the kitchen of a model home , the two leader engage in a folksy dialogue on the relative merit of the capitalist and Soviet systems. The two men stand jowl to jowl , the Soviet leader occasionally jab Mr. Nixon 's chest for emphasis. The outcome be inconclusive , of course , but Mr. Nixon win acclaim at home for the forceful manner in which he defend the American system. There be also attack from his opponents. Frequent Herblock cartoon in The Washington Post show him with a shadowy , hateful face ; some show him climb out of a sewer to give a campaign talk. The Duke faculty vote 61 to 42 against give Mr. Nixon an honorary degree. Richard Nixon could never give up politics , however. He have taste power and the excitement of living on the precipice , and he like it. Pat Nixon , though she would still try to persuade him to retire from politics , resign herself year after year to 'another campaign.' AIMING HIGHER One Ballot , Four Debates , Two Defeats , And a Recovery After the Eisenhower-Nixon ticket win again in 1956 by a wide margin , defeat Adlai E. Stevenson for a second time , Mr. Nixon groom himself for the 1960 Presidential nomination. A rival , Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York , abandon his effort after Mr. Nixon 's popularity shoot up in the wake of the 'kitchen debate.' The Republicans nominate Mr. Nixon on the first ballot at their convention in Chicago. Trying to appeal to the 'Eastern establishment , ' he choose Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts a his run mate. The Democratic ticket be Senator John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Senator Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas. The campaign go badly from the beginning. For the first time in his career , Mr. Nixon be on the defensive , force to defend the Eisenhower record and to erase his reputation a an unfair campaigner. Eisenhower , who have always have trouble embrace Mr. Nixon , do not help. At a news conference he be ask for an example of a major idea of Mr. Nixon 's that have be adopt by the Administration. 'If you give me a week , I might think of one , ' he replied. 'I do n't remember.' And the Nixon campaign itself be in many way uncharacteristic. Mr. Nixon , who have always seem prepared to take on any opponent anywhere , hold Senator Kennedy and his family in awe in a way few of his supporter could understand. He admire the Kennedy family 's fighting spirit and their wealth and status. Whatever the reason , he break from his practice , and never make a slashing attack on his opponent.. A note debater , he be not at his best in the four television debate with Mr. Kennedy. He be tense , and he decline the use of makeup : his dark beard and pasty forehead , with bead of sweat , make him appear on television to be the shadowy figure that cartoonists have depicted. Throughout the campaign , the Vice President 's serious , sometimes prim , demeanor be overshadow by the charisma of the young Senator. This seem more important than question about an interest-free $ 205,000 loan from Howard Hughes to Mr. Nixon 's brother Donald or such issuesas which candidate would be toughest against the Russians and which could , in Mr. Kennedy 's word , 'get this country move again ' in the wake of a recession. A Quiet Pledge : 'I Would Be Back' Still , Mr. Nixon campaign as doggedly a he ever have , and the outcome be extraordinarily close. In the popular vote Mr. Kennedy lead by 113,000 out of 68.8 million cast. It be Mr. Nixon 's first defeat and the last he would accept graciously. Many Republicans , believe that Democratic machine in Chicago and Texas have steal the election for Mr. Kennedy , want to contest the outcome. But Mr. Nixon would not. In his memoir , he write that on the night of Mr. Kennedy 's inauguration , when happy Democrats be celebrate throughout Washington , he go alone to the desert Capitol and stand for several minute on a balcony overlook the snow-covered Mall and the Washington Monument. 'As I turn to go inside , I suddenly stop short , strike by the thought that this be not the end , that someday I would be back here. I walk as fast a I could back to the car.' At the age of 48 , Mr. Nixon return to California and enter the 1962 race for Governor against the incumbent , Pat Brown , a Democrat seek a second term. It be another tumultuous campaign of charge and countercharge , but in the end the voter seem to recognize what Mr. Nixon admit in his memoir : he do not really want to be Governor ; he want to be President. The night of his defeat he be in a foul mood. Mr. Nixon felt he have be abuse by the press , and when reporter keep insist that he make a statement , he march into the press room and make an angry farewell-to-politics speech that include the line , 'You wo n't have Nixon to kick around anymore , because , gentleman , this be my last press conference.' Almost everyone believe that his political career be over. He have violate a basic rule of American politics : Never appear to be a poor loser. But after that night he begin a slow , measured recovery that would lead to victory in two Presidential elections. He write in his memoir : 'I have never regret what I say in 'the last press conference. ' I believe that it give the medium a warning that I would not sit back and take whatever bias coverage be dish out to me. I think the episode be partially responsible for the much fairer treatment I receive from the press during the next few years. From that point of view alone , it be worth it.' Ever restless , he move to New York a a senior partner in a Wall Street law firm whose name become Nixon , Rose , Guthrie , Anderson & amp ; Mitchell. The Nixons settle in an expensive apartment on Fifth Avenue. But Mr. Nixon spend little time a a lawyer. Rather , he work at become President. The crush defeat of it 1964 nominee , Barry Goldwater , leave the Republican Party in a shambles. And it be Mr. Nixon who move in and do the drudge work need to rebuild a constituency , attend the dinner , the rally , the conventions. In 1966 he charter a sputter DC-3 to take him around the country to speech on behalf of Republican Congressional candidates. Although his plane be modest , Mr. Nixon manage to appear Presidential , the head of a party that be start to capitalize on the weakness of the Johnson Administration a public opposition to the Vietnam War mount and a many people become fearful of rise crime and civil disorder. On Jan. 31 , 1968 , he formally announce his candidacy for the Presidency. He roll easily through the primaries. With the help of Southern conservative , attract by a promise that he would ease off on school desegregation , he win the nomination at the party 's convention in Miami Beach on the first ballot , defeat Governor Rockefeller of New York , a liberal , and Governor Reagan of California , a conservative. As in the 1950 Senate race , the card fell Mr. Nixon 's way. President Johnson withdraw a a candidate for re-election because of the opposition to the Vietnam War. Senator Robert F. Kennedy be assassinate in Los Angeles in June while campaign for the Democratic nomination. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey be nominate over an antiwar candidate , Senator Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota , at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago while the police and demonstrator fight in the streets. But Mr. Humphrey be too closely tie to Mr. Johnson 's policy for many Democrats , and when he finally announce his independent opposition to the war , it be too late to heal the wounds. Millions of independent and moderate in both party saw Mr. Nixon a a suitable alternative to another Democratic administration. At the age of 55 he seem to have put the excess of his youth behind him. His mastery of foreign affair and the prospect that he would bring an era of reform after year of hastily enact 'Great Society ' program at home appeal to many. And in 1968 he be able to control a never before the image he project to voters. By then , candidate could be and be package and sell on television. Campaign tour and rally be useful mostly for show on TV screens. The reality of a campaign could be alter to project the desired image. John D. Ehrlichman , later a top White House assistant , recall the campaign in his book , 'Witness to Power. ' At an Oct. 31 rally in Madison Square Garden , for example , Nixon supporter be bus in from distant suburb to fill the hall , while those off the street who look a if they might boo or heckle the candidate be direct down a corridor that lead back to the street. 'The television audience , ' Mr. Ehrlichman write , 'saw only the thunderous cheering of a friendly , enthusiastic crowd of enlightened American voters.' Mr. Nixon win the popular vote by a narrow margin and get 301 electoral vote to 191 for Mr. Humphrey and 46 for Gov. George C. Wallace of Alabama , on a third-party ticket. FIRST TERM More Spending , More Control , More Justices , More War When Mr. Nixon become President , he have never before wielded executive authority. But he have be around power for so long and go to such great pain to keep abreast of affair at home and abroad that he know exactly what he would do. Much of what he do in the domestic area be aim at cement his re-election in 1972 , several Nixon aide said. He begin by appoint a broadly base Cabinet that include elect official like Gov. George Romney of Michigan a Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and Walter J. Hickel , the former Governor of Alaska , a Interior Secretary. He name Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York , who have be a liberal in the Kennedy Administration , a his chief urban affair adviser , and Henry Kissinger , an adviser to Governor Rockefeller , a his chief foreign policy aide. Despite his promise during the campaign and his Presidency to trim Government spending , Mr. Nixon preside over an expansion in spending. One reason be that he have to deal with a liberal , Democratic Congress. Another be that he do believe in many innovation for Government aid , and in the 1970 's there be a strong public demand for such services. He propose a family assistance program that would have be more generous than the traditional welfare then on the book , he back safety and health protection for worker and he call for housing allowance that would have move many family out of public housing by give them money to rent their own. His Administration build more subsidized housing unit than any before or since , and he agree to environmental legislation , include the Environmental Protection Act , that would pour billion into clean up the nation 's air and waters. Although few notice it at the time , Mr. Nixon 's expansion of the food stamp program would later be acknowledge a a remarkable breakthrough in social policy by a President who preach austerity : by 1982 it be help to fee 1 in 10 Americans. Another innovation that have an important effect on the nation be the program under which the Federal Government take several billion dollar each year from it tax receipt and distribute it , with few string attach , to local governments. Looking to re-election , Mr. Nixon opt to give local official the maximum authority over use of these revenue-sharing funds. A 1972 Strategy To Comfort the South But much of this be little noticed at the time because of some of Mr. Nixon 's position on civil right and his effort to win the support of Southern conservative break away from the Democratic Party. He back off on enforcement of school desegregation , support legislation and executive action that would vastly reduce the use of busing a the chief tool in achieve integration. A cornerstone of this 'Southern strategy ' be his effort to change the makeup of the Supreme Court. Two conservative nominee from the South be reject by the Senate , but Mr. Nixon be still able to reshape the court with four appointment : Warren E. Burger a Chief Justice , and Associate Justices Harry A. Blackmun , Lewis F. Powell Jr. and William H. Rehnquist. In much of his Presidency , Mr. Nixon face a troubled economy , and a pressure from Congress and the public mount for him to do something to check inflation , he impose wage and price control in mid-1971. The control require him to set up the kind of bureaucracy he have hat in World War II. And when they be lift , after the 1972 election , price shoot up again. 'What do America reap from it brief fling with economic control ? ' Mr. Nixon ask in his memoirs. 'The Aug. 15 , 1971 , decision to impose them be politically necessary and immensely popular in the short run. But in the long run I believe that it be wrong. The piper must be pay , and there be an unquestionably high price for tamper with the orthodox economic mechanism . '