May 13 , 1994 OBITUARY Erik Erikson , 91 , Psychoanalyst Who Reshaped Views of Human Growth , Dies By THE NEW YORK TIMES Erik H. Erikson , the psychoanalyst who profoundly reshape view of human development , die yesterday at the Rosewood Manor Nursing Home in Harwich , Mass. He be 91. He have a brief illness , say his daughter , Sue Erikson Bloland of Manhattan. A friend and disciple of Sigmund Freud , Mr. Erikson be a thinker whose idea have effect far beyond psychoanalysis , shape the emerge field of child development and life-span study and reach into the humanities. He be best know for the theory that each stage of life , from infancy on , be associate with a specific psychological struggle that contribute to a major aspect of personality. That represent a quantum leap in Freudian thought , suggest that the ego and the sense of identity be shape over the entire life span and that experience later in life might help heal the hurt of early childhood. Mr. Erikson 's influence , compound by clinical study of child , a teaching post at Harvard University , popular lecture and best-selling book on Mohandas K. Gandhi and Martin Luther , pervade many layer of society , from education to medicine to law to biography to psychiatry to lowbrow culture. His popular recognition reach a peak in the 70 's , particularly because of his identification with the development of `` identity crisis , '' a term he coined. But his scholarly contribution have assure him of a place of eminence in many disciplines. The term `` psychobiography , '' which he do not originate , be also associate with his name. His most significant contribution , however , be the concept of a malleable ego in adult , a departure from traditional theory of an ego fix early in life and persisting to it end. External Forces And Personality A crucial element in the theory of successive change in personality , and hence ego modification , be that the dynamic of the society in which a person live determine to what extent these change be resolved. By place the individual in a societal matrix , Mr. Erikson could suggest the degree to which political , economic and social system , all exterior force , mold a person 's interior emotional life. In that manner he seek a union between psychoanalysis and the social sciences. As a pioneer in the study of the life cycle , Mr. Erikson saw it consist of these eight crucial stage : *Infancy , or the oral sensory stage , in which the emotional conflict be between basic trust and mistrust. *Muscular-anal , in which autonomy conflict with shame and doubt. *Locomotor-genital , where the conflict lie between initiative and guilt *Latency , in which the positive component be industry and the negative be inferiority. *Adolescence , where the identity crisis , or role confusion , normally occurs. *Young adulthood , in which intimacy vies with isolation. *Adulthood , in which the crisis pole be generativity and stagnation. *And maturity , or old age , when despair threaten ego integrity. In some of his last work , in his 80 's , Mr. Erikson work with his wife , Joan , who lend him an editorial hand throughout his career , to develop a detailed description of just what the lesson of each stage impart to wisdom in old age. They propose that in the final phase of life , wisdom be achieve to the degree that each early phase have positive resolutions. In infancy , for example , the issue be trust versus fearfulness. In old age , that become an appreciation of interdependence. The struggle in early childhood between a sense of will and mastery of one 's body , on the one hand , and a shame and doubt on the other , becomes in old age , if successfully resolve , an acceptance of the inevitable deterioration of the body. Mr. Erikson theorize that all the crisis , include the last , have positive and negative solution , mediate strongly by milieu and other cultural and societal factors. But whatever the solution , at each stage the crisis have to be resolve if the person be to be unharmed by dread or neurosis. The role of society , and even that of contemporary history , apply directly , at least from adolescence onward. Criticism From the Freudians Mr. Erikson 's theory be not wholly accept by Freudians ; indeed , the orthodox consider him a heretic. Mr. Erikson himself think that Freud 's daughter , Anna , with whom he have have a special relationship , be unhappy over his departure from the Freudian canon. Other sharpshooter be in the academic community. Many social scientist consider Mr. Erikson ill ground in their fields. Others doubt his scholarly ability , partly on the ground that his sole diploma be earn in high school. But Mr. Erikson be serene , believe that his critic do not deal with the substance of his finding and assumptions. He felt compensated , he say , by the attention pay by young people without credal allegiances. The evolution of his idea emerge to a definable extent from his life experience and from a long habit of trust his artistic eye and his belief in the efficacy of his intuition. Mr. Erikson be bear on June 15 , 1902 , in Frankfurt , Germany , of Danish parents. The common story be that his mother and father have separate before his birth , but the closely guarded fact be that he be his mother 's child from an extramarital union. He never saw his birth father or his mother 's first husband. When he be 3 , his mother be marry to his pediatrician , Dr. Theodore Homburger , and throughout his youth he be know a Erik Homburger. He do not learn about his parentage until his teen-age year , `` and it be a secret my mother and I shared. '' To add to the confusion , his adoptive father be Jewish and his mother 's heritage be Lutheran. He be rear a a Jew , because his mother and her new husband agree to treat him a their son. He be also lead to think of himself a a German , and his anti-Semitic schoolmate taunt him , while at the synagogue his Jewish friend reject him because of his Nordic features. As a consequence of compounded identity confusion , he say , he develop `` a morbid sensitivity '' and often escape into a fantasy world. After graduate from high school in Karlsruhe , he become an itinerant bohemian , scratch out a living by sketch children. In the process he read eclectically on his own , mostly about art and history. Then , in 1927 , he get word from Peter Blos , a classmate and `` my old friend , '' who be a child analyst , that there might be a summer job in Vienna a a tutor-companion to the four child of Dorothy Tiffany Burlingham , an American studying with Freud. Mr. Erikson go for the summer and remain to create , with Mr. Blos and Anna Freud , a progressive school in which the student be teach a individuals. Mr. Erikson prove a gifted teacher , with `` a knack , '' a he put it , for empathy with children. Miss Freud , who be pioneer the application of her father 's theory to child , single him out a a potential child analyst and invite him to be her patient. He have , meantime , meet Freud at a family party and have go mushroom hunt with him. Focus Turns To Children Being analyze by a woman pose problem for Mr. Erikson , but the process , which last more than three year , prove beneficial , he said. `` Psychoanalysis be not so formal then , '' he recalled. `` I pay Miss Freud $ 7 a month , and we meet almost every day. My analysis , which give me self-awareness , lead me not to fear be myself. We do n't use all those pseudoscientific term then -- defense mechanism and the like -- so the process of self-awareness , painful at time , emerge in a liberating atmosphere. '' In 1930 Mr. Erikson marry Joan Serson , a dancer and artist , many of whose intellectual interest coincide with his. The marriage help stabilize Mr. Erikson and turn him far toward child analysis a a career. With his analysis complete by 1933 and his formal training in psychoanalysis also finish , Mr. Erikson leave Vienna for the United States. He have a presentiment , he say , of the Nazi terror that be about to descend on Europe , and he be restive about development in Freudianism , in which Freud 's theory be be harden into belief , `` and the whole thing be become credal. '' On the boat he learn 800 word of basic English with the aid of George F. Kennan , the diplomat , so that when he arrive in Boston he could make his way around. Child analysis be in it infancy here , so Mr. Erikson have little difficulty in acquire patient and an appointment at the Harvard Medical School. Mr. Erikson be urge to become more academically acceptable by earn a Ph.D. `` I try for a bit , '' he recall , `` and then I say the hell with it. '' He felt that he could learn more from children. `` You see a child play , '' he say , `` and it be so close to see an artist paint , for in play a child say thing without utter a word. You can see how he solve his problems. You can also see what 's wrong. Young child , especially , have enormous creativity , and whatever 's in them rise to the surface in free play. '' Mr. Erikson also work at the Harvard Psychological Clinic , come into contact with Margaret Mead , Gregory Bateson and Ruth Benedict , the anthropologist , and Henry Murray and Kurt Lewin , the psychologists. He then go to Yale a a full-time researcher at the Institute of Human Relations and , eventually , a a professor at the medical school. How Society Molds Childhood The development of his thought , he say , be from case history to life history to social and cultural factors. In the pursuit of the social and cultural , he leave Yale in 1938 to study the early childhood training of the Sioux on a reservation in South Dakota. That be the start of a life concern to demonstrate how the universal event of childhood be affected and mold by society. Later he also study the Yurok , salmon-fishing Indians in northern California. He find a marked difference between Sioux child , who be rear on tale of game hunting , and the more restrictive childhood of the Yurok , who be prepare for an arduous way of life. In the war year Mr. Erikson study score of normal child on the West Coast in an effort to explore psychodynamics through experimental play. Out of that come his initial attempt to relate the Freudian stage theory of infantile sexuality to emergent social capacity and need in a particular milieu. His proposal that psychoanalysis ought to be a way for understand `` the vicissitude of normal life '' be reinforce in a postwar treatment of emotionally disturb veterans. Mr. Erikson be impress by find that his patient be bewilder and anxious but not mentally ill. They be , he write , mostly normal men undergo the normal crisis of readjustment to postwar society. Mr. Erikson elaborate in a paper entitle `` Ego Development and Historical Chance , '' in which he argue that racism and joblessness could affect the mind at the deep layer of the unconscious and that social and historical factor contribute heavily to an ego 's strength or weakness. Widespread Effects From Popular Book Mr. Erikson 's reputation be limit , however , until the publication in 1950 of `` Childhood and Society , '' which lay out his theory on the stage development of life. The book , which attain a popular audience and establish Mr. Erikson a a generative thinker , have profound effect on many educator , psychologist and other specialist who have accept Freud 's view of childhood. The book also help spur young analyst to appreciate cultural anthropology and social psychology. Mr. Erikson 's concept , moreover , open a door to the idea that adult , despite poor childhood , could compensate for their deprivations. The mold of the first five year of life be not hard and fast. Mr. Erikson 's book , which have be a steady seller over the year in many language , be one anchor of his fame. Two others be `` Young Man Luther '' ( 1958 ) and `` Gandhi 's Truth '' ( 1969 ) , both psychobiographies in which men of great gift discover themselves and their role in relation to their time in adulthood. `` Gandhi 's Truth '' win a Pulitzer Prize and a National Book Award. Before write those book Mr. Erikson become a cause celebre by leave the University of California in 1950 rather than sign a loyalty oath. Not a Communist , Mr. Erikson spurn the oath on First Amendment ground and create a considerable hubbub. He stand fast , and he say later that he felt that his attitude have be among his fine moments. In the McCarthy era Mr. Erikson be a senior staff member at the Austin Riggs Center in Stockbridge , Mass. , where he treat severely disturbed young people from well-off families. As a balance , he commute every other week to Pittsburgh to work with disturbed youngster from poor family , partly in collaboration with Dr. Benjamin Spock. He also write for journal , chiefly about identity , which he define a a basic confidence in one 's inner continuity amid change. A sense of adult identity , he say at one point , `` denote certain comprehensive gain that the individual must have derive from all his pre-adult experiences. '' The crisis associate with an emergent identity , he suggest , be a normal one and may be accompany by intense neurotic suffering. In some case the crisis may be prolong , especially for creative people. That thinking be apply in Mr. Erikson 's study of Luther , in which he focus on Luther 's `` fit '' in a monastery choir a an identity crisis and try to show how Luther have free himself from an authoritarian father and the constriction of Roman Catholicism. Widely praise , the book stir discussion on the insight of psychobiography as well a it limitations. Critics suggest that for all the light that Mr. Erikson have shed , he have underestimate the cumulative historical force that produce the Reformation. In the 1960 's , Mr. Erikson return to Harvard a professor of human development. He also conduct behavioral research , lecture at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and publish essay in journal , later put into book form. The book be `` Insight and Responsibility '' ( 1964 ) and `` Identity : Youth and Crisis '' ( 1968 ) . Hopefulness Inspired by Gandhi His busy life include long sojourn in India , where he become fascinate by the life of Gandhi and write , in `` Gandhi 's Truth , '' about Gandhi 's first use of fasting , in 1918 , to win a textile strike. The book try to show the virtue of nonviolent civil disobedience and center on Gandhi 's middle life , when he become a symbol of the struggle for independence. Mr. Erikson be energize by his study of Gandhi and be lead to believe in the possibility of `` quite different image of youth and young adulthood '' than those prevailing. He be full of hope that `` new model of fraternal behavior may come to replace those image of comradeship and courage that have be tie in the past to military service and probably have contribute to a glorification of a kind of warfare doom to be obsolete in our time. '' He be optimistic that new model of behavior `` would make it possible for adult to contribute true knowledge and genuine experience without assume an authoritative stance beyond their actual competence and genuine inner authority. '' He be especially wary of what he saw a a prevailing irrationality among people , young and old , who scorn measured progress a they take direct action to pursue their goals. After his formal retirement in 1970 , Mr. Erikson work on essay , write book , lecture and divide his time between California and Cape Cod. In 1987 , he and his wife move from Marin County , Calif. , to Cambridge , Mass. , because of the founding of the Erik Erikson Center there for scholar and clinicians. The center be affiliate with Cambridge Hospital , part of the Harvard Medical School. His last two book , `` The Life Cycle Completed '' in 1982 and `` Vital Involvement in Old Age , '' write with his wife and Helen Kivnick in 1986 , articulate his idea on the last stage of life. `` A Way of Looking at Things , '' a collection of his paper edit by Dr. Stephen Schlein , be publish in 1987. In addition to his daughter and his wife , of Harwich , survive be two son , Kai , of New Haven , and Jon , of Los Osos , Calif. ; two sister , Ruth Hirsch of Manhattan and Ellen Katz of Haifa , Israel , and three grandchild .