August 21 , 1994 OBITUARY Linus C. Pauling Dies at 93 ; Chemist and Voice for Peace By RICHARD SEVERO Linus C. Pauling , a brilliant chemist and an untiring political activist who receive one Nobel Prize for chemistry and another for peace , die on Friday at his ranch in the Big Sur area of Northern California. He be 93. The cause be cancer , say Steve Lawson , chief executive officer of the Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine in Palo Alto , Calif. Dr. Pauling receive the prize for chemistry in 1954 , a a result of his research into the nature of the chemical bond , the force that give atoms the cohesiveness to form the molecule that in turn become the basis of all physical matter. In 1962 , at age 61 , he receive the Nobel Peace Prize. The award 's citation acclaim him for his work since 1946 `` not only against the testing of nuclear weapon , not only against the spread of these armament , not only against their very use , but against all warfare a a mean of solve international conflicts. '' Dr. Pauling be also say to have provide powerful impetus to others in achieve what many come to regard a the medical discovery of the century. That be the determination of the structure of DNA , or deoxyribonucleic acid , the genetic material in all living organisms. To those who eventually win the race to solve DNA , Dr. Pauling be see at the time a the close rival. Had he be the victor , he , no doubt , would have be the recipient of a third Nobel Prize. Dr. Pauling 's scientific genius be accompany by a strong penchant for dissent. He touch off a debate among scientist in his late year , for example , by vigorously advocate that vitamin C , if take in large-enough dos , would build up the immune system in human and protect them against infectious diseases. In the 1950 's , he be a primary shaper of the antinuclear-testing movement , and he be actively involve in the antiwar movement in the 1960's. By the time he receive the chemistry prize at the age of 53 , he have long be recognize a a chemist 's chemist. By the age of 30 , he have already publish 50 paper base on original chemical research and have rise to a full professorship at the California Institute of Technology. His year at the institute , from 1927 to 1963 , mark the most productive period of his professional career. In 1931 , when Dr. Pauling receive the American Chemical Society 's Award in Pure Chemistry , Arthur A. Noyes , president of the Gates Chemical Laboratory at Pasadena , Calif. , prophetically call the young scientist `` a rise star , who may yet win the Nobel Prize. '' Dr. Pauling 's grasp of the nature of chemical bond and molecular structure be so formidable that Albert Einstein , whom he meet that year , say he would have to `` brush up on the subject '' of chemical bond before again try to engage the young Dr. Pauling in a conversation. In 1939 Dr. Pauling publish `` The Nature of the Chemical Bond , '' a book that win worldwide recognition among scientific researcher a a landmark work. Throughout the 1930 's , he use quantum mechanic , the theoretical framework use to explain the structure of the atom and the motion of atomic particle , to investigate chemical bonding. He assert that the `` resonance , '' or internal vibration of atom , give molecule their cohesiveness. Joseph E. Mayer , a professor of chemistry at Columbia University , once praise him a a `` rarity among scientist -- a chemist with mathematical and geometrical intuition. '' Growing Evidence Of Social Conscience While Dr. Pauling be win international plaudit a a theoretical chemist , he be also develop a reputation a a scientist with a social conscience. But some critic believe he sometimes overlook national concern in advocate social policy and in other actions. In World War II he ignore the widespread resentment against Japanese-Americans and hire a young man whose parent be bear in Japan a a gardener for his home in Pasadena. Vandals later deface the house with anti-Japanese slogans. By 1949 he have declare himself an advocate of peace and help organize a Congress for Peace , hold in Mexico City. His colleague in this venture include Dr. W. E. B. DuBois , the singer Paul Robeson , the actor Charlie Chaplin and O. John Rogge , a former Assistant Attorney General of the United States. The State Department denounce the group a `` Moscow-directed , '' assert that it be `` devote to provide an apologia for the Moscow point of view. '' The next year , Dr. Pauling join with seven other prominent Americans to start a `` peace crusade , '' a forerunner of peace movement that be to win the support of many Americans two decade later. In explain his action , he say that the possibility of war be become great `` with the continued increase in man 's power of destruction '' and that `` it be the duty of every American to work for a peaceful solution of international arguments. '' He incur the suspicion of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy , the Wisconsin Republican who be chairman of Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations , and Mr. McCarthy accuse him of have a `` well nigh incredible '' record of membership in Communist front organizations. Dr. Pauling deny under oath that he be ever a Communist. Partly a a result of the Senator 's attack , the State Department deny Dr. Pauling a passport in April 1952 , hold that it would be contrary to national interest to permit him to travel abroad. There seem to be a feeling that Dr. Pauling might go to the Soviet Union. In fact , he want only to go to London with his wife , Ava , to participate in a conference on the structure of proteins. Dr. Pauling say the State Department inform him that his passport application have be deny because of the suspicion that he be a Communist. Attacked by Stalin As Anti-Marxist The suspicion that Dr. Pauling might be sympathetic to the Soviet Union persist , even though his theory of resonance have make him a persona non grata in the Soviet Union , where Stalin believe that the theory be incompatible with Communist ideology. In 1951 the Russians denounce the theory a `` pseudo- scientific , '' `` vicious , '' and an example of world outlook `` hostile to the Marxist view. '' Dr. Pauling 's book , `` The Nature of the Chemical Bond , '' be regard a hostile to the dialectical materialism of Marx , Engels and Lenin. Dr. Pauling counter by call Stalinist science distorted. By July 1952 , after a number of effort , Dr. Pauling manage to obtain a `` limited passport '' for travel to Britain and France. In 1954 , he receive an unrestricted passport so he could travel to Stockholm to receive his first Nobel Prize. After return from Stockholm , Dr. Pauling be as outspoken a ever. He castigate the Government for it treatment of J. Robert Oppenheimer , a crucial scientist in the development of the atomic bomb , whose security clearance have be withdraw because of concern about his patriotism. Dr. Pauling call it `` the bad case of national ingratitude I know. '' Alluding to Dr. Oppenheimer 's opposition to the Government 's crash program to develop a hydrogen bomb , he declare , `` Advisers to the Government , if they be to be valuable , must be free to express their opinions. '' Throughout the 1950 's , Dr. Pauling seem a scientist in perpetual motion , pursue research in such area a possible biochemical aspect of schizophrenia , the nature of nucleic acid , and hereditary fault in body chemistry , sickle-cell anemia , that be cause by abnormal molecules. In the early 1950 's , Dr. James D. Watson and Sir Francis Crick , be constantly look over their shoulder at the body of the research of Linus Pauling with a mixture of admiration and apprehension. Dr. Watson and Sir Francis be at the time feverishly try to determine that structure that be crucial to the construction of all living cell -- DNA -- and Dr. Pauling be pursue the same goal. Writing year later in `` The Double Helix , '' a book about the discovery , Dr. Watson describe Dr. Pauling 's presentation of work , show , in part , the helical structure of proteins. The passage reveal not only the high esteem in which Dr. Pauling be hold by his colleague but also the intense envy he sometimes engendered. `` Pauling 's talk be do with his usual flair , '' Dr. Watson wrote. `` The word come out a if he have be in show business all his life. A curtain keep his model hidden until near the end of his lecture , when he proudly unveil his late creation. Then , with his eye twinkle , Linus explain the specific characteristic . . . that make his model uniquely beautiful. `` This show , like all of his dazzling performance , delight the young student in attendance. There be no one like Linus in all the world. The combination of his prodigious mind and his infectious grin be unbeatable. `` Several fellow professor , however , watch this performance with mixed feelings. Seeing Linus jump up and down on the demonstration table and move his arm like a magician about to pull a rabbit out of his shoe make them feel inadequate. If only he have show a little humility , it would have be so much easy to take ! '' Though Dr. Pauling 's early protein research have lay groundwork for the DNA discovery , his theory in that area do not ultimately prove correct. Dr. Watson 's and Sir Francis ' proposition , that the basic genetic strand of DNA take the shape of a double helix , be validate in 1953 , and they be award the Nobel Prize nine year later. A Traditionalist Or a Radical ? All the while , Dr. Pauling be also pursue the cause of peace. He press his attack on the pointlessness of war and what he regard a a major reason for the persistence of war : the hypocrisy and short-sightedness of the world 's politicians. Calling war outmode , he say , `` The major world power have reach a standoff and they will have to give up war a a maneuver of power politics. '' At other time , however , he express doubt that this would happen -- at least not before one , last , major conflagration. After the McCarthy era begin to wane , he remain sensitive to suggestion that he be politically radical. His admirer say any implication that Dr. Pauling be somehow anti-American be unfair , regard him , instead , a the quintessential American. As for radicalism , they contend that , a the son of an Oregon druggist , he be inculcate with the value of small-town life in the Far West and be at heart a traditionalist. Linus Carl Pauling be bear Feb. 28 , 1901 , in Portland , Ore. His independent streak and his insistence on stand by his belief become apparent early in life. He never receive a real high school diploma because he drop out of Washington High School in Portland a a form of protest against take course he regard a pointless. But he gain entrance to Oregon Agricultural College without a high school diploma , and the young man major in chemical engineering be quickly recognize a a prodigy. He receive his bachelor of science degree in 1922 , and the following year he marry Ava Helen Miller. Two year later he receive his Ph.D. from Caltech. In later year , Dr. Pauling 's candid criticism of the United States anger conservative Americans. In 1958 , for example , he appear on a television interview program where he be ask by a reporter how the United States could trust the Soviet Union enough to sign a test ban treaty with them since they have `` break so many agreements. '' `` Well , the United States have break many agreement , too , international agreement and treaty , '' he replied. `` Nations keep agreement , keep their treaty so long a they continue to do them good. '' Around 1960 , he begin a campaign to obtain the signature of scientist oppose to nuclear testing. A total of 11,021 scientist in 49 country sign the petitions. The tone of the petition and it success anger some people in Government , and in 1960 , Dr. Pauling be subpoena to testify before the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee `` on Communist participation in , or support of , a propaganda campaign against nuclear testing. '' `` I do n't know anything '' about Communist activity , '' he say , emphasize that his opposition to nuclear testing be part of his opposition to nuclear war and his longstanding concern about the biological effect of radioactivity. Indeed , Dr. Pauling be so concerned about the harmful effect of radioactivity that he warn that people should `` change dentist '' if theirs recommend annual or semiannual full mouth X-rays for children. He refuse to divulge the name of scientist who have help him circulate the petition call for a nuclear test ban , assert that he fear that the Government would subject his colleague to reprisals. `` My conscience , '' he say , `` will not allow me to protect myself by sacrifice these idealistic young people. I be not go to do it ! '' The Senate subcommittee excuse Dr. Pauling without issue order for him to divulge the name of those who have help him and the matter be drop , thus avoid a showdown. When Dr. Pauling win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1962 , it be the first time anyone have win two Nobel prize since Marie Curie do it in 1903 and 1911 , and unlike Mme. Curie , Dr. Pauling win his alone , not share it with another scientist , a she did. The honor apparently move Washington High , the school that have deny Dr. Pauling a diploma in his youth , to award him an honorary diploma. Receiving Honors And Speaking Out Winning both the Nobel Peace Prize and an honorary diploma from Washington High do nothing to mellow Dr. Pauling or to cause him to rest on his laurels. Indeed , these new distinction seem only to encourage him in his effort to prevent nuclear war. In April 1962 , President and Mrs. Kennedy invite Dr. Pauling and 48 other Nobel laureates to the White House for dinner. It be a most impressive gathering , but Dr. Pauling join it only after picket the White House with member of the Woman 's Strike for Peace , who be protest the resumption by the United States of atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons. The American press be not so sure the Nobel committee have choose the right candidate. In an editorial title , `` The Nobel Peacenik Prize , '' The Herald Tribune in New York say that `` Award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Dr. Pauling , whatever the committee 's reason , inevitably associate this semisacrosanct honor with the extravagant posturing of a placarding peacenik. '' The New York Times , in an editorial , note : `` Professor Pauling have be a persistent and effective agitator in his fight for international peace and against the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons. He have not always be wise in his choice of tactic and he have sometimes be reckless. '' But The Times agree with Gunnar Jahn , chairman of the Norwegian parliamentary committee that choose Dr. Pauling for the prize , that it be reasonable to ask if a nuclear test ban treaty would have be sign without the like of Dr. Pauling. He leave Caltech in 1963 and go to the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions. In 1967 he move to the University of California at San Diego and remain there until 1969 , when he switch to Stanford University. After his 70th birthday , when he be force to retire from Stanford , he set up the Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine. His collaborator in the venture be Dr. Arthur B. Robinson , one of his former student at Caltech. He thus begin a phase of his life that prove to be as controversial a his early period of political activism. Creating a Furor On Vitamin C A scientific debate be touch off by his book `` Vitamin C and the Common Cold , '' publish in 1970 , in which he propose that massive dos of vitamin C could prevent the common cold. `` That suggestion , make by so pre-eminent a scientist a Linus Pauling , cause such a run on vitamin C that pharmacy be unable to maintain adequate supply , '' The Wall Street Journal reported. `` Seldom have a pronouncement cause such a run on anything. '' The debate drone on through the 1970 's , with some scientist support Dr. Pauling and others say that his advice be speculative. By the middle of the decade , a number of controlled experiment have find no cold-preventive benefit from vitamin C. Dr. Pauling , with characteristic independence , then elaborate on his original thesis and suggest that the vitamin might also be of help in treat cancer. This touch off still more spirited response from the scientific community. In 1979 a report compile by a research team from the Mayo Clinic say that experiment on 150 patient with advanced cancer show no benefit from vitamin C. The finding be publish in The New England Journal of Medicine. In addition to the public turmoil about his work , there be private problem , too. Dr. Robinson , the former student , be dismiss from the Linus Pauling Institute. He respond by charge that he , not Dr. Pauling , have do the experimental work at the institute , and that `` Linus have not personally contributed significant research work on vitamin C and human health. '' Among the people who have work with Dr. Pauling in the antinuclear movement be his wife , who have become in her own right a vigorous proponent of peace and human rights. On Dec. 7 , 1981 , after 58 year of marriage and rear four child , she die at the age 77. To the end , Linus Pauling , almost always wear his signature beret , remain irreverent , iconoclastic and outspoken. In 1976 , shortly after he have turn 75 , he address a meeting of the American Chemical Society , which be observe it centennial. He try to predict what might be expect of chemistry and of the world in the century to come. Although he describe himself a `` optimistic , '' he go on to say : `` I be force , a I think about what have happen in the world during my lifetime and a I observe government in their process of make decision , to conclude that the coming century be probably go to be one in which the amount of suffer reach it maximum. '' `` Unless we be wise than we have show ourselves to be in the past , '' he add , `` we chemist and we citizen , we adviser of government and we government official , there will be a catastrophe during the coming century , perhaps a series of catastrophes. The human race might survive. By 2076 , we shall , I hope , have solve these problem , and from then on we may have a world in which every person who be bear will have the opportunity to lead a good life. '' Surviving Dr. Pauling be three son , Dr. Peter of Wales , Linus Jr. of Honolulu , Crellin of Portola Valley , Calif. ; a daughter , Linda Pauling Kamb of Pasadena ; a sister , Pauline Emmett of Salt Lake City ; 15 grandchild and 19 great-grandchildren .