June 14 , 1994 OBITUARY Jan Tinbergen , Dutch Economist and Nobel Laureate , Dies at 91 By PETER PASSELL Jan Tinbergen , the Dutch economist and Nobel laureate whose technical accomplishment and passion for effective public policy have lead some to compare him with John Maynard Keynes , die last Thursday at the age of 91. News of his death be withhold by his family until yesterday to allow his funeral to take place without publicity. Mr. Tinbergen be train a a physicist ( he receive a doctoral degree in the subject from the University of Leyden ) but switch to economics in the late 1920's. During the early 1930 's he be a professor of development planning at the University of Rotterdam and staff member of the Dutch Central Bureau of Statistics , where he apply mathematical technique from the science to the question of why industrial output fluctuate in nonrandom way -- the classic puzzle of the business cycle. As an adviser to the Social Democrats in the Netherlands , he be co-author of a plan for cop with the unemployment that have sweep across Europe with the Great Depression. Econometric Models But Mr. Tinbergen first gain prominence with his pioneer effort to build mathematical model of how whole economy work -- more specifically , how shock like harvest failure or stock market crash ricochet through an economy to influence employment , output and inflation. Others have use mathematics to add intellectual rigor to economic theory. But in the view of Paul Samuelson of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , `` Tinbergen 's combination of analytic versatility and good policy judgment '' give him an enormous advantage over most of his contemporaries. His model of the American economy , produce for the League of Nations in 1938 , be the precursor of the giant computer model now use to forecast everything from the size of next year 's budget deficit to the exchange rate of the Mexican peso. In the decade after World War II he serve a the director of the Dutch Central Planning Bureau and a a key policy adviser to the country 's Social Democrats. Indeed , his reputation a a guru of the democratic left be reportedly so sacrosanct that he be able to broker a wage pact between the Government and the country 's militant labor union that prevent mount inflation. But he remain a world-class theorist and practitioner as well , help to transform economics into a true policy science. One idea generally attribute to Mr. Tinbergen be that government must have at least a many independent policy instrument a policy targets. For example , if a country wish to control both the exchange rate of it currency and the rate of economic growth it must use a minimum of two lever -- say , the supply of money and the rate of deficit spending. That notion come a second nature to the current generation of economist , who be put through their mathematical pace in graduate school. But it be a revelation at the time , an insight that have elude the greats. In 1969 Mr. Tinbergen share the first Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science with the Norwegian Ragnar Frisch. And while his intellectual force a an economist be by this time largely spent , he remain , in the word of James Tobin of Yale , `` a congenital do-gooder , '' who use his fame and prestige to further the cause of rational economic policy in the third world. Failure to help impoverished country , he tell an interviewer during his tenure a the chairman of the United Nations Development Planning Committee , would result in `` mass unemployment , increase internal conflict , disaster. '' Part of his prescription be a sharp increase in development aid , a fashionable view at the time. But he have the foresight to understand that barrier to import from the third world be potentially more important obstacle to growth. The voice of a man whom Mr. Samuelson dub a `` humanist saint '' be not still until his last days. Just a few week ago , Mr. Samuelson report , he receive a letter from the Dutch economist ask him to sign a petition call for an end to the exploitation of children. The cause of Mr. Tinberg 's death and information about his family be not immediately available .