May 20 , 1994 OBITUARY Death of a First Lady ; Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Dies of Cancer at 64 By ROBERT D. McFADDEN Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis , the widow of President John F. Kennedy and of the Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis , die of a form of cancer of the lymphatic system yesterday at her apartment in New York City. She be 64 year old. Mrs. Onassis , who have enjoy robust good health nearly all her life , begin be treat for non-Hodgkin 's lymphoma in early January and have be undergo chemotherapy and other treatment in recent month while continue her work a a book editor and her social , family and other personal routines. But the disease , which attack the lymph node , an important component of the body 's immune system , grow progressively worse. Mrs. Onassis enter the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center for the last time on Monday but return to her Fifth Avenue apartment on Wednesday after her doctor say there be no more they could do. In recent year Mrs. Onassis have live quietly but not in seclusion , work at Doubleday ; join effort to preserve historic New York building ; spending time with her son , daughter and grandchild ; jogging in Central Park ; get away to her estate in New Jersey , at Hyannis , Mass. , and on Martha 's Vineyard , and go about town with Maurice Tempelsman , a financier who have become her close companion. She almost never grant interview on her past -- the last be nearly 30 year ago -- and for decade she have not speak publicly about Mr. Kennedy , his Presidency or their marriage. Mrs. Onassis be surround by friend and family since she return home from the hospital on Wednesday. After she die at 10:15 P.M. on Thursday , Senator Edward M. Kennedy 's office issue a statement say : `` Jackie be part of our family and part of our heart for 40 wonderful and unforgettable year , and she will never really leave us. '' President Clinton say he and his wife , Hillary Rodham Clinton , speak with Mrs. Onassis over the last several day and have be get regular update on her condition. `` She 's be quite wonderful to my wife , to my daughter and to all of u , '' Mr. Clinton said. Although she be one of the world 's most famous woman -- an object of fascination to generation of Americans and the subject of countless article and book that re-explore the myth and reality of the Kennedy year , the terrible image of the President 's 1963 assassination in Dallas , and her made-for-tabloids marriage to the wealthy Mr. Onassis -- she be a quintessentially private person , poise and glamorous , but shy and aloof. They be quality that spoke of her upbringing in the wealthy and fiercely independent Bouvier and Auchincloss family , of mansion life in East Hampton and Newport , commodious apartment in New York and Paris , of Miss Porter 's finishing school and Vassar College and circle that value a woman 's skill with a verse-pen or a watercolor brush , at the rein of a chestnut mare or the center of a whirling charity cotillion. She be only 23 , work a an inquiring photographer for a Washington newspaper and take in the capital night life of restaurant and party , when she meet John F. Kennedy , the young bachelor Congressman from Massachusetts , at a dinner party in 1952. She think him quixotic after he tell her he intend to become President. But a year later , after Mr. Kennedy have win a seat in the United States Senate and be already be discuss a a Presidential possibility , they be marry at Newport , R.I. , in the social event of 1953 , a union of powerful and wealthy Roman Catholic family whose scion be handsome , charm , trendy and smart. It be a whiff of American royalty. And after Mr. Kennedy win the Presidency in 1960 , there be a thousand day that seem to raise up a nation mire in the cold war. There be baby in the White House for the first time in this century , and Jackie Kennedy , the vivacious young mother who show little interest in the nuance of politics , busily transform her new home into a place of elegance and culture. She set up a White House fine art commission , hire a White House curator and redecorate the mansion with early 19th Century furnishing , museum quality painting and objets d'art , create a sumptuous celebration of Americana that 56 million television viewer saw in 1961 a the First Lady , invite America in , give a guided tour broadcast by the three television networks. A Transformation At the White House `` She really be the one who make over the White House into a living stage -- not a museum -- but a stage where American history and art be display , '' say Hugh Sidey , who be a White House correspondent for Time magazine at the time. He say she tell him : `` I want to restore the White House to it original glory. '' There be more. She bring in a French chef and throw elegant and memorable parties. The guest list go beyond prime minister and potentate to Nobel laureate and distinguished artist , musician and intellectuals. Americans gradually become familiar with the whispering , intimate quality of her voice , with the head scarf and dark glass at the taffrail of Honey Fitz on a summer evening on the Potomac , with the bouffant hair and formal smile for the Rose Garden and the barefoot romp with her child on a Cape Cod beach. There be an avalanche of article and television program on her fashion choice , her hair style , her taste in art , music and literature , and on her travel with the President across the nation and to Europe. On a visit to New York , she speak Spanish in East Harlem and French in a Haitian neighborhood. Arriving in France , a stunning understated figure in her pillbox hat and wool coat a she ride with the President in an open car , she enthral crowd that chant `` Vive Jacqui '' on the road to Paris , and later , in an evening gown at a dinner at Versailles , she mesmerize the austere Charles de Gaulle. When the state visit end , a bemused President Kennedy say : `` I be the man who accompany Jacqueline Kennedy to Paris -- and I have enjoy it. '' But the image of Mrs. Kennedy that burn most deeply be those in Dallas on Nov. 22 , 1963 : her lunge across the open limousine a the assassin 's bullet strike , the Schiaparelli pink suit stain with her husband 's blood , her gaunt stun face in the blur of the speeding motorcade , and the anguish later at Parkland Memorial Hospital a the doctor give way to the priest and a new era. In the aftermath , some thing be not so readily apparent : her refusal to change clothes on the flight back to Washington to let Americans see the blood ; her refusal to take sleeping pill that might dull her capacity to arrange the funeral , whose plan she dominated. She stipulate the riderless horse in the procession and the eternal flame by the grave at Arlington. And in public , what the world saw be a figure of admirable self-control , a black-veiled widow who walk beside the coffin to the toll drum with her head up , who remind 3-year-old John Jr. to salute at the service and who look with solemn dignity upon the proceedings. She be 34 year old. A week later , it be Mrs. Kennedy who bestow the epitaph of Camelot upon a Kennedy Presidency , which , while deeply flaw in the mind of many political analyst and ordinary citizen , have for many Americans come to represent something magical and mythical. It happen in an interview Mrs. Kennedy herself request with Theodore H. White , the reporter-author and Kennedy confidant who be then write for Life magazine. The conversation , he say in a 1978 book , `` In Search of History , '' swung between history and her husband 's death , and while none of J.F.K. 's political shortcoming be mention -- story about his liaison with woman be know only to insider at the time -- Mrs. Kennedy seem determine to `` rescue Jack from all these 'bitter people ' who be go to write about him in history. '' She tell him that the title song of the musical `` Camelot '' have become `` an obsession with me '' lately. She say that at night before bedtime , her husband have often play it , or ask her to play it , on an old Victrola in their bedroom. Mr. White quote her a say : `` And the song he love most come at the very end of this record , the last side of Camelot , sad Camelot. . . . 'Do n't let it be forget , that once there be a spot , for one brief shin moment that be know a Camelot. ' `` . . . There 'll never be another Camelot again. '' Mr. White recall : `` So the epitaph on the Kennedy Administration become Camelot -- a magic moment in American history , when gallant men dance with beautiful woman , when great deed be do , when artist , writer and poet meet at the White House and the barbarian beyond the wall be hold back. '' But Mr. White , an admirer of Mr. Kennedy , add that her characterization be a misreading of history and that the Kennedy Camelot never exist , though it be a time when reason be bring to bear on public issue and the Kennedy people be `` more often right than wrong and astonishingly incorruptible. '' Five year later , with image of her a the grieve widow fade but with Americans still curious about her life and conduct , Mrs. Kennedy , who have move to New York to be near family and friend and have get into legal dispute with photographer and writer portray her activity , shatter her almost saintly image by announce plan to marry Mr. Onassis. It be a field day for the tabloid , a shock to member of her own family and a puzzlement to the public , give Camelot-Kennedy mystique. The prospective bridegroom be much short , and more than 28 year old , a canny businessman and not even American. Moreover , her brother-in-law , Robert Kennedy , have be assassinate earlier in the year , and the prospective marriage even pose a problem for the Vatican , which hint that Mrs. Kennedy might become a public sinner. Negotiating A Marriage There be additional unseemly detail -- a prenuptial agreement that cover money and property and children. But they be marry in 1968 , and for a time the world saw a new , more outgoing Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis. But within a few year there be report fight over money and other matter and account that each be be see in the company of others. While the couple be never divorce , the marriage be widely regard a over long before Mr. Onassis die in 1975 , leave her a widow for the second time. Jacqueline Bouvier be bear on July 28 , 1929 , in East Hampton , L.I. , to John Vernou Bouvier 3d and Janet Lee Bouvier. A sister , Caroline , know a Lee , be bear four year later. From the beginning , the girl know the trapping and appearance of considerable wealth. Their Long Island estate be call Lasata , an Indian word mean place of peace. There be also a spacious family apartment at 765 Park Avenue , near 72d Street , in Manhattan. Although the family live well during the Depression , Mr. Bouvier 's fortune in the stock market rise and fell after huge loss in the crash of 1929. The marriage also foundered. In 1936 , Mr. and Mrs. Bouvier separate , and their divorce become final in 1940. In June 1942 , Mrs. Bouvier marry Hugh D. Auchincloss , who , like Mr. Bouvier , be a stockbroker. Mr. Auchincloss have be substantially well able to weather the Great Depression ; his mother and benefactor be the former Emma Brewster Jennings , daughter of Oliver Jennings , a founder of Standard Oil with John D. Rockefeller. From her early day , Jacqueline Bouvier attract attention , a much for her intelligence a for her beauty. John H. Davis , a cousin who write `` The Bouviers , '' a family history , in 1993 , describe her a a young woman who outwardly seem to conform to social norms. But he write that she possess a `` fiercely independent inner life which she share with few people and would one day be partly responsible for her enormous success. '' Mr. Davis say Jacqueline `` display an originality , a perspicacity , '' that set her apart , that she write credible verse , paint and become `` an exceptionally gift equestrienne. '' She also `` possess a mysterious authority , even a a teen-ager , that would compel people to do her bidding , '' he said. Jacqueline seem shy with individual but would flower in large group , dazzle people. `` It be this watertight , interior suffisance , couple with a need for attention , and correspond love of be at center stage , which puzzle her relative so and which in time would alternately charm and perplex the world , '' Mr. Davis wrote. Her natural gift could not save her from the effect of her parent ' divorce , and after it occur , Mr. Davis say , her relative notice her `` tendency to withdraw frequently into a private world of her own. '' John Vernou Bouvier Jr. , her grandfather , write a history of the Bouvier family call `` Our Forebears. '' The history indicate that the Bouviers be descend from French nobility. Stephen Birmingham , who write the biography `` Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis '' ( Grosset & Dunlap ) , call the grandfather 's book `` a work of massive self-deception. '' Mr. Davis call it `` a wishful history. '' From the documentation at hand , the Bouviers , who originate in southern France , have apparently be draper , tailor , glovers , farmer and even domestic servants. The very name Bouvier mean cowherd. The family 's original immigrant , Michel Bouvier , leave a troubled France in 1815 after serve in Napoleon 's defeated army and settle in Philadelphia. A man of considerable industry , he start a a handyman and later become a furniture manufacturer and , finally , a land speculator. After the divorce , Jacqueline remain in touch with her father , but later she also spend a great deal of time with the Auchinclosses , who have a large estate in Virginia call Merrywood and another in Newport , R.I. , call Hammersmith Farm. When she be 15 , Jacqueline pick Miss Porter 's School in Farmington , Conn. , an institution that in addition to it academic offering emphasize good manner and the art of conversation. Its student simply call it Farmington. She become popular with classmate as well a with young men who visit Farmington from Hotchkiss , Choate , St. Paul 's and other elite preparatory school in the Northeast. Her teacher regard her a an outstanding girl , but she once fret to a friend , `` I 'm sure no one will ever marry me , and I 'll end up be a housemother at Farmington. '' When she graduate , her yearbook say her ambition in life be `` not to be a housewife. '' Just a Jacqueline pick Miss Porter 's , she also pick Vassar College , which she enter in 1947 , not long after she be name `` Debutante of the Year '' by Igor Cassini , who write for the Hearst newspaper under the byline Cholly Knickerbocker. He describe her a a `` regal brunette who have classic feature and the daintiness of Dresden porcelain. '' He note that the popular Miss Bouvier have `` poise , be soft-spoken and intelligent , everything the lead debutante should be. '' Romance With Paris Starts in College She do well at Vassar , especially in course on the history of religion and Shakespeare , and make the dean 's list. The late Charlotte Curtis , who become society editor of The New York Times and who be a student at Vassar with Miss Bouvier , once write that Miss Bouvier be not particularly thrill with be in Poughkeepsie , N.Y. , and refer to her college a `` that damn Vassar , '' even though the invitation continue to flow in from young men at Harvard , Yale , Princeton and other lead universities. In 1949 , for her junior year , she decide to apply to a program at Smith College for a year study in France. She love Paris , and when the year be up she decide not to return to Vassar to finish her bachelor 's degree but to transfer to George Washington University in Washington. If this new institution lack some of the elan and elegance of Vassar , it save grace in her eye be it location , in the capital. She receive a bachelor 's degree from George Washington University in 1951. While she be finish the work for her degree , she win Vogue magazine 's Prix de Paris contest , with an essay on `` People I Wish I Had Known , '' beat out 1,279 other contestants. Her subject be Oscar Wilde , Charles Baudelaire and Sergei Diaghilev. Her victory entitle her to spend some time in Paris , write about fashion for Vogue , but she be persuade not to accept the prize. C. David Heymann , author of `` A Woman Named Jackie '' ( Lyle Stuart , 1989 ) say Hugh Auchincloss have fear that if Jacqueline have return to Paris and stay there for any length of time , she might not have ever return to the United States. Her mother come to agree with him. They may have be right ; Mrs. Onassis would later recall her stay in Paris a a young woman a `` the high point in my life , my happy and most carefree year. '' In Washington , she meet and be briefly engage to John Husted , a stockbroker. Through her stepfather 's contact , she be able to get a job a a photographer at The Washington Times-Herald , earn $ 42.50 a week. At the paper , she be an inquire photographer assign to do a light feature in which people be ask about a topic of the day ; their comment appear with their photos. Among the question she ask be : `` Are men braver than woman in the dental chair ? '' and , `` Do you think a wife should let her husband think he 's smart than she be ? '' She continue her work for The Washington Times-Herald and she enjoy Washington 's restaurant and parties. It be at one such party , give in May 1952 by Charles Bartlett , Washington correspondent for The Chattanooga Times , that she meet Mr. Kennedy , who would soon capture the Senate seat hold by Henry Cabot Lodge. Some time afterward , they begin see each other , and the courtship gather momentum. In 1953 , while she be in London on assignment , Mr. Kennedy call her and proposed. Their engagement be not immediately make public by the Kennedys who fear that it might have head off a flattering article due to appear in the Saturday Evening Post entitle , `` Jack Kennedy -- Senate 's Gay Young Bachelor. '' The article appear in the June 13 issue and the engagement be announce on June 25. They be marry Sept. 12 , 1953 , at Hammersmith Farm in Newport. John Bouvier , whose feeling about Mr. Auchincloss have be restrain , do not show up at the wedding , and the bride be give away by Mr. Auchincloss. The couple honeymoon in a villa overlook Acapulco Bay in Mexico. She later write a long letter to her father , forgive him , but he become withdrawn in the year that followed. He die in 1957. In the late 1950 's , Mrs. Kennedy confide to friend that she tire of listen to `` all these boring politician , '' Mr. Heymann write , but she do her duty a the wife of a Senator. There be trial in her personal life. In 1955 she suffer a miscarriage , and in 1956 she have a stillborn child by Caesarean section. Mr. Kennedy , who have only narrowly miss win the Democratic Vice Presidential nomination in 1956 , begin to worry that they might not be able to have children. They move into a rented Georgetown home after Mr. Kennedy sell his Virginia home to his brother , Robert. But in 1957 Caroline Bouvier Kennedy be born. Three year later she give birth to John F. Kennedy Jr. A third child , Patrick Bouvier Kennedy , live only 39 hour and die less than four month before President Kennedy 's assassination in 1963. The Royal Aura Of the Kennedys After Mr. Kennedy be elect President in 1960 , the mystique and aura around Mrs. Kennedy begin to grow rapidly , especially after she and her husband make the state visit to France in 1961. Her elegance and fluency in French capture their heart , and at a glittering dinner at Versailles she seem to quite mesmerize President de Gaulle , a man not easy to mesmerize , as well a several hundred exuberant French people name Bouvier , all of them apparently claim some sort of cousinhood. At a luncheon at the Elysee Palace , Theordore C. Sorensen write in `` Kennedy '' that President de Gaulle have turn to Mr. Kennedy and say , `` Your wife know more French history than any French woman. '' Returning home by way of London , where she receive more approbation , Mrs. Kennedy soon begin to make her plan to redecorate the White House , a building that she find lack in grace. She ask the advice of Henry Francis du Pont , curator of the Winterthur Museum in Wilmington , Del. , and set about collect authentic piece from the early 1800's. She find some object in the White House basement ; others be donate by private citizen who , like Mrs. Kennedy , be interested in the project. Some people say she go too far when she find some antique Zuber wallpaper on a wall in nearby Maryland , have it remove and rehung in the White House at a cost of $ 12,500 , even though the original French printing block be still in existence and she could have have the same design on new paper for much less. The social skill she acquire at East Hampton and Farmington be much in evidence. Her party be nothing short of spectacular. When the president of Pakistan visit Washington , he hear an orchestra , take a boat ride , and have poulet chasseur , accompany by couronne de riz Clamart and , for dessert , some framboise a la creme Chantilly at a table grace by silverware , glassware and china from Tiffany and Bonwit Teller. Operatic and popular voice , the cello of Pablo Casals , string trio and quartet and whole orchestra fill the room with glorious sound. `` I think she cast a particular spell over the White House that have not be equal , '' say Benjamin C. Bradlee , former executive editor of The Washington Post , who be a friend of the Kennedys. `` She be young. My God , she be young. She have great taste , a sense of culture , an understanding of art. She bring people like Andre Malraux to the White House who never would have go there. As personality , they really transform the city. '' Letitia Baldridge , who be Mrs. Kennedy 's chief of staff and social secretary in the White House , remember her sense of humor. `` She have such a wit. She would have be terrible if she have n't be so funny. She imitate people , head of state , after everyone have leave a White House dinner. Their accent , the way they talked. She be a cutup. Behind the closed door , she 'd dance a jig. '' Before she leave the White House , she place a plaque in the Lincoln bedroom that say , `` In this room live John Fitzgerald Kennedy with his wife , Jacqueline , during the 2 year , 10 month and 2 day he be President of the United States -- Jan. 10 , 1961 - Nov. 22 , 1963. '' Mrs. Richard M. Nixon have the plaque remove after she and her husband move in in 1969. To some , Jacqueline Kennedy seem to fall from grace a her year of mourn ended. She be photograph wear a miniskirt ; she be escort to lunch and dinner and various social gathering by prominent bachelor , include Frank Sinatra , Marlon Brando and Mike Nichols ; she tour the Seville Fair on horseback in 1966 and , in a crimson jacket and a rakish broad-brimmed black hat , toss down a glass of sherry. `` I know , '' she say , `` that to visit Sevilla and not ride horseback at the fair be equal to not come at all. '' To some Americans she be no longer just the grieve widow of their martyred President ; she be young , attractive and she clearly want to live her life with a certain brio. But Mrs. Kennedy find she also need more privacy. The more private she become the more curious the public seem about her conduct. New Yorkers might be consider the most private of all Americans ; urban apartment-dwelling grant anonymity to those who seek it. And so she move to New York in 1964 to an apartment at 1040 Fifth Avenue. It be near the home of family and friend and also not far from the Convent of the Sacred Heart at 91st Street and Fifth Avenue , where Caroline be to attend school. New York be not all she have hop it would be. For one thing , the photographer Ron Galella seem to be everywhere she go , take thousand of photograph of her. The preparation and publication of `` The Death of a President , '' William Manchester 's detailed account of the assassination of President Kennedy , turn into an unexpected battle for Mrs. Kennedy that may have cost her some popularity. Mr. Manchester , whose work be admire by President Kennedy , ask for and receive permission from the Kennedy family to do an authorized , definitive work on the assassination. His publisher , Harper & Row , agree to turn over most of their profit to the Kennedy Library. Mrs. Kennedy , in a rare departure from her usual practice , agree to be interviewed. Although Mr. Manchester do not stand to profit from the book itself , he do arrange to have it serialize in Look Magazine , start in the summer of 1966 , for which he would be pay $ 665,000. Long Fight For Privacy Mrs. Kennedy become angry. From her perspective , Mr. Manchester be commercially exploit her husband 's assassination. At one point , she try to get an injunction in New York State Supreme Court to stop the publication of the book , either by Look or by Harper & Row. The case be settle in 1967 , with Mr. Manchester agree to pay a large share of his earnings to the Kennedy Library. Mrs. Onassis never create an oral history , associate say , and her refusal to give interview have leave little for the record that she would have approved. Tapes of two interview with her -- Mr. White 's shortly after the assassination in Dallas and Mr. Manchester 's for his book `` Death of a President '' -- be keep under seal at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library in Boston. Mr. Manchester 's interview , 313 minute on tape , be seal for 100 year and be schedule to be open in 2067. The interview by Mr. White be to be unseal a year after Mrs. Onassis 's death. William Johnson , chief archivist at the library , say he believe the interview contain material that the author do not use in their book and might prove useful to historians. Her silence about her past , especially about the Kennedy year and her marriage to the President , be always something of a mystery. Her family never speak of it ; out of loyalty or trepidation over her wrath , her close friend shed no light on it and there be nothing authoritative to be learn beyond her inner circle. The next year , Mr. Onassis and Mrs. Kennedy announce that they would be married. It have be five year since the President 's death. She tell a friend , `` You do n't know how lonely I 've been. '' The ceremony be hold on Oct. 20 , 1968. She then become Mistress of Skorpios , the Aegean island that Mr. Onassis own , and hold sway over a palace with more than 70 servant on call. There be four other location where he have homes. Mr. Davis observe that immediately after her marriage , Mrs. Onassis become more cheerful and outgo but it be not to last. Within a few year , there be report that Mr. and Mrs. Onassis be arguing. He be again see in Paris , din at Maxim 's with the soprano Maria Callas. Mrs. Onassis be see in New York in the company of other escorts. Mr. Onassis issue a public statement that do little to dampen the rumor-mongering. `` Jackie be a little bird that need it freedom as well a it security and she get them both from me , '' he said. `` She can do exactly a she please -- visit international fashion show and travel and go out with friend to the theater or anyplace. And I , of course , will do exactly a I please. I never question her and she never question me. '' The marriage continue to founder. Mr. Onassis persuade the Greek Parliament to pass legislation to prevent her from get the 25 percent portion of his estate that Greek law reserve for widows. When he die in 1975 , his daughter Christina be at his side ; Mrs. Onassis be in New York. There be a lawsuit and when it be settle , she receive $ 20 million -- far less than the $ 125 million or more that she might have received. Mrs. Onassis ' begin her career in publishing in 1975 , when her friend Thomas Guinzburg , then the president of Viking Press , offer her a job a a consult editor. But she resign two year later after Mr. Guinzburg publish -- without tell her , she say later -- a thriller by Jeffrey Archer call `` Shall We Tell the President , '' which imagine that her brother-in-law , Senator Edward M. Kennedy , be President of the United States and describe an assassination plot against him. In 1978 , Mrs. Onassis then take a new job a an associate editor at Doubleday under another old friend , John Sargent , and be instal at first in a small office with no windows. It help , she say , that Nancy Tuckerman , who have be her social secretary at the White House , already have a job there ; the two work closely for the next 15 years. At Doubleday , where she be eventually promote to senior editor , Mrs. Onassis be know a a gracious and unassuming colleague who have to pitch her story at editorial meeting , just a everyone else did. She avoid the industry 's active social scene , probably because she have so little need to expand her network of contacts. She often eat lunch at her desk , for instance , avoid the publishing lunchtime crowd at restaurant like the Four Seasons and 44. She work three day a week -- Doubleday never reveal what day they be , for fear the information would attract celebrity-watchers -- and take long vacation in Martha's Vineyard every summer. But she be very productive , edit 10 to 12 book a year on perform art and other subjects. Books she publish included Bill Moyers 's `` Healing and the Mind '' ; Michael Jackson 's `` Moonwalk '' ; and Edvard Radzinsky 's `` The Last Tsar : The Life and Death of Nicholas II. '' Her list also testify to her eclectic taste and to her first-rate contacts. She publish a number of child 's book by the singer Carly Simon , a friend and Martha 's Vineyard neighbor. Her love of Egypt inspire her , among other thing , to bring the Cairo Trilogy , `` Palace Walk , '' `` Palace of Desire '' and `` Sugar Street '' by Naguib Mahfouz , the Nobel Prize winner from Egypt , to Doubleday , where they be publish in translation. Admiration From Her Writers In an industry where editor often have little time for their author , Mrs. Onassis 's spoke admiringly of her curiosity , her interest in their work and her great attention to detail. `` Working with her be extraordinary , '' say Jonathan Cott , a contributing editor at Rolling Stone who have publish several book on Egypt with Mrs. Onassis , the most recent be `` Isis and Osiris : Rediscovering the Goddess Myth. '' It seem daunt to work with an editor who be also a public figure , but Mr. Cott say he be soon put at his ease. In edit session at Mrs. Onassis 's home and office , he say , she would make notation on every page of his manuscript , draw from her own knowledge of Egypt and her extensive collection of Egyptian literature and history books. `` She have an incredible sense of literary style and structure , '' he said. `` She be intelligent and passionate about the material ; she be an ideal reader and an ideal editor. '' John Russell , a former art critic for The New York Times and a longtime friend of Mrs. Onassis , remember her a a shrewd judge of people , but one who be always mindful of their feeling and be careful not to hurt them if her judgment be negative. `` She have an absolutely unfailing antenna for the fake and the fraud in people , '' he said. `` She never show it when meet people , but afterwards she have quite clearly sized people up. She never in public let people know she do not like them. People always go away think , 'She quite like me , yes , she be impress by me. ' It be a very endearing quality. '' Mrs. Onassis give a rare interview to Publishers Weekly , the industry trade magazine , and it be on the subject of publishing. She agree to the interview , Mrs. Onassis tell the reporter , only on the condition that he use no tape recorder , take no photograph and ask no question about her personal life. In the interview , in typically self-deprecating style , she say she have join the profession because of a simple love of books. `` One of the thing I like about publishing be that you do n't promote the editor -- you promote the book and the author , '' she said. In the year follow Mr. Onassis 's death , she build a 19-room house on 375 acre of ocean-front land on Martha 's Vineyard. She spend considerable time there , as well a in Bernardsville , N.J. , where she rent a place and rode horses. Mrs. Onassis do not marry again. In the last few year , Mr. Tempelsman , a Belgian born industrialist and diamond merchant , have be her frequent companion. The couple , who meet about seven year ago , summer together on Martha 's Vineyard and visit her horse farm. She tell a friend that she admire his `` strength and his success. '' Mrs. Onassis be survive by her daughter , Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg ; a son , John F. Kennedy Jr. ; her sister , Lee Radziwill Ross , and three grandchild , Rose Kennedy , Tatiana Celia Kennedy and John Bouvier Kennedy Schlossberg .