June 24 , 1995 OBITUARY Dr. Jonas Salk , Whose Vaccine Turned Tide on Polio , Dies at 80 By HAROLD M. SCHMECK Jr. Dr. Jonas Salk , who in the 1950 's develop the first successful vaccine against poliomyelitis , the viral illness that have grip a fearful nation with image of child doom to death or paralysis , die yesterday at Green Hospital in the La Jolla section of San Diego. He be 80. The cause be heart failure , say a spokeswoman for the Salk Institute , which Dr. Salk have establish to carry out medical research. As an intense 40-year-old scientist , Dr. Salk become a revered medical figure upon the announcement in 1955 that his new polio vaccine be safe and effective. It be a turning point in the fight against a disease that condemn some victim to live the rest of their life in tanklike breathing machine call iron lung and place sunny swimming hole off limit to child because of parent ' fear of contagion. The Salk vaccine change medical history , prevent many thousand of case of cripple illness and save thousand of lives. In the United States , the vaccine soon end the yearly threat of epidemic and the toll of paralysis and death. In the five year before 1955 , when mass inoculation with the vaccine begin , case of paralytic polio average about 25,000 a year in the United States. A few year after polio vaccination become routine , the annual number of case drop to a dozen or so , sometimes fewer. In 1969 not a single death from polio be report in the nation , the first such year on record , and now the disease be on the verge of be eradicate worldwide. Success against polio be a critical event in the dawning of the modern era of vaccine development , which have be mark by effective preventative against a broad range of other infectious disease , include influenza , measles , mumps and rubella. Paralytic polio be know as early a the time of ancient Egypt. In America it be never a widespread a disease a influenza or measles. In the 1920 's , 30 's and 40 's , however , outbreak of the disease come , increasingly , in frighten epidemics. Many child and young adult die , be cripple or paralyzed. Some expect the decade of the 1950 's to be even bad , and in the epidemic of 1952 , the bad on record , nearly 58,000 case of polio be report in the United States ; more than 3,000 died of the disease. The turn point in the battle against polio be probably the day , April 12 , 1955 , when Dr. Thomas Francis Jr. of the University of Michigan announce at a news conference in Ann Arbor the successful result of a field trial in which 440,000 American child have be inject with Dr. Salk 's new vaccine. The $ 7.5 million project be the climactic effort of the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis , which later change it focus to birth defect and become the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. In the light of early , small test project , the polio vaccine have seem likely to be safe and highly effective. The big field trial , which involve more than one million people include it control population , prove that it be worthy of the nation 's hopes. The news cause a public sensation probably unequaled by any health development in modern times. The chairman of the board of director of the American Medical Association , Dr. Dwight H. Murray , call it `` one of the great event in the history of medicine. '' Later that spring , President Eisenhower praise Dr. Salk a a `` benefactor of mankind. '' But the successful development of a polio vaccine also lead to a long scientific debate over the relative merit of Dr. Salk 's version , which use kill virus , and one develop later by Dr. Albert Sabin that use live virus. The Sabin vaccine , which be take orally , eventually entirely supplant the Salk vaccine in the United States , and a sharp rivalry persist between the two scientist throughout their lives. The pinnacle of public notice and acclaim that Dr. Salk reach on the occasion of the successful field trial come to him through long year of hard work and a dedication to a principle that be less familiar then than it be now. `` My ambition , '' he say during an interview in 1980 , `` be to bring to bear on medicine a chemical approach. `` I do that by chemical manipulation of virus and chemical way of thinking in biomedical research , '' he said. Jonas Edward Salk be bear in New York City Oct. 28 , 1914 , the eldest of three son of Daniel B. and Doris Press Salk. Dr. Salk like to point out that he be bear into one of the decisive epoch of human history and into the beginning of a golden age of science. His father be a worker in New York 's garment district. The family live in the Bronx , where Jonas go to grade school , then to the Townsend Harris High School for exceptionally promising students. He graduate from City College in 1934 and enrol in New York University 's medical school. After his freshman year he take time out for a one-year research fellowship in chemistry. Later , while still in medical school , he serve a research fellowship in a virus laboratory , where he be first introduce to a field that have never interested him , but that later shape his entire life. He receive his medical degree from N.Y.U. in 1939. That same year he marry Donna Lindsay , a social worker who have recently graduate from Smith College. The marriage end in divorce in 1968. In 1942 Dr. Salk go to the University of Michigan on a National Research Council fellowship to study the influenza virus with Dr. Francis , an internationally know virologist. That work lead him , after little more than a decade , to the conquest of polio. Dr. Salk have become interested in the influenza virus while in medical school. With Dr. Francis he help develop commercial vaccine against flu , work consider an important contribution to the war effort. Many Americans could remember the devastate flu pandemic of 1918 , in which an estimate 20 million people die throughout the world. When the University of Pittsburgh expand it virus research program after World War II , Dr. Salk join their staff and soon become director of virus research. There his scientific interest move gradually from influenza virus to the urgent effort to develop a polio vaccine. There have be effort to produce such a vaccine before the war , but some have cause paralysis instead of prevent it. Those failure have dampen the enthusiasm of many public health experts. But polio seem to be on the increase , and some mean of cop with the disease be acutely needed. Dr. Salk 's concentrated effort against polio begin when he be part of a team assign to survey polio viruses throughout the United States to see how many variety could be link to the disease in humans. The research show unequivocally that a vaccine would have to include three distinct type of polio virus , but no more. Many other virus know to be relate to polio could be ignore in fight the disease. The three polio virus strain be know originally a the Brunhilde , Lansing and Leon strain but be now know simply a polio virus type I , II and III. A crucial factor in the ultimate success of polio vaccine be earlier research at Harvard University on method of grow virus in animal-cell tissue culture in the laboratory. Dr. John Enders of Harvard later win a Nobel Prize for the work. The Salk vaccine virus be grow on monkey kidney cell , then inactivate , or kill , by formaldehyde. Dr. Salk be often describe by associate a a hard-working , tough-minded scientist who be coolly confident of the point he have hammer out in painstaking scientific experiments. During his research on polio vaccine he be conscious of be a young scientist , sometimes a dissenter from the wisdom of his more experienced elders. Some eminent virologist insist , right up to the first field trial , that the kill virus vaccine should be withhold in favor of a live virus vaccine concurrently under development. The live virus vaccine , develop by Dr. Sabin , be first license in 1961. The live virus be modify in the laboratory so that it stimulate immunity but cause no damage. Shortly after the Salk vaccine come into use , a manufacturing error leave live virus in one batch. Several case of polio result and use of the vaccine be halt until the explanation be find and corrective measure taken. After the polio vaccine be prove successful in the field trial , Dr. Salk become a hero to the public. An opinion poll rank him roughly between Churchill and Gandhi a a revered figure of modern history. But among scientist , both Dr. Salk and his vaccine be somewhat controversial. The usefulness of the vaccine have be vindicate in many country and among million of user , but the debate over the relative merit of the Salk vaccine and the Sabin vaccine have continued. The live virus vaccine promise lifetime immunity , while the original Salk vaccine do not. But Dr. Salk never lose faith in kill virus polio vaccine and continue to champion it cause all his life. On several occasion he point out that the live virus vaccine do , on rare occasion , produce the disease as well a immunity , while the killed virus vaccine , properly make , carry no such risk. For his part , Dr. Sabin , who die in 1993 at age 86 , be still exasperate at the mention of Dr. Salk 's name late in life. `` It be pure kitchen chemistry , '' Dr. Sabin say a few year ago of his rival 's work. `` Salk do n't discover anything. '' After the success of 1955 , Dr. Salk continue his research at the University of Pittsburgh , but there be many other demand on his time , include his membership on an expert advisory panel of the World Health Organization on virus diseases. In 1963 he fulfil a dream he have harbor for almost a decade , the creation of a special institute where scientist and brilliant people in other field could think , do research and work toward goal important to humanity. The Salk Institute for Biological Studies , the embodiment of that dream , open that year with the financial support of the March of Dimes. It be house in a stark but architecturally grand group of concrete building , design by Louis Kahn , on a piece of land overlook the Pacific Ocean that be donate by the city of San Diego. The group of fellow invite to work there included several winner of the Nobel Prize , an award that elude Dr. Salk , although many other honor be confer upon him in his lifetime. These include the Albert Lasker Award , the Robert Koch Medal , the Mellon Institute Award , a United States Presidential Citation and a Congressional Gold Medal. He be name a Chevalier de la Legion d'Honneur by the French Government and be award honorary degree from university in the United States , Britain , Israel , Italy and the Philippines. He be never , however , elect to the National Academy of Sciences of the United States. At the institute that bore his name , Dr. Salk continue biomedical research on a wide range of subject , include the immunological aspect of multiple sclerosis and cancer. Over the last decade , he turn his attention to AIDS , try to develop an immunization that would help prevent those already infect with H.I.V. , the AIDS virus , from develop full-fledged AIDS. Scientists have be test such an experimental immunization on hundred of people. The president of the Salk Institute , the Nobel laureate Dr. Francis Crick , say today that Dr. Salk `` have be the personal hero of million of men and women. '' `` Few have make one discovery that have benefit humanity so greatly , '' Dr. Crick said. `` Jonas be a man who , right to his last day , be actively in pursuit of another. '' In late year , Dr. Salk broaden his horizon to include painting , poetry and write on theme a much philosophical a scientific. In 1990 , he say in an interview that he believe the universe have be kaleidoscopically unfold accord to certain deeply ingrained principles. `` There be a dynamism , a dynamic force that propel u into the future , '' he said. And a few highly evolved people like himself , he add , be bless with the ability to tap into the current. They can sense which way evolution be go and hurry it along. `` I have come to recognize evolution not only a an active process that I be experience all the time but a something I can guide by the choice I make , by the experiment I design , '' he said. `` I have always sense this a the next evolutionary step. It 's not something of which a great many be capable , but some are. '' Dr. Salk come to believe that it be the force of evolution that guide him in the early 1950 's to reject the common wisdom and develop a polio vaccine use kill virus instead of live ones. He have a lively sense of history and a conviction that he live at the crucial time at which the graph of world population growth change it slope , a harbinger of future leveling-off and decline. In 1970 he marry the French painter and former mistress of Picasso , Francoise Gilot , an event that create a tabloid sensation. Her influence strengthen his interest in and knowledge of the world of art. Dr. Salk 's scientific publication number more than 100. His book include `` Man Unfolding '' in 1972 and `` The Survival of the Wisest '' in 1973. In addition to his wife , he be survive by three son from his first marriage , Peter , of San Diego , Jonathon , of Los Angeles and Darrell , of Seattle .