August 25 , 1995 OBITUARY Alfred Eisenstaedt , Photographer of the Defining Moment , Is Dead at 96 By CHARLES HAGEN Alfred Eisenstaedt , the German photographer whose pioneering image for Life magazine help define American photojournalism , die on Wednesday while vacation on Martha 's Vineyard in Massachusetts. He be 96 and live in Manhattan. Over a career that last more than 50 year , Mr. Eisenstaedt become famous a the quintessential Life photographer , produce more than 2,500 picture story and 90 cover for the magazine. He be especially renowned for his ability to capture memorable image of important people in the news , include statesman , movie star and artists. Still , his most famous photograph be not of a celebrity , but of the joyful celebration in Times Square on V-J Day , Aug. 14 , 1945 , when Japan 's surrender bring the end of World War II. The picture , which show an exuberant American sailor kiss a nurse in a dancelike dip , sum up the euphoria many Americans felt a the war come to a close. The photograph be publish on the cover of Life and quickly become a classic example of photojournalism. In recent month it have be widely reproduce in conjunction with the 50th anniversary of the war 's end. Another of Mr. Eisenstaedt 's best-known image be a 1933 shot of Joseph Goebbels , the Nazi propaganda minister , glare at the camera. `` Here be the eye of hate , '' the photographer write later. Far more lighthearted be a series of photograph from 1963 of the awestruck face of Parisian child watch a puppet show. A shot of the bare foot of an Ethiopian soldier in 1935 during the Italian invasion of that country make emphatically clear the uneven term of the conflict. Born in 1898 in Dirschau in Prussia ( now Tczew , Poland ) , Mr. Eisenstaedt move with his family to Berlin in 1906. He serve in the German Army in World War I and in the 1920 's begin work a a freelance photojournalist while employ a a button and belt salesman. He turn to photography full-time in 1929 , when he be assign to cover the Nobel Prize ceremony in Stockholm for a German publication. Six year later , after Hitler 's rise to power , he emigrate to the United States. In 1936 , his extraordinary involvement with Life began. One of the four original photographer hire by the magazine ( the others be Margaret Bourke-White , Thomas McAvoy and Peter Stackpole ) , Mr. Eisenstaedt soon distinguish himself with candid shot take with a Leica camera. He have begin use the unobtrusive 35-millimeter model in Germany in 1929 , four year after it invention. He become know at the magazine for his ability to bring back visually strike picture from almost any assignment. Among the many celebrity he photograph be figure as diverse a Churchill , John F. Kennedy , Charlie Chaplin , Marilyn Monroe , George Bernard Shaw and Marlene Dietrich. His mastery of the Leica allow him to capture his subject in unguarded moment , create a sense of intimacy. In a picture from 1947 , for example , the physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer puff on a cigarette a he stand in front of a blackboard cover with mathematical formulas. Though he be not consider a great visual stylist , Mr. Eisenstaedt be almost invariably able to communicate the essence of a story in a single image. The photographer 's job , he once write , be `` to find and catch the storytelling moment , '' and time and again he succeeded. The story his picture tell be often touch by a gentle humor. A 1930 shot at a waiter ' school in St. Moritz , Switzerland show a headwaiter in black tie and tail ice-skating with a full tray of glass rest delicately on his fingertips. In a picture take in 1950 in Ann Arbor , Mich. , a high-stepping drum major in shiny boot and tall shako lead a ragtag parade of child across a campus lawn. Cornell Capa , founder of the International Center of Photography in New York City and a longtime photographer for Life , praise Mr. Eisenstaedt 's skill a a photojournalist. `` He know exactly what he be look for in a story , and where to position himself '' to get the most telling picture , he say yesterday. `` His use of the 35-millimeter camera be superb , '' add Mr. Capa , who organize three show of Mr. Eisenstaedt 's work at the International Center of Photography. `` And he appreciate light ; he hardly ever use artificial light. His influence be with all of us. '' Called Eisie by his friend , Mr. Eisenstaedt be legendary for his energy and enthusiasm. He keep an office at Life up to his death and visit the magazine nearly every day. `` He tell me , if I do n't go , I 'll die , '' say Gordon Parks , the film director and photographer , who work with Mr. Eisenstaedt at Life for more than 20 years. David Friend , director of photography and new medium at Life , say that Mr. Eisenstaedt 's work `` embody what Life magazine stand for. '' `` His photograph and his personality be upbeat in spirit , '' he said. `` What we remember of Eisie 's work be the joyous moments. '' In response to Mr. Eisenstaedt 's death , Life have open a home page on the Internet devote to his image , include his cover shot and outtake from various other story , Mr. Friend said. It can be reach at http : //pathfinder.com./Life/lifehome.html. Mr. Eisenstaedt be the author of many book , include `` Witness to Our Time '' ( 1966 ) , `` The Eye of Eisenstaedt '' ( 1969 ) , `` Eisenstaedt 's Guide to Photography '' ( 1978 ) and `` Eisenstaedt : Germany '' ( 1981 ) . His work be include in exhibition throughout the United States and Europe. He receive many award and honor , include the Presidential Medal of Arts and the Infinity Master of Photography Award , give by the International Center of Photography. In 1951 he be name `` Photographer of the Year '' by the Encyclopedia Britannica and the University of Missouri School of Journalism. He continue to work until shortly before his death. In 1993 he photograph President Clinton , Hillary Rodham Clinton and their daughter , Chelsea , on Martha 's Vineyard. When he die , Mr. Eisenstaedt 's name `` be on the tip of everyone 's tongue , '' Mr. Capa say , in part because of the renew attention to his photograph of the V-J Day celebrations. `` He be on the top of the mountain , '' he said. Kathy Kaye , a South African whom Mr. Eisenstaedt meet and marry in 1949 , die in 1972. No immediate family member survive .