February 2 , 1995 OBITUARY George Abbott , Broadway Giant With Hit After Hit , Is Dead at 107 By MARILYN BERGER George F. Abbott , who open on Broadway in 1913 and do n't close for more than 80 year , die on Tuesday at his home in Miami Beach. He be 107. The cause be a stroke , say his wife , Joy. Probably no one in this century bring more verve and excitement to the American stage than the versatile man who be know to the theater world a Mr. Abbott , and to the rest of the world a Mr. Broadway. As a playwright , director , actor , producer and play doctor who could make a faulty script work , George Abbott be virtually synonymous with the history of Broadway : `` Jumbo , '' `` Broadway , '' `` Pal Joey , '' `` High Button Shoes , '' `` Where 's Charley , '' `` Call Me Madam , '' `` Wonderful Town , '' `` Pajama Game , '' `` On Your Toes , '' `` Damn Yankees , '' `` Fiorello ! , '' `` A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. '' He direct these show , and he be involve , in one capacity or another , in more than 120 production on and off Broadway and on the road. In some year , he have three hit run at once. Gilbert Millstein of The New York Times write that `` on the basis of sheer frightening volume alone , an easily defensible argument can be drum up that no live individual , or possibly even dead , have contribute more to the Broadway theater in the capacity of actor , director , producer , co-producer , author , co-author and play doctor , than George Abbott. '' This accolade be write in 1954 , when Mr. Abbott still have more than 40 year of work ahead of him. 'Pygmalion Complex' He prefer work with young , unknown actors. `` You 're always good off if you can do without a star , '' he once said. `` Besides save money , it save wear and tear on the nervous system. '' He confess to what he call a `` Pygmalion complex , '' and in his desire to mold young career he give the first big break to Shirley MacLaine , Jose Ferrer , Shirley Booth , Butterfly McQueen , Jack Gilford , Jean Stapleton , Carol Burnett , Tom Bosley and at least 40 others work for Equity minimum. He also take a chance on many other virtual unknown : Jerome Robbins , Bob Fosse , Harold Prince , Garson Kanin , Betty Comden , Adolph Green and a stranger to Broadway by the name of Leonard Bernstein. Along the way he win virtually every theatrical award as well a many other honor : He share the Pulitzer Prize for `` Fiorello ! '' ( which also win the Drama Critics Circle Award and two Tony Awards ) ; win Tonys for `` Pajama Game '' in 1955 , `` Damn Yankees '' in 1956 and `` A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum '' in 1963 ; be give a special Tony for a career of distinguished achievement in the theater , and receive the Handel Medallion from New York City and , in 1982 , the Kennedy Center Lifetime Achievement Award. Mr. Abbott say he refuse to be greatly elate at such honor : `` Perhaps it 's a defense ; if you do n't get too emotional when they like you , you will be less likely to get too emotional when they don't. '' Halfway into his 99th year he telephone his secretary , Celia Linder , who have work for him since 1935 , to tell her that he be send her two play he have write between round of golf. In 1989 , when he be 102 year old , he be the co-director of one of them , `` Frankie , '' off Off Broadway. When the actress Maureen Stapleton , a friend of his , be tell he be still play golf at that age , she say : `` If you tell me he have win a swimming contest I would n't be surprised. He be full of beans. '' One day in the late 1980 's he be play golf and fell on the fairway. When he do n't get up , his wife lean over and start to shake him. `` Get up , George , get up , '' she pleaded. `` Do n't just lay there. '' After a moment he open his eyes. `` Lie there , '' he said. Mrs. Abbott say that a week and a half before his death he be dictate revision to the second act of `` Pajama Game , '' with a revival in mind. Last year , at a mere 106 year old , he walk down the aisle on open night of the `` Damn Yankees '' revival and receive a stand ovation. He be heard say to his companion , `` There must be somebody important here. '' Few Intermissions In His Working Life The `` Abbott touch '' -- which rescue flop and create hit -- be often frenetic. In an Abbott production people do n't stand there , they do something. Doors open and shut , curtain rise and fell , everything happen quickly. Even offstage his life be an Abbott production. He would come home from the rehearsal of one show to rewrite another , or leave the stage of one musical to cast the next. His energy and optimism be a tribute , perhaps , to the abstemious life he advocated. `` With the slight encouragement , '' he write in his 1963 autobiography , `` Mister Abbott , '' `` I will launch forth on a violent argument in favor of health. I do not think burn the candle at both end cast a lovely light ; on the contrary , I be of the opinion that it be a dandy way to get a nervous breakdown. How can anyone enjoy anything in the wide , wide world with a headache or a queasy stomach ? '' He be an anomaly in the flamboyant world of Broadway and be , by his own admission , a puritanical and exact escort. He never smoke and barely tolerate it in others. He rarely take a drink , and then it be only wine at dinner. He be careful to eat three square meal a day. His advice to anyone who ask , be : `` Have fun. And go home when you 're tired. '' Mr. Abbott -- 6 foot 2 inch tall and ramrod straight , hair slick back , look more like a preacher than a producer -- would always appear for rehearsal precisely on time in a brown or gray business suit and tie. He never remove the tie. He be know for say only what be necessary , not a word more. For Mr. Abbott , the play be everything , and nothing be permit to get in it way. What Mr. Abbott impart to a show be taste , artistic judgment and a sense of how much to do or not to do. When he be ask what he bring to the player , he say , `` I make them say their final syllables. '' He reserve his most acid criticism for the Method actor : `` He have struggle successfully at such difficult task a pretending that he be a tree in full bloom , but he have never learn to say a final 't. ' '' Once , when an actor ask , `` What be my motivation ? , '' Mr. Abbott be say to have reply , `` Your job. '' With actor who have no method at all he would provide painstaking directions. `` Walk here , count one-two-three-four , say the line and count seven , kiss the girl and count eight , walk off the stage. '' Nobody Would Use His First Name If he have one problem throughout his life on Broadway , he say , it be his failure to get people to call him `` George. '' `` I do n't feel either formal or formidable , but I guess I must be , '' he write in his autobiography. Stanley Prager , one of the star of `` Pajama Game , '' once say he plan to name his first child after Mr. Abbott : he say he would call him Mr. Abbott Prager. He once tell his protege Bobby Griffith to call him George. `` I certainly will , Mr. Abbott , '' Mr. Griffith replied. Although Mr. Abbott make million in the theater , he be say to be just about the most tightfisted man on Broadway. An actor say Mr. Abbott 's idea of a treat be to invite you out to a Child 's restaurant , order coffee and then suggest go Dutch. He admit he be a `` tightwad. '' What he never admit to be his private charity , and he never mention that he be the `` angel '' who back show when no one else would. When Harold Prince , then an underling in the Abbott office , want to produce `` Pajama Game , '' he have trouble get backer because no one connect with the production be well known. Bob Fosse be the choreographer , Richard Adler the composer , and a 20-year-old from Virginia by the name of Shirley MacLaine be one of the dancers. It be Mr. Abbott who finally come through with the money. When Mr. Prager be call before the House Committee on Un-American Activities during the McCarthy era to answer question about Communist penetration into show business , he be sure he be go to be fire from `` Pajama Game. '' Mr. Abbott come through again , take that moment to sign him to a long-term contract. George Francis Abbott be bear on June 25 , 1887 , in Forestville , N.Y. , the first of three child of George Burwell and May MacLaury Abbott. By his own admission , the young George Abbott be `` a frightful liar , '' always make up stories. It be only later , he say , that he realize `` this tendency to fantasy be something which could be use to make money. '' When he be 11 year old the family move to Cheyenne , Wyo. , where a a Western Union messenger , young George be dispatch to deliver beer to the town 's red light district. Later , during summer , he work on a ranch , and for the rest of his life be fond of remind people that he be once a real cowboy. Because he be a tall , gangling boy he walk with a stoop so he would look shorter. A lackluster student , he be finally send to Kearney Military Academy in Nebraska , which , by his own account , cure his poor posture as well a what he call his tendency toward juvenile delinquency. A Writing Prize In the Year 1912 Just after the turn of the century , the family move back East to Hamburg , N.Y. , near Buffalo , which enable the stage-struck teen-ager to take the trolley car to the theater. After graduate from the University of Rochester , where he play football but be soon draw to the Dramatic Club , Mr. Abbott enrol in a playwriting course at Harvard. That year -- 1912 -- Mr. Abbott win a $ 100 prize for his play `` The Man in the Manhole. '' By 1913 , Mr. Abbott think he be ready for Broadway , but he be rebuff month after month. He finally land a job a a drunken college youth in `` The Misleading Lady , '' and with a princely salary of $ 45 a week he think he could finally marry Ednah Levis , the woman he 'd be see for more than five years. But work be not steady , and it be n't until two year later , when he be hire by John Golden a a combination office boy , assistant cast director , associate playwright and protege at $ 15 a week , that he begin to make a living in New York. The role of Tex , a roister cowboy in `` Zander the Great , '' be the turn point in his career. He be select a 1 of the 10 best performer of 1923 , and his job-hunting day be over. But he soon become increasingly involve in rewrite script and eventually in production. In 1926 , `` Broadway , '' which he write with Philip Dunning and also direct , become Mr. Abbott 's first smash hit. The next year he give a young actor from the Yiddish theater his first role on the English-speaking stage , in `` Four Walls. '' The actor , Muni Weisenfeld , go on to become Paul Muni. In 1927 , the Abbott production of `` Coquette '' star an actress whom he call `` the weep wonder of the world. '' Her name be Helen Hayes. When the talkie arrive , Mr. Abbott be lure to Hollywood , and between 1928 and 1958 work on 11 movie , include `` All Quiet on the Western Front '' and the film version of `` Where's Charley , '' `` The Pajama Game '' and `` Damn Yankees. '' But he always long to get back to Broadway. He write , `` Hollywood be jealous of Broadway because it be well , and Broadway be jealous of Hollywood because it be richer. '' He Made Stars As Well a Hits For more than half a century , begin in 1920 , there be hardly a year in which there be not at least one George Abbott production on Broadway , and sometimes there be as many a five. In 1932 , the Ben Hecht-Charles McArthur play `` Twentieth Century '' begin a string of hit , among them `` Jumbo '' ( 1935 ) , a circus story with song by Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart , book by Hecht and MacArthur , and production by Billy Rose. New star be make in Mr. Abbott 's play : Shirley Booth and Garson Kanin in `` Three Men on a Horse '' ( 1935 ) ; Eddie Albert and Jose Ferrer in `` Brother Rat '' ( 1936 ) ; Desi Arnaz and Van Johnson in `` Too Many Girls '' ( 1939 ) ; Gene Kelly in `` Pal Joey '' ( 1940 ) . In 1938 , `` What a Life , '' a comedy about the problem of adolescence direct by Mr. Abbott , bring America a teen-ager who become a staple of radio , Henry Aldrich. George Abbott have one daughter , Judith , who be a casting director. She die in 1984. His first wife die in 1930 , and he later recall that at the age of 43 -- for the first time in his life -- he start collect telephone numbers. In 1946 he marry Mary Sinclair. They be divorce in 1951. In 1983 , when he be 96 , he marry Joy Valderrama , more than 40 year his junior , whom he have meet 25 year before when she be work a a Hawaiian dancer in a New Jersey nightclub. During the cold month they live in Miami , where they frequently play golf. They keep a summer home in Merriewold Park , Forestburgh , N.Y. In addition to his wife , he be survive by a sister , Isabel Juergens ; two granddaughter , Amy Clark Davidson and Susan Clark Hansley ; a grandson , George Clark , and six great-grandchildren. Mr. Abbott dislike funeral -- he even skip his mother 's and his father 's -- and write in his autobiography : `` I have see to it that no one must come and be sad when I die. Later on , if some of my friend should talk about me , or remember something funny or interesting that have happen to u , that will be all the obsequies I desire. '' History Encapsulated in a Career George Abbott make his protean presence felt in the theater a an actor , writer , producer and director in more than 120 production on and off Broadway and on the road. Here be a highly selective sampling. The Misleading Lady 1913 ; Three Wise Fools 1918 ; Processional ; The Fall Guy ; A Holy Terror 1925 ; Love 'Em and Leave 'Em ; Broadway ; Chicago 1926 ; The Great Magoo ; Twentieth Century 1932 ; Three Men on a Horse ; Jumbo ; Boy Meets Girl 1935 ; On Your Toes ; Brother Rat 1936 ; Room Service 1937 ; All That Glitters ; The Boys From Syracuse 1938 ; Pal Joey 1940 ; Best Foot Forward 1941 ; Beat the Band ; Sweet Charity 1942 ; On the Town 1944 ; Billion Dollar Baby 1945 ; Beggar 's Holiday 1946 ; Barefoot Boy with Cheek ; High Button Shoes 1947 ; Look Ma , I 'm Dancin ' ; Where 's Charley 1948 ; Call Me Madam 1950 ; A Tree Grows in Brooklyn 1951 ; Wonderful Town ; Me and Juliet 1953 ; Pajama Game 1954 ; Damn Yankees 1955 ; New Girl in Town 1957 ; Once Upon a Mattress ; Fio rello ! 1959 ; Tenderloin 1960 ; A Call on Kuprin ; Take Her , She 's Mine 1961 ; A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum ; Never Too Late 1962 ; Fade Out -- Fade In 1964 ; Flora , the Red Menace 1965 ; How Now , Dow Jones 1967 ; The Education of Hyman Kaplan 1968 ; Norman Is That You ; Not Now , Darling 1970 Correction : February 3 , 1995 , Friday An obituary yesterday and in some copy on Wednesday about the director and producer George Abbott misstate the original name of the actor Paul Muni. It be Muni Weisenfreund , not Muni Weisenfeld. An obituary on Thursday and in some copy on Wednesday about the director and producer George Abbott refer incompletely to the creator of the Broadway musical `` The Pajama Game. '' The music and lyric be write by Richard Adler and Jerry Ross , not by Mr. Adler alone .