November 5 , 1995 OBITUARY Assassination in Israel ; Yitzhak Rabin , 73 , an Israeli Soldier Turned Prime Minister and Peacemaker By MARILYN BERGER Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel , who be shoot dead yesterday at age 73 , be a soldier turn statesman who lead his country into uncharted territory to make peace with the Palestinians and put an end to the war , bloodshed and terrorism that have plague his country since it founding. It be General Rabin , the Commander in Chief of Israel 's armed force in 1967 , who have lead the lightning strike that capture broad swath of Arab territories. Twenty-six year later , on Sept. 13 , 1993 , it be Prime Minister Rabin who reluctantly extend his hand to Yasir Arafat , leader of the Palestinian Liberation Organization , to put a symbolic seal of approval on an accord that would lead to the return of much of that territory and to Palestinian self-rule on the Israeli-occupied West Bank and the Gaza Strip. In an extraordinary ceremony on the South Lawn of the White House , one that few have ever expect to see , Mr. Rabin come face-to-face with Mr. Arafat -- the man who have be revile for decade by Israelis a the mastermind behind one attack after another on their people , the man with whom the following year he and his Foreign Minister , Shimon Peres , would share the Nobel Peace Prize. `` The time for peace have come , '' Mr. Rabin declared. `` We , the soldier who have return from battle stain with blood , we who have see our relative and friend kill before our eye , . . . we who have come from a land where parent bury their child , we who have fight against you , the Palestinians -- we say today in a loud and clear voice : Enough of blood and tears. Enough. '' Speaking as much to his own people a to the astonished world that be watch , Mr. Rabin explain in mournful tone how painful and how necessary it be for Israel to take this step. `` It 's not so easy -- either for myself a a soldier in Israel 's war nor for the people of Israel. . . . It be certainly not easy for the family of the victim of the war 's violence , terror , whose pain will never heal , for the many thousand who defend our life and their own and have even sacrifice their life for our own. For them this ceremony have come too late. '' But he say Israel be not seek revenge. It be seek peace. The tragedy be that some of Mr. Rabin 's own people be seek revenge. As Mr. Rabin come close to achieve his goal of peace , a wide schism open within the Israeli populace. Much of the bitterness of those oppose to make peace with Israel 's historic enemy be direct at Mr. Rabin , and he become the soldier who pay the ultimate price to make peace. He have be unrelenting in his drive to institutionalize that peace. Only a month ago , Mr. Rabin take part in another White House ceremony to mark the beginning of another withdrawal from the West Bank. This time the handshake with Mr. Arafat be less reluctant and the peace process be well established. A New Generation Brings a New Vision Mr. Rabin be the only one of Israel 's eight Prime Ministers to have be bear in the land of Palestine , a Sabra who have not experience the long history of attack on European Jewry and the horror of the Holocaust. With his election , Israel turn over it leadership from the father to the son and he appeal for a new vision. On take office in 1992 for his second term a Prime Minister , Mr. Rabin say it be time for Israel to jettison it siege mentality. `` No longer be it true that the whole world be against u , '' he said. He accept his election a a mandate to make peace. One of his first step be to put a freeze on all new construction in the occupied territories. For their part , the Palestinians be ready to deal. With the end of the cold war and the collapse of the Soviet Union , the P.L.O. be deprive of diplomatic , financial and military support. At the same time , the P.L.O. be reel from the loss of contribution from wealthy Arab state anger by Mr. Arafat 's support of Iraq during the 1991 Persian Gulf war. To achieve agreement with the Palestinians , Mr. Rabin follow the lead of Foreign Minister Peres , a Labor Party colleague and longtime political rival. They have fight for decade over the leadership of the party and the country , but they join force in the search for peace. To the opposition that brand Mr. Rabin a `` traitor , '' the Prime Minister reply that peace must be make with enemy , not with friends. Mr. Rabin have be at the center of the major event in his nation 's history for five decades. In 1948 , he fight in the siege of Jerusalem during Israel 's war of independence. In 1967 , a Chief of Staff of the Israeli Army for the three year before the June war , he bring to fight strength the formidable force that roll over three Arab army in six days. Later , a Ambassador to the United States he help assure Israel a steady supply of sophisticated weapons. In his first term a Prime Minister he negotiate the crucial and lasting disengagement of Israeli and Egyptian force in the Sinai , which pave the way for the Camp David accords. And a Defense Minister , in 1986 , he preside over the withdrawal of Israeli force from Lebanon although he continue to respond with force to terrorist attacks. Never Charismatic , But a Man to Be Trusted As a boy grow up in Palestine , Mr. Rabin want to be an agronomist , and attend the Kadoorie Agricultural School in Galilee where he win the High Commissioner 's Gold Medal a the best student in Palestine. But like many patriotic young people of his time he give up his childhood ambition and join the Palmach , the elite strike force of the Haganah underground Jewish army , saw action in World War II , and develop into a brilliant military tactician. He also develop into a politician. Israelis trust him for his single-minded devotion to the good of the country and he be repeatedly ask to accept high government positions. But he be the antithesis of the convivial party man. Taciturn , introspective , control , intensely private , he have almost no close adviser and reach decision independently , often announce them in an authoritarian manner that alienate the party leadership. He speak in a deep monotone that make his public personality seem colorless , and even in private he be almost devoid of humor. Mr. Rabin be bear in Jerusalem on March 1 , 1922. His father , Nehemiah , who come from a poor family in Ukraine , have escape from Czarist Russia and go to Palestine by way of Chicago and St. Louis.In Palestine , he become a trade union organizer in the labor movement of David Ben-Gurion. His mother , Rosa Cohen , bear to a well-to-do family in Gomel , Russia , be active in politics and become the dominant influence on the young Rabin. Theirs be a home where young Yitzhak be teach that public service be a duty and where , he remember , `` It be a disgrace to speak about money. '' He be 7 year old when Arabs begin attack Jewish settlements. Later , during the 1936 Arab riot and general strike , he be at the Khadouri school where he be train in the use of arm by Yigal Allon , who be later to become his commander and his mentor. Five year later , during World War II , Moshe Dayan , then a young commander in the Haganah , invite Mr. Rabin to join the Palmach. As part of the British invasion of Greater Syria , which be in the hand of the Axis power , Mr. Rabin be send across the border. The young in his unit , it be his job to climb up telephone pole to cut the wire so the collaborationist Vichy French force could not call up reinforcements. In June 1945 , just after the end of the war in Europe , Mr. Rabin command a daring raid to liberate about 200 illegal Jewish immigrant hold by the British in a camp at Athlit , on the Mediterranean just south of Haifa. The exploit be say to be the prototype for a similar raid in the novel `` Exodus , '' and Mr. Rabin the prototype for Ari Ben Canaan , the hero , play in the movie version by Paul Newman. But the shy Mr. Rabin always insist that he be not the fictional Ari Ben Canaan. Mr. Rabin be arrest by the British and imprison for six month in a camp in Gaza. Soon after he be release the British turn the problem of Palestine over to the United Nations , which , in 1947 , vote for partition into a Jewish and an Arab state. The Arabs attack , and a hostility intensify between the Jews and the Arabs , Mr. Allon , then the commander of the Palmach , appoint Mr. Rabin his deputy. During the 1948 Israeli war of independence , Mr. Rabin command the Har-El Brigade , a makeshift unit that fail to take Jerusalem for Israel but keep open the vital supply line between Jerusalem and the sea. Later , with the rank of colonel , Mr. Rabin serve on the southern front against Egyptian forces. When Mr. Rabin disclose in his 1979 memoir his role in force 50,000 Arab civilian to leave their home at gunpoint during the war of independence , there be a furor in Israel , where official have long deny that Arab civilian be push out of their lands. In the middle of the war , on Aug. 23 , 1948 , Mr. Rabin marry Leah Schlossberg , who have join the Palmach and serve in his battalion. They have two child , a son , Yuval and a daughter , Dalia , and three grandchildren. They all survive him. Mr. Rabin 's first venture into diplomacy come when he be send to the island of Rhodes a part of the delegation to the Israeli-Egyptian armistice talk in 1949. In 1953 , have finally commit himself to a career in the army , Mr. Rabin go to England to study at the British Staff College at Camberley. Back home he go on to hold a series of high post in the Israeli Army , mainly involve manpower training , and be name chief of staff in 1964. He become Israel 's top expert on military matters. Even a he rise through the rank , he become know a the man who who know more than the generals. Eventually , he become a general himself , a lieutenant-general. The Army that fight the six-day war in 1967 be essentially Mr. Rabin 's army. Shab'tai Teveth , professor of history at Tel Aviv University , say , `` It be the army he train , plan , build and arm in his three year a chief of staff. '' But , he add , `` There his glory ends. '' His `` glory '' end when , on the eve of the fighting , Mr. Rabin suffer a nervous collapse. The Terrible Burden Of Leadership in War In his memoir , Mr. Rabin write of go to see Mr. Ben-Gurion , then in retirement. He go in search of encouragement but instead get a dressing-down. Mr. Ben-Gurion , he write , scold him for mobilize the reserve after President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt close the Straits of Tiran. `` You have lead the state into a grave situation , '' Mr. Ben-Gurion tell him. `` We must not go to war. We be isolated. You bear the responsibility. '' Mr. Ben-Gurion 's word reverberate in his ear a he work himself into a state of physical and mental exhaustion. He recover in time to carry out his duty during the war , but some observer think he be not function normally and be only be `` prop up '' so that the troop and the people would not lose confidence in their leader. Whatever the source of Mr. Rabin 's difficulty , the result achieve by his army be astonishingly clear. At the end of the war Hebrew University confer on him an honorary doctorate. In a modest , occasionally poetic speech , Mr. Rabin say he accept the honor not for himself but a the representative of an army of civilian who have never be train for conquest , of battle-hardened paratrooper who have lean on the stone of the Wailing Wall and weep at the capture of the Old City of Jerusalem. He speak about his army , but perhaps even more about himself. `` Our Sabra youth , and most certainly our soldier , '' he say , `` do not tend to be sentimental and they shrink from any public show of feeling. But the strain of battle , the anxiety which precede it , and the sense of salvation and of direct confrontation with Jewish history itself crack the shell of hardness and shyness and release wellspring of emotion and stirring of the spirit. '' In 1968 , Mr. Rabin be appoint Ambassador to the United States , where he become know a an effective advocate for Israel and a master at procure sophisticated American weapons. In his five year a Ambassador he develop a close relationship with Henry A. Kissinger , President Richard M. Nixon 's national security adviser and later his Secretary of State. Mr. Kissinger call on him for intelligence about troop movement in the Middle East and even consult him on Vietnam. Shortly after he return to Israel in 1973 , Mr. Rabin enter national politics for the first time. Then , on Yom Kippur , while the country be in the middle of an election campaign , Syria and Egypt launch a surprise attack. The country 's leader -- Prime Minister Golda Meir and her Minister of Defense , Mr. Dayan -- be hold responsible for the country 's lack of preparedness in that October war , but the Labor Party win enough vote to form a new Government. Mr. Rabin win in his first attempt at election and be give the post of Minister of Labor. But within a month of form her Cabinet , Mrs. Meir resign and the party turn to Mr. Rabin , who have be out of power at the time of the war and be therefore untainted by the heavy casualties. Diplomatic Departures , And a Final Legacy In 1974 , Mr. Rabin become Israel 's fifth Prime Minister and , at 52 , it youngest. `` The time have come , '' he say , `` for the son of the founder of the state to take over their role. '' Mr. Rabin become the first Israeli Prime Minister to make an official visit to West Germany. He also say he meet secretly with King Hussein of Jordan six time in an unsuccessful effort to open peace negotiation with him. His Government weather the Arab oil embargo and the skyrocket price of oil , and negotiate a second Sinai disengagement with the Egyptians , but only after incur the wrath of Mr. Kissinger when it turn down one of his early proposals. The Secretary of State return to Washington in March 1975 and persuade President Ford to undertake a `` reassessment '' of American policy toward Israel , a move see a a threat to withhold arm shipments. Mr. Rabin have be ready to negotiate what he call `` a piece of land for a piece of peace , '' but he believe the plan Mr. Kissinger bring back during his shuttle trip between Cairo and Jerusalem demand maximum Israeli territorial concession in exchange for minimal Egyptian political concessions. Mr. Schiff , of the newspaper Haaretz , say that Mr. Rabin have be `` absolutely right to say 'no ' to the Americans , '' and in do so to win in the long run. `` It cause a rift between the Egyptians and the Syrians. This be a important a cornerstone on the road to Camp David a the Yom Kippur War. '' Five month later he accept what he call a `` risk for peace '' and sign an Egyptian-Israeli disengagement agreement. During his term a Prime Minister , Mr. Rabin face down terrorist who hijack an Air France plane en route from Tel Aviv to Paris. At first , he be see a weak because he wait several day before dispatch an assault group to Entebbe , Uganda , where the plane and almost 100 Israeli citizen be be hold hostage. When he finally approve a military operation and , when the daring raid succeed , he be hail a a hero. But in 1977 , his image be damage when an Israeli newspaper disclose that he and his wife have violate currency law by maintain bank account in the United States after he have return home. At first he lie about how much money be in the account and , finally , he be force to step down , open the way for the victory of Menachem Begin and the Likud party. Mr. Rabin accept responsibility for the bank account , which have be use mainly by his wife. The Rabins pay a fine impose by an Israeli court , but six month after Mr. Rabin resign , the currency regulation be rescinded. Mr. Rabin bounce back from the scandal not because he be a skilled politician , but because he be not a politician at all. He return to government a Minister of Defense in a Labor-Likud national unity coalition that preside over the Israeli pullout from Lebanon. His be the policy of the `` iron fist , '' promise swift retaliation for guerrilla raid against Israelis withdraw from southern Lebanon. Sitting in his office at the Defense Ministry one evening in 1987 , he look back at his life with satisfaction ting with disappointment. His disappointment , he say , be in what he saw a a loss of national spirit , the failure of the creator of the state to pass on their sense of commitment. Of his most satisfying moment he have no doubt -- the liberation and unification of Jerusalem in 1967. But there be more , a legacy deliver that day in 1993 when he lead the country to come to term with the Palestinians , `` to live together on the same soil in the same land. '' He acknowledge the risk. But in go to Washington to endorse the agreement , he say , `` We have come to try to put an end to the hostility so that our child , our child 's child , will no longer experience the painful cost of war . ''