December 21 , 1996 OBITUARY Carl Sagan , an Astronomer Who Excelled at Popularizing Science , Is Dead at 62 By WILLIAM DICKE Carl Sagan , an astronomer who become one of the nation 's best-known scientist by enthusiastically convey the wonder of the universe to million of people on television and in book , die yesterday at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. He be 62 and live in Ithaca , N.Y. The cause be pneumonia , a complication of the bone marrow disease myelodysplasia , say Susan Edmonds , a spokeswoman for the cancer center. He have be suffer from the ailment for two year and receive a bone marrow transplant at the center in April 1995. Since then , he have return several time for treatment. Dr. Sagan be David Duncan Professor of Astronomy and Space Sciences and director of the Laboratory for Planetary Studies at Cornell University in Ithaca. Building on a foundation of respect scientific research , he become a best-selling and Pulitzer Prize-winning author and a telegenic popularizer of scientific research and space exploration. Bruce Alberts , president of the National Academy of Sciences , say yesterday , `` Carl Sagan , more than any contemporary scientist I can think of , know what it take to stir passion within the public when it come to the wonder and importance of science. '' A Longtime Belief In Extraterrestrial Life A persistent theme in his work be one practically guarantee to capture public interest : the possibility that life exists elsewhere in the universe. He become an expert on the subject at a time when it be consider highly speculative , and prod other scientist to consider it seriously. Civilized life must be common in the universe , he say , because star be so abundant and the Sun be a fairly typical star. Dr. Sagan ( pronounced SAY-gun ) be probably best know a the host of `` Cosmos , '' a 13-part series on public television in 1980 that explore everything from the world of the atom to the vastness of the universe , and show him look awestruck a he contemplate the heavens. With an audience of 400 million people in 60 country , it be consider the most widely view short-term public television series in history until it be eclipse in 1990 by a series on the Civil War. He receive critical acclaim as well a substantial financial award for the series , which make him an international celebrity. The book he write to accompany it , also call `` Cosmos , '' be on the best-seller list for more than a year , and a company he form , Carl Sagan Productions , promote such thing a `` The Music of the Cosmos '' with RCA Records. Dr. Sagan be also familiar to television viewer from 26 appearance in the 1970 's and 80 's on `` The Tonight Show '' with Johnny Carson , who be know to don a black wig and perform a Sagan impersonation. He and other comic delight in parody Dr. Sagan 's reference to `` billion and billion '' of star in the universe. In an interview in 1977 , Dr. Sagan say he turn down several hundred request to give lecture every year but always try to accept invitation to appear on `` The Tonight Show. '' `` The show have an audience of 10 million people , '' he said. `` That 's an awful lot of people , and those be n't people who subscribe to Scientific American. '' Defending his activity in popularize science , Dr. Sagan say in another interview : `` There be at least two reason why scientist have an obligation to explain what science be all about. One be naked self-interest. Much of the funding for science come from the public , and the public have a right to know how their money be be spent. If we scientist increase the public excitement about science , there be a good chance of have more public supporters. The other be that it 's tremendously exciting to communicate your own excitement to others. '' While his leap from the scientific ivory tower into the television studio may have irritate some of his colleague , there can be no doubt that Dr. Sagan be a serious and productive scientist. Early Observations Of Venus and Mars When he be still in his 20 's , he deduce that mysterious radio emission from Venus be cause by surface temperature around 900 degree Fahrenheit and that the planet have a crushing atmosphere. Years later , observation by a Soviet spacecraft substantially confirm his conclusions. Early in his career , Dr. Sagan offer a new interpretation of color variation observe on Mars. Some scientist say the variation could be seasonal change in some form of plant life , but Dr. Sagan and a colleague , James Pollack , say that shift in Martian dust cause by wind storm could explain the observation. The theory be confirm by a Mariner spacecraft in the 1970's. Dr. Sagan be deeply involve in NASA 's mission to explore Mars and other planets. He be a member of the imaging team for the voyage to Mars by Mariner 9 , a spacecraft launch in 1971 that be the first to orbit another planet ; it transmit 7,300 photograph of the Martian surface. He help select the landing site for Viking 1 and Viking 2 , the first spacecraft to land successfully on Mars , in 1975. He also work on Pioneer 10 , which be launch in 1972 and be the first spacecraft to investigate an outer planet when it fly by Jupiter , and Pioneer 11 , which be launch in 1973 and fly by Jupiter and Saturn. Dr. Sagan be a member of the scientific team that send the Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft to the outer solar system. The spacecraft , which visit Jupiter in 1979 and then Saturn , be the first to fly by Uranus , in 1986 , and Neptune , in 1989 , and take the first picture of the solar system from beyond Pluto , in 1990. As a member of the Voyager team , Dr. Sagan conceive the idea of put a message aboard the Voyager spacecraft on the chance that extraterrestrial being will come upon it centuries from now , somewhere on it endless journey beyond the solar system. The message , which he call a `` bottle cast into the cosmic ocean , '' be in the form of a 12-inch copper phonograph record insert in an aluminum protective jacket attach to the outside of the spacecraft. It include greeting from people in many language and from whale , a 12-minute sound essay , 90 minute of music and a series of blip to be decode into black-and-white and color photographs. He also carry out extensive research relate to the origin of life , and be a member of a team that raise the specter that dust and smoke throw up by explosion and fire in a nuclear war could lead to a devastate cooling of the atmosphere , or `` nuclear winter. '' Reaching for Stars As a Boy in Brooklyn Carl Sagan be bear on Nov. 9 , 1934 , in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn , where his father be a cutter in a clothing factory. He become interested in the star a a child , read science fiction avidly , and say that by the time he be 8 he have arrive at the idea that there must be life on planet orbit other stars. `` I do n't make a decision to pursue astronomy , '' he said. `` Rather , it just grab me , and I have no thought of escaping. '' He like to recall that when he be 12 , his grandfather ask him what he want to do when he grow up. `` An astronomer , '' he said. `` Fine , '' his grandfather say , `` but how will you make a living ? '' Carl Sagan go off to the University of Chicago , from which he receive bachelor 's degree in 1954 and 1955 , a master 's degree in physic in 1956 and a Ph.D. in astronomy and astrophysics in 1960. He accept a fellowship at the University of California at Berkeley , become an assistant professor of astronomy at Harvard University , and then join the Cornell faculty in 1968. He become a full professor in 1971. Dr. Sagan write more than 600 scientific paper and popular article , and more than a dozen book , range outside his specialty ; once he even turn to fiction. In The New York Times Book Review , the novelist James Michener describe Dr. Sagan 's book `` Cosmos '' a `` a cleverly write , imaginatively illustrate summary of his geological , anthropological , biological , historical and astronomical rumination about our universe , '' and add , `` His style be iridescent , with light flash upon unexpected juxtaposition of thought. '' In 1978 , Dr. Sagan win the Pulitzer Prize for `` The Dragons of Eden : Speculations on the Evolution of Human Intelligence. '' In a review in The Times , John Leonard call the book `` a delight '' and describe Dr. Sagan a `` a scientific Robert Redford , handsome and articulate and all business. '' In 1966 , Dr. Sagan collaborate with a Soviet scientist , I. S. Shklovskii , on a book , `` Intelligent Life in the Universe , '' which show that some scientist be willing to speculate about this topic. A Literary Lion With Cosmic Interests Dr. Sagan set off a stir in the literary world by sign a $ 2 million contract with Simon and Schuster for his first novel , `` Contact , '' a work of science fiction publish in 1984 that also be a best seller. With his wife , Ann Druyan , he be work a co-producer of a movie base on the book ; it be to be release by Warner Brothers next year. Among his other book be `` The Cosmic Connection : An Extraterrestrial Perspective '' ( Doubleday , 1973 ) ; `` Other Worlds '' ( Bantam , 1975 ) ; `` Broca's Brain : Reflections on the Romance of Science '' ( Random House , 1979 ) ; `` The Cold and the Dark : The World After Nuclear War '' ( W. W. Norton , 1984 ) , with several co-authors ; `` Comet '' ( Random House , 1984 ) , write with Ms. Druyan ; `` Shadows of Forgotton Ancestors : A Search for Who We Are '' ( Random House , 1992 ) , also write with Ms. Druyan ; `` Pale Blue Dot '' ( Random House , 1994 ) , and `` The Demon-Haunted World : Science a a Candle in the Dark '' ( Random House , 1995 ) . Dr. Sagan hold many position , among them the chairmanship of the Division for Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society. He also be editor in chief of Icarus , a journal of planetary study , and president of the Planetary Society. He receive numerous award , include the National Academy of Sciences ' high honor , the Public Welfare Medal , and the NASA Medal for Distinguished Public Service twice. His first two marriage , to Lynn Margulis and Linda Salzman , end in divorce. Besides his wife , he be survive by a sister , Cari Sagan Greene of League City , Tex. ; four son , Dorion , of Amherst , Mass. , Jeremy , of Ithaca , Nicholas , of Los Angeles , and Sam , of Ithaca ; a daughter , Alexandra , of Ithaca , and a grandchild .