June 1 , 1996 OBITUARY Timothy Leary , Pied Piper Of Psychedelic 60 's , Dies at 75 By LAURA MANSNERUS Timothy Leary , who effectively introduce many Americans to the psychedelic 1960 's with the relentlessly quote phrase , `` turn on , tune in , drop out , '' die yesterday at his house in Beverly Hills , Calif. He be 75. However indelible his connection with another era , Mr. Leary be very much a man of the moment , and make his death a final act of performance art by have video camera record it for possible broadcast on the Internet. He have plan a celebration , and Web site have collect Leary memorabilia -- text of his book and lecture , tribute from friend , a listing of his daily drug intake , legal and illegal -- from the time he be tell last year that he have prostate cancer. Carol Rosin , a friend who be at Mr. Leary 's bedside , say his last word be : `` Why not ? Why not ? Why not ? '' Mr. Leary 's stepson , Zachary Chase , say that until the end , `` he be maintain his rascal quality. '' And R. Couri Hay , another friend who join a small gathering around Mr. Leary on his last night , say : `` Tim tell u , 'Do n't let it be sad. Buy wine. Put soup on the stove. ' Tim love life. '' In his long and extravagant public career , Mr. Leary be an accomplished clinical psychologist at Harvard University , a dabbler in Eastern mysticism , a fugitive and convict , a stand-up comedian and actor , a writer and a software designer and an exponent of cybernetics. Most of all , he be know a a kind of publicist for psychedelic experience , a career that blossom in the heady day of the 1960 's after he be dismiss from Harvard for his drug experiments. The phrase `` turn on , tune in , drop out '' come to him shortly afterward , in the shower , after Marshall McLuhan advise him to come up with `` something snappy '' to advertise the wonder of LSD. As the era of drug , sex and rock 'n ' roll unfold , it seem that Mr. Leary be at every scene , alongside a strange cast of famous characters. He take psilocybin trip with , among others , Arthur Koestler , Allen Ginsberg , Jack Kerouac , Robert Lowell , Maynard Ferguson and William Burroughs. He be arrest by G. Gordon Liddy. He sing `` Give Peace a Chance '' with John Lennon and Yoko Ono. As a fugitive on drug charge , he live in Algeria with Eldridge Cleaver and din in Gstaad with Roman Polanski ; back at Folsom prison in California , he be a jailmate of Charles Manson. To each of his enthusiasm , include death , Mr. Leary bring an elegant , happy contempt for authority that make him popular with college audience decade after the psychedelic experience have expired. Over and over , he be refer to a a priest or a guru , but Mr. Leary hat everything the title stand for ; at most , he say , he think of himself a a coach. Well into his 70 's , though he have lose his reputation a a corrupter of youth , Mr. Leary be step up to microphone in his white sneaker , tell audience that the liberation and exchange of knowledge by electronic communication would free their brain and soul from the oppressive orthodoxy of education , religion and politics. He often present a multimedia show call `` how to operate your brain , '' and his new motto be `` just say know. '' Timothy Francis Leary be bear Oct. 22 , 1920 , in Springfield , Mass. , an only child in an Irish Catholic household. He attend Holy Cross College , West Point and the University of Alabama , be a discipline problem at each , and finally earn a bachelor 's degree in the Army during World War II. He receive a doctorate in psychology in 1950 from the University of California at Berkeley , where he become convinced that conventional psychotherapy be not only politically disagreeable but also useless. He begin experiment with group therapy and theory of transactional analysis , which the psychiatrist Eric Berne would later popularize in his book `` Games People Play. '' He teach at Berkeley , be director of psychological research at the Kaiser Foundation Hospital in Oakland , Calif. , from 1955 to 1958 , and join Harvard 's faculty in 1959. At this point , he be personally unsettled. His wife , Marianne , have commit suicide in 1955 , leave Mr. Leary to raise their school-age son and daughter. On a trip to Spain , he suffer a mysterious wrench illness. In his 1968 book `` High Priest , '' he recall a powerful moment in his delirium : `` With a sudden snap , all the rope of my social self be gone. I be a 38-year-old male animal with two cubs. High , completely free. '' The succeed mind-altering experience would be purposeful , begin with a mushroom-induced high in Cuernavaca , Mexico , in 1960. With a few Harvard colleague , notably Richard Alpert ( who later take the Hindu name Ram Dass ) , Mr. Leary introduce others to psilocybin , the mushroom 's active ingredient , which be legally available for psychiatric research. At Harvard , he administer the drug to other researcher , prison inmate and even a group of divinity student , who , Mr. Leary write later , show that `` spiritual ecstasy , religious revelation and union with God be now directly accessible. '' Still , his superior be grow nervous , and after he try LSD in 1962 and propose to use it in experiment , the departmental power turn on him. Newspapers report a drug scandal at Harvard. In 1963 , have confirm that undergraduate have share in the researcher ' stash , Harvard dismiss Mr. Leary and Mr. Alpert. Mr. Leary 's status a an outlaw , quite literally at time , would continue for years. Once dismiss , he be free to embrace drug strictly for sensation -- and he did. With Mr. Alpert , Mr. Leary leave Cambridge for a country estate in Millbrook , N.Y. , which be provide by a millionaire sympathizer and be to be the headquarters of a foundation for drug research. It turn out to be more like a hippie commune , suffuse with Eastern religion. Guests meditate and take drugs. The neighbor be horrified. As the Millbrook group ( and a brief second marriage ) split up , a decade of legal trouble began. Mr. Leary be stop in Texas with a small amount of marijuana and be convict on several charges. While the verdict be on appeal , the Millbrook house be raid ; Mr. Leary be rouse from bed and arrest by G. Gordon Liddy , then of the Dutchess County Sheriff 's Department , who would later gain notoriety a an overseer of the Watergate burglary. Mr. Leary 's career veer into light show and exhortation at love-ins and be-ins. He start a church call the League for Spiritual Discovery. He throw over Millbrook for Hollywood. When he marry his third wife , Rosemary Woodruff , in 1967 , the event be direct by Ted Markland of `` Bonanza. '' All the guest be on acid. Mr. Leary be still productive , write two book , `` High Priest '' and `` Politics of Ecstasy , '' in 1968 alone. He be busy on the lecture circuit , usually appear in white duck trouser , Indian silk shirt and bare feet. `` Dr. Tim '' be accuse of send many young people off on bad drug trip , and Richard Nixon call him `` the most dangerous man in America. '' But it be not only the right that be cut : `` His rhetoric have a patina of phoniness , '' The New Republic 's review of `` High Priest '' said. The New Yorker , report on a `` celebration '' in 1966 , be merely condescend , say that after the show , `` with his disheveled hair and his white garment , he look like a shipwrecked sailor , and very much alone. '' In that era Mr. Leary publicly disavow politics , dismiss the left 's power game as much a anyone else 's , but in 1970 he suddenly declare his candidacy for governor of California. The campaign be interrupt when Mr. Leary be convict on a new marijuana charge in California and sentence to 10 year in prison ; he be still await 10 year on the Texas charge. In prison at San Luis Obispo , Mr. Leary plot escape from Day 1. In his autobiography , `` Flashbacks '' ( Tarcher/Patnam 1983 ) , he write : `` Consider my situation. I be a 49-year-old man face life in prison for encourage people to face up to new option with courage and intelligence. The American Government be be run by Richard Nixon , Spiro Agnew , John Ehrlichman , Robert Haldeman , G. Gordon Liddy , John Mitchell , J. Edgar Hoover and other cynical flouter of the democratic process. Would you have let men like these keep you in prison for life for your idea ? '' The escape be spectacular : Mr. Leary hoist himself to a rooftop and up a telephone pole , shimmy along a cable across the prison yard and over barbed wire , and drop to the highway. A clutch of helper , describe by Mr. Leary and others a member of the ultra-leftist Weathermen but never conclusively identify , spirit him to Algeria , where , oddly , he be place under the watch of Eldridge Cleaver 's American government-in-exile. Mr. Leary chafe under constant instruction from Mr. Cleaver 's rather militaristic band of fugitive Black Panthers , and make his way to Switzerland and then Afghanistan. He be capture there , and , in 1973 , return to the United States. He spend three more year in California 's prison system and be release in 1976 by Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. The last two decade of his life be divide between his home in Beverly Hills and the campus lecture circuit. He try comedy club , too , and public debate with Mr. Liddy. To some he be a has-been and a crackpot , and to others an interesting relic , but he tap into the information age early , around 1980 , attract an entirely new follow among the young and wired. Mr. Leary take drug well into his 70 's , but his regular pleasure be cigarette and wine. He hail cybernetics a the new vehicle of expanded consciousness , play with virtual reality , design computer game and start a software company. At the same time , Mr. Leary become fascinate by death , both by the near-death , out-of-body experience and by the social control surround the dying. In his last book , `` Chaos and Cyber Culture '' ( Ronin Publishing , 1994 ) , which skewer `` the priest and mullah and medical expert '' who `` swarm around the expire human like black vulture , '' he write , `` The time have come to talk cheerfully and joke sassily about personal responsibility for manage the die process. '' When he learn in January 1995 that he have inoperable cancer , Mr. Leary say he be `` thrilled. '' `` I 'm look forward to the most fascinating experience in life , which be die , '' he say in the interview last fall. `` I 've be write about self-directed dying for 20 years. You 've get to approach your die the way you live your life , with curiosity , with hope , with fascination , with courage and with the help of your friends. '' His friend be everywhere , it seem , and often at his house. They help in his death project , collect his older writing and paper and film the ever-discursive Mr. Leary. From a site on the World Wide Web ( http : //www.leary.com ) , he greet visitor and record his drug intake , which consist mostly of cigarette , coffee and wine but also include marijuana , cocaine , nitrous oxide and a modest list of pharmaceuticals. His family life be not so blessed. After his first wife 's suicide and two divorce , he separate from his fourth wife , Barbara , a few year ago. His daughter , Susan , commit suicide in 1990. In addition to Mr. Chase , his stepson , Mr. Leary be survive by a son , Jack , three grandchild and two great-grandchildren. Mr. Chase say the family be plan a small wake next week. No public service be planned. Correction : June 7 , 1996 , Friday An obituary of Timothy Leary on Saturday misstate the surname of his survive son Zachary. Formerly a stepson , Zachary be adopt by Mr. Leary. He be Zachary Leary , not Chase .