April 6 , 1997 OBITUARY Allen Ginsberg , Master Poet Of Beat Generation , Dies at 70 By WILBORN HAMPTON Allen Ginsberg , the poet laureate of the Beat Generation whose `` Howl ! '' become a manifesto for the sexual revolution and a cause celebre for free speech in the 1950 's , eventually earn it author a place in America 's literary pantheon , die early yesterday. He be 70 and live in the East Village , in Manhattan. He die of liver cancer at his apartment , Bill Morgan , a friend and the poet 's archivist , said. Mr. Morgan say that Mr. Ginsberg write right to the end. `` He 's work on a lot of poem , talk to old friend , '' Mr. Morgan say on Friday. `` He 's in very good spirits. He want to write poetry and finish his life 's work. '' William S. Burroughs , one of Mr. Ginsberg 's lifelong friend and a fellow Beat , say that Mr. Ginsberg 's death be `` a great loss to me and to everybody. '' `` We be friend for more than 50 year , '' Mr. Burroughs said. `` Allen be a great person with worldwide influence. He be a pioneer of openness and a lifelong model of candor. He stand for freedom of expression and for come out of all the closet long before others did. He have influence because he say what he believed. I will miss him. '' As much through the strength of his own irrepressible personality a through his poetry , Mr. Ginsberg provide a bridge between the Underground and the Transcendental. He be a comfortable in the ashram of Indian guru in the 1960 's a he have be in the Beat coffeehouse of the precede decade. A ubiquitous presence at the love-ins and be-ins that mark the drug-oriented counterculture of the Flower Children year , Mr. Ginsberg be also in the vanguard of the political protest movement they help spawn. He march against the war in Vietnam , the C.I.A. and the Shah of Iran , among other causes. If his early verse shock Eisenhower 's America with it celebration of homosexuality and drug , his involvement in protest keep him in the public eye and fed ammunition to his critics. But through it all , Mr. Ginsberg maintain a sort of teddy bear quality that deflect much of the indignation he inspired. He be know around the world a a master of the outrageous. He read his poetry and play finger cymbal at the Albert Hall in London ; he be expel from Cuba after say he find Che Guevara `` cute '' ; he sing duet with Bob Dylan , and he chant `` Hare Krishna '' on William F. Buckley Jr. 's television program. As the critic John Leonard observe in a 1988 appreciation : `` He be of course a social bandit. But he be a nonviolent social bandit. '' Or a the narrator in Saul Bellow 's `` Him With His Foot in His Mouth '' say of Mr. Ginsberg : `` Under all this self-revealing candor be purity of heart. And the only authentic living representative of American Transcendentalism be that fat-breasted , bald , beard homosexual in smeared goggles , innocent in his uncleanness. '' J. D. McClatchy , a poet and the editor of The Yale Review , say yesterday : `` Ginsberg be the best-known American poet of his generation , a much a social force a a literary phenomenon. `` Like Whitman , he be a bard in the old manner -- outsized , darkly prophetic , part exuberance , part prayer , part rant. His work be finally a history of our era 's psyche , with all it contradictory urges. '' Allen Ginsberg be bear on June 3 , 1926 , in Newark and grow up in Paterson , N.J. , the second son of Louis Ginsberg , a schoolteacher and sometime poet , and the former Naomi Levy , a Russian emigree and fervent Marxist. His brother , Eugene , name for Eugene V. Debs , also write poetry , under the name Eugene Brooks. Eugene , a lawyer , survives. Recalling his parent in a 1985 interview , Mr. Ginsberg say : `` They be old-fashioned delicatessen philosophers. My father would go around the house either recite Emily Dickinson and Longfellow under his breath or attack T. S. Eliot for ruin poetry with his 'obscurantism. ' My mother make up bedtime story that all go something like : 'The good king rode forth from his castle , saw the suffering worker and heal them.' I grow suspicious of both sides. '' An Authorization For a Lobotomy Allen Ginsberg 's mother later suffer from paranoia and be in and out of mental hospital ; Mr. Ginsberg sign an authorization for a lobotomy. Two day after she die in 1956 in Pilgrim State Hospital on Long Island , he receive a letter from her that say : `` The key be in the window , the key be in the sunlight in the window -- I have the key -- get married Allen do n't take drugs. . . . Love , your mother. '' Three year after her death , Mr. Ginsberg write `` Kaddish for Naomi Ginsberg ( 1894-1956 ) , '' an elegy that many consider his fine poem. Strange now to think of you , go without corset & eye , while I walk on the sunny pavement of Greenwich Village , downtown Manhattan , clear winter noon , and I 've be up all night , talk , talk , read the Kaddish aloud , listen to Ray Charles blue shout blind on the phonograph the rhythm , the rhythm -- and your memory in my head three year after -- . . . `` Kaddish '' burnish a reputation that have be forge with the publication of `` Howl ! '' three year earlier. The two work establish Mr. Ginsberg a a major voice in what come to be know a the Beat Generation of writers. Mr. Ginsberg 's journey to his place a one of America 's most celebrated poet begin during his college days. He first attend Montclair State College. But in 1943 , he receive a small scholarship from the Young Men 's Hebrew Association of Paterson and enrol at Columbia University. He consider become a lawyer like his brother , but be soon attract to the literary course offer by Mark Van Doren and Lionel Trilling , and switch his major from pre-law to literature. At Columbia he fell in with a crowd that include Jack Kerouac , a former student four year his senior , Lucien Carr and William Burroughs , and later , Neal Cassady , a railway worker who have literary aspirations. Together they form the nucleus of what would become the Beats. Kerouac and Carr become the poet 's mentor , and Kerouac and Cassady become his lovers. It be also at Columbia that Mr. Ginsberg begin to experiment with mind-altering drug like LSD , which would gain widespread use in the decade to follow and which Mr. Ginsberg would celebrate in his verse along with his homosexuality and his immersion in Eastern transcendental religions. But if the Beats be create literary history around Columbia and the West End Cafe , there be a dangerous undercurrent to their activities. Mr. Carr spend a brief time in jail for manslaughter , and Mr. Ginsberg , because he have associate with Mr. Carr , be suspend from Columbia for a year. In 1949 , after Mr. Ginsberg have receive his bachelor 's degree , Herbert Huncke , a writer and hustler , move into his apartment and store steal good there. Mr. Huncke be eventually jail , and Mr. Ginsberg , plead psychological disability , be send to a psychiatric institution for eight months. At the institution , he meet another patient , Carl Solomon , whom Mr. Ginsberg credit with deepen his understanding of poetry and it power a a weapon of political dissent. Becoming a Protege Of the Poet Williams Returning home to Paterson , Mr. Ginsberg become a protege of William Carlos Williams , the physician and poet , who live nearby. Williams 's use of colloquial American language in his poetry be a major influence on the young Mr. Ginsberg. After leave Columbia , Mr. Ginsberg first go to work for a Madison Avenue advertising agency. After five year , he once recall , he find himself take part in a consumer-research project try to determine whether Americans prefer the word `` sparkling '' or `` glamorous '' to describe ideal teeth. `` We already know people associate diamond with 'sparkling ' and fur with 'glamorous , ' `` he said. `` We spend $ 150,000 to learn most people do n't want furry teeth. '' The poet say he decide to give up the corporate world `` when my shrink ask me what would make me happy. '' He hang his gray flannel suit in the closet and go to San Francisco with six month of unemployment insurance in his pocket. San Francisco be then the center of considerable literary energy. He take a room around the corner from City Lights , Lawrence Ferlinghetti 's bookstore and underground publishing house , and begin to write. During this period , Mr. Ginsberg also become part of the San Francisco literary circle that include Kenneth Rexroth -- an author , critic and painter -- Gary Snyder , Michael McClure , Philip Whalen , Robert Duncan and Philip Lamantia. He also meet Peter Orlovsky , who would be his companion for the next 30 years. His first major work from San Francisco be `` Howl ! '' The long-running poem express the anxiety and ideal of a generation alienate from mainstream society. `` Howl ! , '' which be to become Mr. Ginsberg 's most famous poem , be dedicate to Solomon , and begin : I saw the best mind of my generation destroy by madness , starve hysterical naked , drag themselves through the negro street at dawn look for an angry fix , angelheaded hipster burn for the ancient heavenly connection to the starry dynamo in the machinery of night. . . . Mr. Ginsberg read the poem to a gathering arrange by Mr. Rexroth , and those present never forget the poem , it author or the occasion. Mr. Rexroth 's wife privately distribute a mimeographed 50-copy edition of `` Howl ! '' and in 1956 , Mr. Ferlinghetti publish `` Howl ! and Other Poems '' in what he call his `` pocket poet series. '' With it open and often vivid celebration of homosexuality and eroticism , `` Howl ! '' be impound by United States Customs agent and Mr. Ginsberg be try on obscenity charges. After a long trial , Judge Clayton Horn rule that the poem be not without `` redeem social importance. '' The result be to make `` Howl ! '' immensely popular and establish it a a landmark against censorship. The outrage and furor do not stop with the sexual revolution. As late a 1988 , the radio station WBAI refuse to allow `` Howl ! '' to be read on the air during a weeklong series about censorship in America. There be almost a many definition of Beatniks and the Beat movement a there be writer who claim to be part of it. As John Clellan Holmes describe it , `` To be beat be to be at the bottom of your personality look up. '' But if the movement grow out of disillusionment , it be disillusionment with a conscience. Mr. Ginsberg try to explain the aim of the Beats in a letter to his father in 1957 : `` Whitman long ago complain that unless the material power of America be leaven by some kind of spiritual infusion , we would wind up among the 'fabled damned. ' We 're approach that state as far a I can see. Only way out be individual take responsibility and say what they actually feel. That 's what we a a group have be try to do. '' On another occasion , he describe the literary rule more succinctly : `` You do n't have to be right. All you have to do be be candid. '' Mr. Ginsberg be nothing if not candid. As he write in `` America , '' another 1956 poem , which take aim at Eisenhower 's post-McCarthy era : America I 've give you all and now I 'm nothing America two dollar and twentyseven cent January 17 , 1956 . . . America this be quite serious America this be the impression I get from look in the television set America be this correct ? . . . Mr. Ginsberg say the poet who form the prime influence on his own work be William Blake , Walt Whitman , Ezra Pound and Williams. He declare he have find a new method of poetry. `` All you have to do , '' he say , `` be think of anything that come into your head , then arrange in line of two , three or four word each , do n't bother about sentence , in section of two , three or four line each. '' His disdain for poetry 's traditional rule only give ammunition to his critics. James Dickey once complain that the `` problem '' with Allen Ginsberg be that he make it seem a if anybody could write poetry. Traveling Widely For Two Decades Mr. Ginsberg use the celebrity he gain with `` Howl ! '' to travel widely during the next two decades. He go to China and India to study with guru and Zen master and to Venice to see Pound. On his way home , he be crown King of the May by dissident university student in Prague , only to be expel by the Communist Government. He read his poetry wherever he be allow , from concert stage to off-campus coffeehouses. He be in the forefront of whatever movement be in fashion : the sexual revolution and drug culture of the 1960 's , the anti-Vietnam war and anti-C.I.A. demonstration of the 1970 's , the anti-Shah and anti-Reagan protest of the 1980's. In 1967 he be arrest in an antiwar protest in New York City , and he be arrest again , for the same reason , at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago in 1968. He testify in the trial of the so-called Chicago Seven. Through it all , he keep writing. After `` Kaddish '' in 1959 , major work include `` TV Baby '' in 1960 , `` Wichita Vortex Sutra '' ( 1966 ) , `` Wales Visitation '' ( 1967 ) , `` Do n't Grow Old '' ( 1976 ) and `` White Shroud '' ( 1983 ) . In his celebrated career , Mr. Ginsberg receive many award , include the National Book Award ( 1973 ) , the Robert Frost Medal for distinguish poetic achievement ( 1986 ) , and an American Book Award for contribution to literary excellence ( 1990 ) . In 1968 , Cassady die of a drug overdose. Kerouac die of alcoholism the next year. By the mid-1970 's , Mr. Ginsberg have help start the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics of the Naropa Institute in Boulder , Colo. , a Buddhist university where he teach summer course in poetry and in Buddhist meditation. He also be become one of the last living voice of the Beat generation and the keeper of the flame. In 1985 , Harper & Row publish Mr. Ginsberg 's `` Collected Poems , '' an anthology of his work in one volume that firmly establish the poet in the mainstream of American literature. The poet again make tour , show up on television show , but this time he be in suit and tie offer a sort of explanation of his work. `` People ask me if I 've go respectable now , '' he say to one interviewer. `` I tell them I 've always be respectable. '' During another interview , he confess : `` My intention be to make a picture of the mind , mistake and all. Of course I learn I 'm an idiot , a complete idiot who be n't as prophetic a I think I was. The crazy , angry Philippic sometimes get in the way of clear perception. `` I think the North Vietnamese would be a lot good than they turn out to be. I should n't have be march against the Shah of Iran because the mullah have turn out to be a lot worse. '' But despite his suit and tie , the censor continue to look over Mr. Ginsberg 's shoulder. During the interview , David Remnick , then of The Washington Post , accompany him to CBS 's `` Nightwatch. '' A producer , unfamiliar with the poet 's work , ask if he would read something on the show. `` How about reading that poem about your mother ? '' she suggested. `` 'Kaddish , ' yes. Time magazine call it my masterpiece , '' Ginsberg replied. `` But I do n't know. . . . '' The poet point to a word in the poem he doubt would make prime time. As Mr. Remnick report , the producer 's eye glaze over and there be a long silence. `` Your mother 's . . . ? '' the producer say in horror. `` Could n't we just bleep that part out ? '' the poet offer , always helpful. `` No , '' the producer said. `` It 's O.K. , '' the poet replied. `` I 've get other poems. '' Social Conscience Plus Sex and Drugs What sphinx of cement and aluminum bash open their skull and eat up their brain and imagination ? Moloch ! Solitude ! Filth ! Ugliness ! Ashcans and unobtainable dollar ! Children scream under the stairway ! Boys sob in army ! Old men weep in the park ! Moloch ! Moloch ! Nightmare of Moloch ! Moloch the loveless ! Mental Moloch ! Moloch the heavy judger of men ! -- From `` Howl ! '' ( 1955-56 ) America I still have n't tell you what you do to Uncle Max after he come over from Russia I 'm address you. Are you go to let your emotional life be run by Time magazine ? . . . It occur to me that I be America I be talk to myself again. -- From `` America '' ( 1956 ) And how Death be that remedy all singer dream of , sing , remember , prophesy a in the Hebrew Anthem , or the Buddhist Book of Answers -- and my own imagination of a withered leaf -- at dawn -- Dreaming back thru life , Your time -- and mine accelerate toward Apocalypse , the final moment -- the flower burning in the Day -- and what come after , look back on the mind itself that saw an American city a flash away , and the great dream of Me or China , or you and a phantom Russia , or a crumpled bed that never exist -- like a poem in the dark -- . . . O mother what have I leave out O mother what have I forget O mother farewell -- From `` Kaddish '' ( 1959-60 ) . . . Kansas ! Kansas ! Shuddering at last ! PERSON appear in Kansas ! angry telephone call to the University Police dumbfound lean on their radiocar hood While Poets chant to Allah in the roadhouse Showboat ! Blue-eyed child dance and hold Thy Hand O age Walt who come from Lawrence to Topeka to envision Iron interlace upon the city plain -- Telegraph wire strung from city to city O Melville ! . . . Thy sin be forgiven , Wichita ! -- From `` Wichita Vortex Sutra '' ( 1966 )