February 20 , 1997 OBITUARY Deng Xiaoping : A Political Wizard Who Put China on the Capitalist Road By PATRICK E. TYLER Like Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai before him , Deng Xiaoping be among the small group of revolutionary elder who fight a guerrilla for the Communist cause and then dominate the leadership of the People's Republic they proclaim on Oct. 1 , 1949. Few if any figure in this century match Mr. Deng for political longevity. Nearly half a century have pass since Mao first instal Mr. Deng in the upper-reaches of power in China , make him general secretary of the world 's large Communist Party in 1954. Twice he be to be drag down from those height -- purge a a `` capitalist roader '' in 1967 during the Cultural Revolution and again -- after a remarkable comeback -- follow the death of Mao in 1976. Only with his second resurrection do Mr. Deng begin to consolidate his power , become China 's paramount leader in 1978. He be then 74 , seemingly too old to be anything but a transitional figure. Instead , he reign for a generation. Even after his formal retirement in 1989 , Mr. Deng remain an all-powerful patriarch , order a purge of the military leadership in 1992 and rescue his economic reform program from a conservative backlash. As his health slip precipitously -- his last public appearance be during the Lunar New Year festivity in early 1994 -- he seem far remove from daily decision-making. But still he be consult to resolve major policy and personnel issues. In the 18 year since he become China 's undisputed leader , Mr. Deng nourish an economic boom that radically improve the life of China 's 1.2 billion citizens. By early in the next decade , the reform Mr. Deng ignite may well propel China 's economy to the position of third large , after the United States and Japan , but China 's prosperity will be dilute by the increase number of Chinese. Nearly 270 million will not have job at the turn of the century. At the end of his life , Mr. Deng seem unable to chart a clear path to economic success his economic reform still face daunt challenges. China 's rise a a great economic power be become a race against time a population growth and incomplete reform be add to the siege of China 's strain foundations. Shortages of water and arable land mount , and unchecked industrial pollution contribute to an overall degradation of the environmental landscape. Still , in city and in village , real income more than double in the Deng era. Most Chinese who have watch a television or use a washing machine or dial a telephone have do so only since Mr. Deng come to power. The struggle to survive in the Chinese countryside have greatly eased. A former American Ambassador to China , J. Stapleton Roy , who a a young man in Nanjing witness the Communist takeover in 1949 , say once in an interview , `` If you look at the 150 year of modern China 's history since the Opium Wars , then you ca n't avoid the conclusion that the last 15 year be the best 15 year in China 's modern history. '' During most of those year , Mr. Deng symbolize the Chinese aspiration to move beyond the ideological extremism that have mark the Maoist era and reclaim for the Chinese a long-denied prosperity. But in do so , he also come to symbolize a stubborn and inflexible resistance to democratic stirrings. For Mr. Deng , China 's economic reform could only occur under the authoritarian rule of the Communist Party. China 's security force , often harsh and brutal under Mao , continue to be so under Mr. Deng. China today remain perennially criticize a a nation whose ruler seem to respect human right only grudgingly. A Small Figure , A Towering Presence Mr. Deng 's early reputation a a visionary who deliver the Chinese from suffer be blacken most notably by his leading role in order the June 1989 military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrator in Beijing. The tank and machine-gun assault on student and bystander that come to be know a the Tiananmen massacre diminish his prestige a a world leader and isolated China politically for year afterward. A generation of student and intellectual , many of whom have flee the country , hold Mr. Deng responsible and scorn his image. But much of the country , particularly the peasantry , seem grateful to Mr. Deng for provide them with the first prolonged period of peace and stability in this century. If intellectual could not forgive the brutality at Tiananmen , peasant could not forget that he have end a long chapter of deprivation. In foreign policy , Mr. Deng negotiate an end to the last vestige of British colonial power in China with an agreement to return Hong Kong to Chinese sovereignty later this year. Reunification with Taiwan elude him , but he work to settle China 's border dispute , normalize relation with the United States and repair the 30-year rift with the Soviet Union. His goal be to focus the totality of national energy on China 's economic development. Even the Chinese military have to serve the new national priority by accept deep budget cut through the 1980's. As a leader , Mr. Deng cut a most unusual figure in the Chinese pantheon. He be emperor-like in a century in which the Chinese overthrow their last emperor after three millennium of imperial rule. Mr. Deng be first among equal in the small circle of revolutionary elder who survive Mao. The post and title Mr. Deng hold in the Communist Party hierarchy never quite equal or convey his stature a paramount leader , a term that seem invent for Mr. Deng , who be still arguably the most powerful citizen of China when he died. Yet his physical presence offer no clue to his storied ability to manipulate event `` much like a puppeteer , '' a the political scientist Lucian W. Pye put it. The conventional wisdom be that Mr. Deng be five foot tall but , a one scholar observe , `` that be surely an exaggeration. '' In an essay in 1993 , Professor Pye describe an audience with Mr. Deng : `` As he settle into an overstuffed chair , his sandaled foot barely touch the floor , and indeed hang free every time he lean forward to use the spittoon. He have an atrocious Sichuan accent , which make his word slur together like a gargle. There be few sign of liveliness of mind , of wit or humor , and no sustain , systematic pursuit of ideas. '' Xiao Rong , the young of Mr. Deng 's three daughter , say in a biography of her father : `` In the eye of his child , Father be a man of introverted character and few words. Only with old colleague and old friend do he like to talk , and carry on in a loud voice. '' Henry A. Kissinger , who help to engineer the normalization of relation with China during the Nixon Administration , once pronounce Mr. Deng a `` nasty little man. '' But others find a certain charm. When Queen Elizabeth II pay a visit in October 1986 , she be warm by his self-effacing greeting : `` Thank you for come all this way to meet an old Chinese man. '' Although he pick his political heir carefully , Mr. Deng be plague by the problem of succession. In May 1989 he worry aloud to the Soviet leader , Mikhail S. Gorbachev : `` The only thing that ca n't be bring to pas be the abolition from the system of lifelong position for leaders. '' That same year , Mr. Deng name Jiang Zemin , the current President and Communist Party chief , a the `` core '' of the `` third generation '' leadership , after him and Mao. But many Chinese say Mr. Jiang could face trouble manage the party now without Mr. Deng behind him and could be sweep aside , much a Mao 's nominal successor , Hua Guofeng , be sweep aside by Mr. Deng. Neither intellectual nor poet , Mr. Deng be best know a a pragmatist who focus on the problem of the day , unencumbered by history or ideology. His year a a military strategist and political commissar , balance real military capability against the expectation of politician , give him a keen sense of what be possible. He be best remember for his simple maxim rather than for coherent policy : To defeat ideological attack from the Maoists , he often quote the Maoist dictum , `` Seek truth from facts. '' To emphasize that there be no road map for economic reform , he say the Chinese must `` cross the river by feel out the stone with our feet. '' His most famous aphorism be an old proverb from his native Sichuan : `` It do n't matter whether a cat be black or white , as long a it catch mice. '' Fear of Disorder , Grounded in History In this century China have be a land of warlord , invade army , flood , famine and revolution. Tens of million have die violently , or wretchedly from starvation. Mr. Deng 's inherent fear of disorder and the violence it have work explain his deep opposition to political pluralism. `` If all one billion of u undertake multiparty election , we will certainly run into a full-scale civil war , '' he tell President Bush in February 1989. `` Taking precedence over all China 's problem be stability. '' There be a time when Mr. Deng appear briefly to embrace democratic ideal : As he struggle to regain power in 1978 , he identify with the goal of the Democracy Wall movement in Beijing. But in early 1979 , after he have gain the upper hand politically , he crush the movement and send it leader , Wei Jingsheng , to prison for 15 years. When Mr. Wei , once an electrician at the Beijing Zoo , emerge in September 1993 after serve 14 1/2 year , he be still Mr. Deng 's fierce and most fearless critic , and find himself return to prison seven month after his release. The Dark Shadow Of Tiananmen In 1984 , on the 35th anniversary of Communist rule , student at Beijing University hoist a banner say , `` Hello , Xiaoping ! '' show their affection through the familiarity of their greeting. At the outset of 1987 , Beijing University student march for democracy chant , `` Xiaoping , hear our voice ! '' still hop that Mr. Deng would embrace their goal. Instead he turn on them , crush their movement and sack the Communist Party general secretary , Hu Yaobang , for encourage the democratic cause. The more Mr. Deng resist political reform , the more he seem a guardian of a party elite that be do little to bring corruption under control a China 's economy gain speed. The party leader , include Mr. Deng , be be chauffeur around in black Mercedes sedans. Some of their child become know a the princeling of conspicuous new wealth. And the leader all seem oblivious to their hypocrisy a they admonish the mass to guard against `` bourgeois liberalization. '' The death of Mr. Hu in April 1989 unleash pro-democracy force for a third time in Mr. Deng 's first decade a leader , but he be no long a figure of hope. One Beijing University poster mourn Mr. Hu capture the antipathy toward Mr. Deng. `` The Wrong Man Died , '' it said. Zhao Ziyang , the party chief tap by Mr. Deng a a possible successor , show sympathy for the Tiananmen demonstrator and be remove on the eve of the crackdown. Mr. Zhao 's liberal tone in economic reform and political tolerance be bury by new edict from the hard-line faction lead by Prime Minister Li Peng. In the aftermath of Tiananmen , Mr. Deng and his family take care to disguise his precise role in order the tank and machine-gunners into Beijing , where they kill hundred , perhaps thousand , of demonstrator and bystanders. Mr. Evans , the former British Ambassador , say in his biography that Mr. Deng be angry when he learn of the bloodshed around Tiananmen and tell the President , Yang Shangkun , and Prime Minister Li that they have `` bungle the military operation appallingly. '' The sensitivity of fix historic responsibility for the massacre be never lose on Mr. Deng , who understand that after his death , the harsh verdict with which he brand the Tiananmen demonstrator a counterrevolutionary could be reverse and he could become history 's villain. Mr. Deng 's rule bring China nearly to the end of a century that open with the Qing Dynasty still ensconce in the Forbidden City , the vermilion-walled palace compound at the center of Beijing. In the eight decade since the last Emperor , Pu Yi , be depose in 1911 , ten of million of Chinese have die in war , invasion and famine. Mr. Deng grow to manhood in the midst of chaos and become a revolutionary after spend five year in France on a work-study program , where he toil in filthy factory that pay subsistence wage to Chinese. His own family member be victim of a violent century : His father , Deng Wenming , be set upon by bandit near his home and kill in 1938. During the Cultural Revolution of 1966-76 , when Mao seek to tear down the Communist Party leadership , Mr. Deng be brand a public enemy , humiliate in `` struggle session '' and send to work in a tractor factory. His younger brother , Deng Shuping , be drive to suicide in 1967 after week of abuse by Red Guards. Mr. Deng 's eldest son , Deng Pufang , be terrorize on the campus of Beijing University and , accord to his sister Xiao Rong , attempt suicide by jump from a fourth-floor physic laboratory window in September 1968. The fall break his back and he suffer for month without adequate medical attention ; he remain paralyzed. Deng Xiaoping , like many of the emperor , combine the pursuit of a good life for the Chinese people with a studied ruthlessness to preserve the institution of power. As a young revolutionary , he exhort peasant to kill landowner because , he be say to have reason , once the mass have blood on their hand , they would be more committed to the Communist cause. Mr. Deng would later earn a reputation a a pragmatist , but in the late 1950 's he be an exponent of political repression and accelerate socialism. After intellectual respond to Mao 's invitation to `` let a hundred flower bloom '' -- to express freely their criticism of the Communist Party -- Mr. Deng help lead a witch hunt against those who have take the invitation in full measure. In 1980 , Mr. Deng acknowledge that the Anti-Rightist Campaign have be excessive , but he assert that the essence of the struggle have be `` necessary and correct. '' Ever since Emperor Qinshi unite China more than 2,200 year ago , the Chinese have look to an imperial figure to rule them with the `` mandate of heaven , '' a feudal concept that be use to buttress the absolute right of the sovereign , but later evolve under Confucian tradition of benevolence and wisdom. The Communist revolution that raise the flag of the People 's Republic of China on Oct. 1 , 1949 , aim at crush this past and create a perfect egalitarian society. But neither Mao nor Mr. Deng seem able or , indeed , willing to completely bury the imperial tradition. Mao create a cult of personality so broad and pervasive that he have the whole nation mimic his style of drab clothing , memorize his quotation from little red book and live under the gaze of his ubiquitous portraits. Under Mr. Deng , China break out of the monochromatic Mao era to life in full color. A walk down Nanjing Road in Shanghai today reveal the new Chinese glitz under the sparkle of a thousand boutique windows. In the throng of new consumer , the hairdo bounce with the late style from Hong Kong above leather jacket trim in fur. In contrast to Mao , Mr. Deng be no cultist. Mr. Deng prefer to maneuver on the sideline , out of the public eye , to exhort policy with occasional pronouncements. Each time that Mr. Deng be purge from power , he fight his way back. Rehabilitated in 1973 after the bad of the Cultural Revolution , he be purge again a Mao lay on his deathbed in 1976. Denounced a an `` unrepentant capitalist-roader , '' it appear that the notorious Gang of Four , the radical lead by Mao 's wife , Jiang Qing , have defeat him. Mao himself decree that Mr. Deng should be relieve of all his post Mr. Deng live under house arrest for nearly a year until one of his old military cohort , Marshal Ye Jian-ying , intervene after Mao 's death , insist that Mr. Deng 's voice be hear in the leadership. The Chinese rejoice at Mr. Deng 's comeback and at the fall of the Gang of Four. To Mao 's successor , Hua Guofeng , Mr. Deng pledge his support `` with all my heart. '' But in less than two year , Mr. Deng have render Mr. Hua a harmless figurehead and have set about steer China on a new economic course. As the economy soar , Mr. Deng acknowledge that he be as much a witness to history a he be it architect. `` I be a layman in the field of economics , '' he say in 1984. `` I propose China 's economic policy of open to the outside world , but a for the detail or specific of how to implement it , I know very little indeed. '' Where Mao have preach `` Communes be good , '' Mr. Deng simply preach `` Markets be good. '' The Chinese do the rest. From Sichuan Village To French Factories Deng Xiaoping be bear Deng Xixian to a landlord family in the heart of China 's most populous province , Sichuan , on Aug. 22 , 1904. The Deng household be the wealthy in the village of Paifang. Mr. Deng 's father , Deng Wenming , control about 25 acre of land with an annual output of about 10 ton of grain. When his wife could not bear child , he take a second wife , or concubine , whose family name be Dan. Her dowry in 1901 include the red-lacquered bed in which the future Chinese leader be bear three year later. Mr. Deng be just enter primary school in 1911 when the last Qing Emperor be overthrow by an amalgam of force lead by Sun Yat-sen. Revolution be gather throughout China and Mr. Deng would soon be part of it. By 1919 , Mr. Deng 's father , join the nation-building spirit of the time , decide to send his son to France for a work-study program. When Mr. Deng , age 16 , and 200 other student board a steamer at Shanghai on Sept. 11 , 1920 , he be never to see his parent again. Mr. Deng arrive in Marseilles , and find Europe a seething , ideological vortex of the Industrial and Bolshevik revolutions. He be quickly pull into it currents. In Paris he befriend the articulate and dash Zhou Enlai , an `` elder brother '' to Mr. Deng. By 1922 , Mr. Deng have join the Communist Party of Chinese Youth in Europe. To escape the French police , Mr. Deng plot his departure from France in 1926. His route take him to Moscow , where his revolutionary training continued. During five year in France , Mr. Deng learn few industrial skill that could be transplant back to China , but he saw the power of Western technology. He seem unmarked by France 's high culture or by it philosopher of democracy and human rights. His daughter Xiao Rong say the reason be that Mr. Deng be part of an under-class in France , exploit a a foreign laborer and persecute a a Communist. `` What he come in contact with be not democratic , '' Ms. Deng said. Political Conversion , And Return to China After 11 month of ideological and military training in Moscow , Mr. Deng begin take order from the Communist International. He return to China a the chief political adviser to one of the powerful warlord who have carve up northern China. But the Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek be determine to eradicate the Communists. Mr. Deng flee south where he be reunite with Zhou Enlai at Wuhan in 1927. There , Mr. Deng be name secretary to the Communist Party Central Committee. He adopt the name Deng Xiaoping , whose origin he have never publicly explained. Civil war be raging. Communists be round up and executed , particularly in Shanghai , where the party headquarters and Mr. Deng have move by the end of 1927. In the chaos , Mr. Deng suffer the first of many personal tragedy when his first wife , Zhang Xiyuan , another young revolutionary whom he have meet in Moscow , die after a miscarriage in early 1930. Mr. Deng , a widower at 26 , do not attend the funeral , his daughter write , because , `` Revolution come first. '' In 1929 , Mr. Deng lead his first successful Communist uprising , in southwestern Guangxi province. But his campaign toward Guangzhou prove a disaster. His Seventh Red Army in tatter , Mr. Deng reach Mao Zedong 's base in 1931. His loyalty to Mao 's vision of the revolution briefly cost him his freedom during the internal party struggle of the early 1930's. Mr. Deng marry Jin Weiying , another party member , in 1932 , but when he come under political attack , she leave him to marry his chief accuser , Li Weihan. In October 1933 , Chiang Kai-shek marshal one million men to crush Mao 's Communist base in Jiangxi province by build a chain of block house across the countryside. Thus begin in 1934 a yearlong , 6,000-mile retreat know a the Long March. Death from exposure , suffer and frequent attack thin the Communist Army from 70,000 to 10,000 a it pass through treacherous and hostile country. Rehabilitated after his first purge , Mr. Deng set out on the Long March a the editor of Red Star , the party paper. By the time the routed army reach the cave of Yanan in remote Shaanxi province , Mr. Deng have nearly die of typhoid fever. And Mao have reverse his own political fortune and never again lose his command of the revolution. Mr. Deng be one of his close lieutenants. Japan 's invasion of China in 1937 provide Mr. Deng and the Communists the opportunity to defend the nation. It be the period of their great exploit a they compete with Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists for the affection of the masses. During eight year of war , Communist force grow from 50,000 to 900,000 in strength and party membership swell from 40,000 member to 1.2 million. Mr. Deng be appoint top political officer of the 129th Division. By the time Mr. Deng be in his early 30 's , he have travel extensively and commanded army in the field , experience give him a keen sense of the limit of military power and the importance of political discipline in marshal it. The battlefield hardships Mr. Deng endure create many lasting bond with China 's top field commanders. These bond also serve his rise in the party and may have save his life when he be later purged. Absorbed with his war duty in 1938 , Mr. Deng have little time to react when he receive word that his father have be murder by bandit back in Sichuan. He do not return home. But the next year , during a visit to Yanan , Mr. Deng marry for the third and last time. Pu Zhuolin , the daughter of a merchant from Yunnan province , have come to Yanan from Beijing University , where she have study physics. Mao attend the wedding in September 1939. Never active in politics , Zhuo Lin , the name she adopt in Yanan , bore five child between 1940 and 1952 and stood by her husband through a series of crises. In addition to his wife , Mr. Deng 's survivor be his five child : the old , Deng Lin , an artist who have exhibit her work in New York and Paris ; Deng Pufang , the paraplegic son , who for the last decade have work on behalf of the handicapped in China ; a second daughter , Deng Nan , a vice minister of the State Science and Technology Commission ; the young daughter , Xiao Rong , who have serve her father a a personal aide since 1989 , and the young son , Deng Zhifang , who study physic in the United States before return in 1988 to enter high-profile business ventures. Victory in War , And in Revolution Victory over the Japanese and then over the Nationalists bring the Communists to power with the founding of the People 's Republic of China on Oct. 1 , 1949. Mr. Deng be dispatch to pacify southwest China and Tibet before return to Beijing in 1952. Reunited with Zhou Enlai , he serve his mentor and the economist Chen Yun on the Economic Commission before take over the Finance Ministry. But Mr. Deng 's administrative skill and wartime connection propel him upward. He be appoint secretary general of the Central Committee in June 1954 and , by 1956 , secretary general of the Communist Party. With Yang Shangkun a his deputy , Mr. Deng virtually control the party personnel apparatus , place thousand of cadre in job and build a party network that become the foundation of his power. Beginning in January 1955 , one of his most secret task be to help Mao and Zhou create and finance the scientific organization that would build and detonate China 's first atomic bomb. With the detonation of a fission bomb weigh 3,410 pound on Oct. 16 , 1964 , China become a nuclear power. Mr. Deng 's rise to the top of the party in the 1950 's coincide with Mao 's grow disaffection with those who would succeed him. When the Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev attack Stalin in a secret speech in 1956 , Mao be appal that his putative heir seem to identify with the attack. If Stalin 's position be not sacred in Soviet history , Mao reason , neither be Mao 's in Chinese history. Great Leap Forward , And Many Setbacks With a series of internal political campaign , Mao begin assault what he perceive a his many enemies. The Anti-Rightist movement of 1957 lead into the Great Leap Forward in 1958. The rupture in relation with the Soviet Union soon follow , become apparent in 1960 with the abrupt withdrawal of Soviet aid. In July 1963 , a final effort be make to patch up the ideological split when Mr. Deng be dispatch to Moscow in what prove to be the last formal contact between leader of the two Communist party for 26 years. In the early stage of the political campaign , Mr. Deng be the instrument of Mao 's revenge , send thousand of Chinese intellectual to manual labor camp and prisons. Mao be not satisfied. He want to propel China forward with agricultural commune and steel production. His Great Leap Forward be perhaps the large policy-induced economic disaster in history. Backyard furnace turn the peasantry 's tool and cookware into useless molten globs. China 's harvest rot in the fields. No one dare tell Mao of the failure ; grain export continued. Then famine struck. As many a 30 million Chinese die of starvation in the next four years. The catastrophe seem to remold Mr. Deng , and he thereafter place more emphasis on practical measure for economic growth , especially those that contain incentive for China 's peasantry to increase individual production. As Mr. Deng work more closely with Yang Shangkun and President Liu Shaoqi , Mao begin to suspect they be plot against him. He complain the party leadership be treat him like a `` dead ancestor '' and he single out Mr. Deng for make decision like an `` emperor. '' Luckily for Mr. Deng , he slip and break his leg in 1958 , thus avoid the bad confrontation over Mao 's policy at the Lushan conference of 1959. Mao mount a withering counterattack and Mr. Deng do not escape for long. Mao unleash the Cultural Revolution in 1966 to destroy his adversary in the party. He exhort the mass to `` bombard the party headquarters '' and thrust China into the decade of chaos that foster civil conflict in every school , factory and municipality. Thousands of young Red Guards be allow into Zhongnanhai , the leadership compound in central Beijing. They rampage through the home of President Liu , Mr. Deng and other leaders. Mr. Deng be brand the `` No. 2 capitalist-roader '' in the party after President Liu. Mr. Deng 's mordant self-criticism have fail to appease the Red Guards. They continue to attack him a a `` capitalist despot. '' Mr. Deng 's penitence and the patronage of Zhou Enlai may have save his life , but he be strip of all office except his party membership. The Deng family be order to the countryside. The child be dispersed. Mr. Deng and his wife be send to Jiangxi province , where they work in a tractor factory and gardened. By the early 1970 's , China seem to be fall apart. Mao 's chosen successor , Lin Biao , be discover plot a coup and be kill in a plane crash ; Mao fear nuclear war be imminent with the Soviet Union ; the economy be in chaos , and Prime Minister Zhou have cancer. After President Nixon 's 1972 visit to China , reporter cover a state banquet in April 1973 for the Cambodian leader , Prince Norodom Sihanouk , be surprise to see a small man in a gray Mao suit , white sock and black oxfords. It be Mr. Deng , recall a month earlier to help heal the country and perhaps succeed Zhou. Mao throw Mr. Deng into a Politburo dominate by radical , and they soon turn on him. When Zhou die in January 1976 , thousand of Chinese swarm into Tiananmen Square to praise Zhou and to express their opposition to the radicals. Mr. Deng be blame for the revolt and Mao , near death , agree to purge him for a final time. Mr. Deng be place under house arrest. Mao die in September that year , and the Gang of Four be arrest the follow month. Mr. Deng press to return to his duty and crucial military ally like Marshal Ye Jianying rally behind him. Mao 's last chosen successor , Hua Guofeng , delay on release Mr. Deng , but Mr. Deng 's ally prevailed. Mr. Deng 's political comeback gather momentum through 1977 until December 1978 , when he be able to establish himself a the country 's paramount leader. Eye for Strategy , In War and Peace Mr. Deng move quickly to get China back on the road to economic modernization. In agriculture , he allow the province to dismantle commune and collective farm , but the peasant move even faster , divide up plot of land for private tilling. Output soared. So do profits. Mr. Deng tell the military that the threat of world war be recede and , therefore , the military would have to serve the civilian economy. Arms production stop in many factory and military modernization be defer , except for strategic weapon to maintain China 's nuclear deterrent. Because he have see what modernization have do for the West , Mr. Deng 's strategic vision be broad than Mao's. He tell President Carter in January 1979 , `` The Chinese need a long period of peace to realize their full modernization. '' And to American businessmen , he say China need their money and technology. After establish full diplomatic relation with Washington on Jan. 1 , 1979 , Mr. Deng make a whirlwind tour of the United States that be full of extraordinary image , from Mr. Deng kiss the child who sing in Chinese at the Kennedy Center to wear a white 10-gallon hat in Texas. Back home , it seem for a time that Mr. Deng 's openness to economic reform would lead him to support significant democratic reforms. He tell party leader that he endorse the spirit of China 's new democracy movement. `` Democracy have to be institutionalize and write into law , '' he said. But when Wei Jingsheng and his Democracy Wall colleague turn their criticism on Mr. Deng , the Chinese leader smash the movement and persecute it intellectual leaders. Mr. Deng begin to equate democracy with the political turmoil of the Cultural Revolution. `` Our people have just go through a decade of suffer '' and `` can not afford far chaos , '' he said. Mr. Deng want the energy of the economic reformer , but could not tolerate their political challenge. The Focus of It All : Economic Change Of the change that Mr. Deng oversee , economic restructuring be central. And the Chinese often do not wait for new policy a they `` dive into the sea , '' the metaphor for go into business. Farmers begin raise fish , shrimp and fruit for new market that spring up in every township. Private and collective enterprise multiply a former peasant begin manufacture toy , firework , brick , clothing -- all manner of everyday items. The agricultural change be easily accomplish and the farmer , by any previous standard , be get rich. The first thing many do be to build a new house , create a huge demand in the construction industry. In industrial reform , Mr. Deng start cautiously , create special economic zone in China 's coastal province of Guangdong and Fujian , where tax subsidy attract Hong Kong 's manufacturing tycoons. Mr. Deng say the coastal province could get rich first , but the real strategy be incrementalism because Mr. Deng fear failure and discredit at the hand of the party 's Marxist conservatives. The economic zone ignite an export explosion that continue today , with China dominate the world market in toy , shoe and textiles. The zone multiply , form a rimland of coastal wealth , but extend inland only to major city like Beijing. Along with the wealth come scourges. Child labor and sweat shop appear a parent send their child to work , not to school. Shoddy and unsafe factory become firetrap where thousand die in accident or fires. Fly-by-night company produce dangerous or useless product , include one ubiquitous contraption that promise to make people taller. Criminal gang , prostitution and the sale of woman into bondage spread from rural to urban areas. Old Communist cadre who wipe out narcotic traffic in the 1950 's be repulse at it return. Heroin and opium be back. Grafting the success of the coastal province onto the large Chinese economy prove beyond Mr. Deng 's capabilities. Today the core of China 's economy , the state-owned industrial sector , remain largely unreformed , mire in debt , a slave to party apparatchik , many of whom be corrupt or incompetent. Over 18 year , Mr. Deng 's attempt to restructure this monolithic sector , the source of the Communist Party 's power and revenue , have lead to a series of `` boom and bust '' inflationary cycle that continue today. Mr. Deng want the party to reform the state factory , to make the manager responsible for their profit and loss , and to raise worker productivity. Bankruptcy , a a concept , enter the Communist lexicon for the first time. But the political consequence of widespread layoff always prevent Mr. Deng 's reformer from act boldly. When they do act , there be no macroeconomic lever to adjust the money supply , only blunt instrument of jawbone from Beijing. When inflation get out of control after the price reform drive of mid-1988 , panic buying add to the unrest that send hundred of thousand of worker into the street in support of democracy , but also to protest corruption and mismanagement. The military crackdown at Tiananmen Square and martial law bring the hard-liners back to pre-eminence in economic policy and Mr. Deng have to go along. After the removal of Zhao Ziyang in 1989 , Mr. Deng and the other revolutionary leader could not agree on who should rule. Their compromise be Jiang Zemin , the Shanghai party bos whose strong suit be consensus-building. The economic bubble that have expand in the late 1980 's finally burst , the economy fell in on itself , production ground to a halt in many industry , foreign investor flee and credit dry up. In November 1989 , Mr. Deng announce his retirement from his last formal post , head of the Central Military Commission. But the emphasis in Chinese culture on seniority make it impossible for him to leave politics , or for politics to function without his intervention. The fail Soviet coup in August 1991 and the subsequent collapse of the Soviet Communist Party seem to convince Mr. Deng that the most powerful antidote to such a fate for Chinese Communism would be economic growth. He begin to criticize conservative who obsess over Western `` plot '' to topple Communism through `` peaceful evolution. '' `` Say le and do more , '' he admonish them , try to return their focus to practical step to promote economic growth. The reform be turn loose force that eventually would challenge the party , whose ideology have lose it moral sway. Millions of Chinese be turn to religion and Confucianism , seek a moral structure to replace the void leave by the party. Mr. Deng understand that economic reform and the force that it unleash in Chinese society would eventually challenge the Leninist rule of the party. Thus begin a period in which the Communist Party 's legitimacy arise from it ability to deliver economic growth and rise incomes. `` In the end , convince those who do not believe in socialism will depend on our nation 's development , '' Mr. Deng say in late 1991. `` If we can reach a comfortable standard of living by the end of this century , then that will wake them up a bit. And in the next century when we , a a socialist country , join the middle rank of the developed nation , that will help to convince them. Most of these people will genuinely see that they be mistaken. '' One Last Battle Against Conservatives But even a Mr. Deng speak , the hard-liners in Beijing refuse to act and Jiang Zemin be paralyze by the lack of consensus. At the beginning of 1992 , Mr. Deng be rampant against his old adversary , principally the hard-line faction lead by the conservative patriarch Chen Yun. Mr. Chen and many other elder retire a Mr. Deng dominate the 14th Party Congress , which enshrine a new national goal of create a `` socialist market economy '' by 2000. Mr. Deng also move against Yang Shangkun and his young half-brother , Gen. Yang Baibing , who have create a power base in the military that be threaten the post-Deng political order. But the pace of reform be too fast for Mr. Deng 's successor , who crave social stability above all to consolidate their rule. Unemployment , sag state industry and labor unrest bedevil the leadership up to the moment of Mr. Deng 's death. And the pro-democracy force have gradually be suppressed. Instead of chart a clear path , Mr. Deng 's successor stumble politically , seek concession from the world on trade and human right but offer little in return. A Clinton Administration review of human right report that by the end of last year , public dissent have be `` effectively silence , '' by intimidation , prison or exile. As long a Mr. Deng draw breath , it seem that China could cope with it contradictions. But a his health inexorably decline , the Chinese seem to pause and to wonder about the future .