November 7 , 1998 OBITUARY Bob Kane , 83 , the Cartoonist Who Created 'Batman , ' Is Dead By SARAH BOXER Bob Kane , the cartoonist who create Batman the Caped Crusader and his sidekick , Robin the Boy Wonder , die on Tuesday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. He be 83 and live in Los Angeles. Batman and Robin , the character that Mr. Kane create with his partner , Bill Finger , nearly 60 year ago , be some of the longest-lived comic-book hero in the world. They be `` up there with Superman , Mickey Mouse , Bugs Bunny and Oz , say Paul Levitz , the executive vice president and publisher of DC Comics. Born in New York City , Mr. Kane attend Cooper Union and the Art Students League. His first comic strip , `` Peter Pupp '' and `` Hiram Hick , '' be publish in 1936. In 1938 he start draw adventure strip , `` Rusty and His Pals '' and `` Clip Carson , '' for National Comics. That same year , a comic-book hero call Superman appeared. Vincent Sullivan , the editor of National Comics , who also own Superman , ask Mr. Kane and Mr. Finger to come up with a Supercompetitor. They develop Batman on a single weekend. Mr. Kane be 18. The first Batman strip come out in May 1939 in Detective Comics , one year after the debut of Superman. Batman 's first adventure be call `` The Case of the Chemical Syndicate. '' And he be another kind of superhero entirely. Batman be n't as strong a Superman , but he be much more agile , a good dresser and have good contraption and a cooler place to live. He live in the Batcave , drive the Batmobile , which have a crime lab and a closed-circuit television in the back , and own a Batplane. He also keep a lot of tool in his utility belt , include knockout gas , a smoke screen and a radio. `` Since he have no superpower , he have to rely only on his physical and his mental skill , '' say Allan Asherman , the librarian of DC Comics. Batman 's fictional history , which be create year after the character himself , be dark. According to Batlegend , under his cape Batman be really a man name Bruce Wayne who , a a child , watch a his parent be murder in the dark street of New York City while they be walk home from a movie. Traumatized , young Bruce vow to avenge their death by punish criminal everywhere. He study criminology , train his body and assemble an assortment of tool to fight crime in Gotham. One night , startle by a bat outside his window , he make up his mind to dress up a a bat to put fear into the `` cowardly and superstitious '' heart of criminals. While `` Superman be an optimist 's myth , '' Mr. Levitz say , Batman be a hero for the guy who think `` the world be a tough place. '' In create Batman Mr. Kane say he draw on a number of source : a 1920 's movie call `` The Mark of Zorro , '' a radio show call `` The Shadow '' and a 1930 movie call `` The Bat Whispers. '' That movie feature a criminal with a cape who shin his bat insignia on the wall just before he be about to kill his victim , and who , in at least one scene , stand on the roof of a building and spread his cape out. `` I guess anyone who wear a cape be tempt to do that , '' Mr. Asherman said. Mr. Kane also credit Leonardo da Vinci : `` I remember when I be 12 or 13 I be an ardent reader of book on how thing begin . . . and I come across a book about Leonardo da Vinci. This have a picture of a fly machine with huge bat wing . . . . It look like a bat man to me. '' But it be Mr. Finger , Mr. Kane say , who choose some of Batman 's most memorable features. He suggest the cape with scalloped edge , the cowl and the blank white eyes. `` When I first draw him I have eye in there and it do n't look right , '' Mr. Kane once admitted. `` Bill Finger say , 'Take them out. ' `` Mr. Finger also come up with the name Bruce Wayne ( which , it have be observe , sound a lot like Bob Kane ) . Robin , the Boy Wonder , come out a year after Batman. `` He be basically a young edition of Batman. '' Mr. Asherman said. `` There be a need for a kid sidekick , so kid could identify with him , and for a character who would tone down the violence. '' Robin 's story echo Batman's. Under his costume , Robin be Dick Grayson , an aerialist who saw his parent fall to their death when the circus fail to pay some racketeer protection money. Bruce Wayne happen to be watch and offer to become Grayson 's guardian. Robin get a less elaborate costume : a red vest , green boot , a yellow cape and no tights. But he be a far good flyer. Batman 's villain also have pedigrees. The Joker be descend not only from the face on play card but also , Mr. Asherman say , from `` The Man Who Laughs , '' a 1920 's movie base on a Victor Hugo story about a disfigured man in medieval France who move in royal circles. The Penguin , Mr. Asherman say , be probably inspire by the penguin who use to be on packet of Kool cigarettes. The Riddler ? Mr. Asher have no idea : `` He be just a psychopath who like to send riddle to the police. '' For an action comic , the style of Batman be strangely quiet , and much be make of the shadows. As the superhero become popular , he begin star in other venues. In the 1940 's Columbia Pictures release two serial film , `` Batman , '' in 15 chapter , and `` The New Adventures of Batman and Robin , '' also in 15 segments. In 1966 come the television show , which star Adam West. Beginning in the 1980 's there be more Batman movies. And Batman toy and costume continue to sell year after year. `` He adapt to each era , '' Mr. Kane said. `` He fight against all injustice in the world. He fight the battle for the little man. '' But it be not Batman 's sense of justice , Mr. Kane believe , that make him so popular. It be his campiness. `` Batman and Robin be always pun and wisecrack and so be the villain , '' he say in an interview in 1965. `` It be camp way ahead of it time. '' Did that mean he do n't take his superheroes seriously ? `` How could you ? '' As Batman 's popularity increase , Mr. Kane do less and less of the drawing. Although his name appear on the strip until 1964 , the work be do mostly by other artist , whom Mr. Kane call his `` ghosts. '' He be survive by his wife , Elizabeth Sanders Kane , an actress ; a daughter , Deborah Majeski of New Jersey ; a sister , Doris Atlas of New York ; a grandson , Matthew Alderman , and , of course , Batman , Robin , the Joker , the Riddler , the Penguin and the Catwoman .