March 17 , 1998 OBITUARY Benjamin Spock , World 's Pediatrician , Dies at 94 By ERIC PACE Dr. Benjamin Spock , the pediatrician who gently coach anxious postwar parent to trust their `` own common sense , '' only to be blame by some critic for the self-indulgence of those parent ' child , the 60 's generation , die on Sunday at his home in San Diego. He be 94. Over half a century , Dr. Spock 's homey handbook on child care , now title `` Dr. Spock 's Baby and Child Care , '' become one of the best seller of all time. Therese Zazycki , a spokeswoman for Pocket Books , it main publisher , say yesterday that almost 50 million copy have be sell around the world , translate into 42 languages. Dr. Spock also become well know a an antiwar demonstrator in the 1960 's , a he campaign for nuclear disarmament and against the war in Vietnam and be arrest in protest demonstrations. `` There 's no point in raise child if they 're go to be burn alive , '' be how he make the connection between parent , pediatrician and politics. Dr. Spock have already break with authority in his child-rearing handbook , which he saw a give `` practical application '' to the idea propound by two early 20th-century sage , Sigmund Freud and John Dewey , the American philosopher and educator. `` John Dewey and Freud say that kid do n't have to be discipline into adulthood but can direct themselves toward adulthood by follow their own will , '' he observe in 1972. And so in the opening chapter of the book , first publish in hardcover in 1946 with the title `` The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care , '' Dr. Spock counsel his reader not to `` take too seriously all that the neighbor say. '' `` Do n't be afraid to trust your own common sense , '' he wrote. `` What good mother and father instinctively feel like do for their baby be usually best. '' Such relaxed advice , give in the easy , practical , reassure way that he have with parent , be light-years from the stern dictum of early standard work , like the 1928 book `` Psychological Care of Infant and Child '' by Dr. John B. Watson. `` Never , never kiss your child , '' Dr. Watson commanded. `` Never hold it in your lap. Never rock it carriage. '' Dr. T. Berry Brazelton of the Harvard Medical School , another note pediatrician-author , once say of Dr. Spock : `` Before he come along , advice to parent be very didactic. He open the whole area of empowered parenting. He give parent choice and encourage them to think thing out for themselves. '' Dr. Spock repeatedly revise his own book over the year , and , for the fifth and sixth edition , which appear in 1985 and 1992 respectively , he have a co-author : Dr. Michael B. Rothenberg , a professor of pediatrics and psychiatry at the University of Washington 's medical school. Dr. Spock say in an interview in early 1992 , when he be 88 , that he plan to stay involve in update the book `` as long a I live. '' Ms. Zazycki of Pocket Books say that , a schedule , the seventh edition of the book will be publish , in mass market paperback and trade paperback version , on May 2 , which would have be the doctor 's 95th birthday. Tracey Guest , a spokeswoman for the publishing house Dutton , say yesterday that Dutton will publish a hard-cover version of the seventh edition of Dr. Spock 's book on July 1. That new edition be by Dr. Spock and a new co-author , Dr. Steven J. Parker , who be a Boston pediatrician. He be the lead author of a study , publish in 1992 in the journal Pediatrics , which find that woman with one aspect of the Type A personality -- loosely identify a a hard-driving nature -- tend to have baby who exhibit Type A temperaments. Dr. Spock 's literary agent , Robert Lescher , say late in 1997 that Dr. Spock be `` very deeply involved '' in prepare the seventh edition. Altogether , the doctor be the author or a co-author of 13 books. He be also a prolific author of magazine column for more than 30 years. He write column about raise child for Redbook and Ladies Home Journal and , more recently , for Parenting magazine. From Pediatrics To Politics In the 1960 's and 1970 's , Dr. Spock 's view on child-rearing be sometimes blame for the disorderliness of young people , many of whose parent have be devotee of his book. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew blame the doctor for what Mr. Agnew call the undue permissiveness abroad in the land. It be in the 1960 's that Dr. Spock become an antiwar activist and opponent of the draft , nuclear armament and the United States 's involvement in Vietnam. He be a co-chairman of the National Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy , know a SANE , from 1962 to 1967. He also undergo what he call a `` conversion to socialism. '' The doctor be arrest at various protest demonstrations. In 1968 a Boston court convict him of conspire to counsel evasion of the draft. He be sentence to two year in prison and fin $ 5,000 , but the conviction be reverse in 1969 by the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit on the ground of insufficient evidence. In 1972 Dr. Spock be the Presidential candidate of the People 's Party , a coalition of left-wing organizations. His platform call for free medical care , the legalization of abortion and marijuana , a guaranteed minimum income for family and the immediate withdrawal of all American troop from foreign countries. In 1976 he be the party 's candidate for Vice President , and in the late 1970 's he be also prominent in anti-nuclear demonstrations. By the time he turn 80 , in 1985 , he have be arrest a dozen time for civil disobedience , but he do not stop. In 1987 , he and others be arrest and charge with trespass after demonstrate at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station against the test launching of a Trident 2 missile. The Rev. Dr. Norman Vincent Peale , the author of `` The Power of Positive Thinking '' and a critic of Dr. Spock , saw it differently. He say the doctor have go `` out in the street with these baby raise accord to his book , demonstrate with them for thing they claim we should not deny them. '' Dr. Peale say the doctor 's view amount to : `` Feed 'em whenever they want , never let them cry , satisfy their every desire. '' Spock Interprets Spock on Babies Dr. Spock say that Dr. Peale , Mr. Agnew and other critic have distort what he have written. `` I do n't want to encourage permissiveness , but rather to relax rigidity , '' he once observed. `` Every once in a while , somebody would say to me , 'There 's a perfectly horrible child down the block whose mother tell everybody that he 's be bring up entirely by your book. ' But my own child be raise strictly , to be polite and considerate. I guess people read into the book what they want to. '' On another occasion , strike a different note , he say : `` Maybe my book help a generation not to be intimidate by adulthood. When I be young , I be always make to assume that I be wrong. Now young people think they might be right and stand up to authority. '' The doctor 's own political activism deter some people from buy his book. In an interview in 1992 , he report : `` The sale of the book be depress a great deal during the Vietnam period. It have gradually creep back up. '' And Dr. Edward F. Zigler , a child psychologist on the Yale University faculty , say in the same year that there be still `` people today who mistrust his book because of his position on social issues. '' Dr. Spock also come in for criticism from the woman 's movement. He be denounce for what be call sexist passage in his writing , one of which object to woman `` act more and more like men. '' Gloria Steinem once tell him that she hop he understand that he be consider a symbol of repression , like Freud and other male supremacists. In 1971 , note the feminist criticism , he write : `` I agree today that a man have no business try to tell woman what their characteristic be , which one be inborn , which be more admirable , which will be best utilize by what occupations. '' In talk about himself , Dr. Spock understandably refer now and then to his own starchy upbringing in New Haven. Once , in the 1960 's , he say that in his life he have `` try hard to rebel , to be pleasure-seeking , '' but that his political dissent have be base on stern moral consideration that his Yankee parent would have approve of. From Need to Help , An Urge to Doctor Benjamin McLane Spock be bear May 2 , 1903 in New Haven. He be the eldest of the six child -- four girl and two boy -- of Benjamin Ives Spock , a railroad lawyer who be conservative in his politics , and Mildred Louise Stoughton Spock. The Spocks be descend from early Dutch settler in the Hudson Valley ; the family name be originally Spaak. After graduate from Phillips Academy in Andover , Mass. , Dr. Spock enter Yale College , where he major in English , minored in history and , a he recall year later , `` gravitate toward medical school without any real decision. '' Six foot 4 inch tall and broad-shouldered , he be , literally and figuratively , a big man on campus , a member of the Yale crew that win in the Paris Olympics in 1924. `` I have an awfully good time at college , '' he recall year later. He also work summer in a home for cripple children. `` I guess that 's why I become a baby doctor , thinking of those kid , '' he say later. `` My doctoring be always vaguely humanitarian. '' After earn a B.A. in 1925 , he study at the Yale Medical School from 1925 to 1927 , and then transfer to Columbia University 's College of Physicians and Surgeons and earn his M.D. in 1929 , after be at the head of his class at the end of the last two years. He intern at Presbyterian Hospital in New York and be a resident in pediatrics at the New York Nursery and Child 's Hospital. `` Sometime during the pediatric residency year ( 1931-1932 ) '' Dr. Spock write year later , `` I conceive the idea that someone go into pediatrics should have psychological training. '' And so he also spend 10 month a a resident in psychiatry at New York Hospital , and he go on to part-time training at the New York Psychoanalytic Institute from 1933 to 1938. A Warm Charmer With Children In 1933 he also open his pediatric practice and after a couple of lean year it begin to flourish. His success be partly the result of his charm , warmth and vitality. `` All the young mother have a great crush on him , '' a former patient say year later. `` He be a gay and charm man. '' Another reason he do well be that , a the product of a large and happy family , he take great pleasure in be with his little patients. He once say , `` One of my fault a a pediatrician have always be that I whoop it up too much with children. '' His success be also the result in part of his concern for the feeling of his patient and their parents. He wear ordinary business suit , rather than white doctor 's coat , to make his visitor feel more relaxed. Describing Dr. Spock 's child-side manner , another writer on child care , Dr. Milton Levine , recall later , `` I use to hear parent and even doctor talk about him a 'the man with the gentle face and eyes. ' `` In addition to his private practice , Dr. Spock serve , early in his career , a an instructor in pediatrics at Cornell Medical College , an assistant attend pediatrician at New York Hospital and a consultant to the New York City Health Department. He also be the part-time school doctor at the Brearley School on East 83d Street , a private school for girl from kindergarten through the 12th grade. At the school , Lynn Z. Bloom write in her 1972 book , `` Dr. Spock : Biography of a Conservative Radical '' : `` He realize that the perceptive teacher could see each child in the context of the whole class and so understand her in a way the pediatrician never could. The perspective he gain at Brearley be to be draw upon at length in his late writing for parents. '' In 1943 , ten year after the birth of his first son , Michael , Dr. Spock begin three year of write `` The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care. '' He spend countless evening dictate it to his first wife , the former Jane Davenport Cheney , who type it up a he go along and assist in many other ways. Dictating the book help to give it the conversational tone that be one of it great attractions. Dr. Spock join the Navy in 1944 and keep on writing in his spare time while work a a psychiatrist in military hospital in New York and California. He leave the Navy , with the rank of lieutenant commander , in 1946. The doctor take enormous pain with the book and even work on it original index during a slow troop-train journey from New York to California. To make thing as convenient a possible for reader , he make sure the index include such common-sensical entry a `` Bedtime -- keep it happy. '' In the 1972 interview , Dr. Spock say he have undertake the book `` a a departure from conventional wisdom. '' `` It be n't radical , though it strike out in new direction , '' he said. A New Perspective On Raising Children Taking a longer look backward , in the 1992 interview , the doctor ascribe much of his professional success to his own psychoanalytic training in the 1930's. In that period , he say , it be highly unusual for an American pediatrician to have that kind of training. `` For the first 10 year I be in practice , before I write the book , '' he say , `` I be try desperately to reconcile Freudian concept with what mother tell me about their babies. '' In the book , Dr. Spock write that it be unnecessary for a mother to stick to a rigid feeding schedule for her baby and that it hurt a mother emotionally to have to wait for a fixed feeding time while her baby wailed. But he also stipulate : `` This be not an argument against reasonable regularity. I do not think it be harmful for a baby or a mother to work toward a schedule. The mother have to run the rest of her household and when the baby be ready to fit in , it will help everybody. '' On the question of how to cope with cry , Dr. Spock take a balanced view : `` I do n't think it 's good to let a baby cry miserably for long period if there 's a way to comfort him , not because it will do him any physical harm but because of what it might do to his and his mother 's spirits. `` The child , he write , `` need to feel that his mother and father , however agreeable , still have their own right , know how to be firm , wo n't let him be unreasonable or rude. '' And he add , `` The spoiled child be not a happy creature even in his own home. '' From Book 's Success , A Frightened Author In retrospect , it seem almost inevitable that the book would become an enormous success , appear a it do when the post-World War II baby boom be under way , and the wind of change be stir in the baby and child care field. Even Dr. Spock 's flinty Yankee mother be say to have observe , after read the book , `` Why Benny , it 's really quite sensible. '' But the doctor say in the 1992 interview that he be frighten when 750,000 copy be sell in it first year. `` I be scar that the book would be misunderstood , '' he say , `` that somebody , think she be follow my advice , would do something that would make a child worse , or even kill a child. '' In it first six year the book sell more than four million copy , and the language it be eventually translate into included Urdu , Thai and Tamil. Duell , Sloan & Pearce publish the original hard-cover edition. Pocket Books , which have persuade Dr. Spock to write the book , bring it out in paperback with the title , `` The Pocket Book of Baby and Child Care , '' which later become simply `` Baby and Child Care '' and then `` Dr. Spock 's Baby and Child Care. '' That be the title of the hard-cover and paperback version of the current , sixth edition , which come out in 1992. Dr. Spock 's earnings from the book be widely think to have make him a millionaire. In the early 1990 's , they be about $ 150,000 a year. As time pass , he watch for new development and insight that might require him to revise part of his book. He recall year later that when he return briefly to his private pediatric practice in New York after the war , `` I begin to see example of a going-to-bed sleep problem in infant that I have never see before : a baby would object to be put to bed in the evening , and his mother would keep pick him up. `` If she be a type who could be progressively intimidated , her baby could turn into a tyrant in six months. He could not only learn to stay awake until 10 or 11 o'clock at night but demand that his exhaust mother carry him around in her arms. '' Dr. Spock take that problem into account in 1954 , when he begin to prepare revisions. As he put it later , `` I write that more mother get into difficulty from be afraid to give firm leadership than from be too rigid. And I put more emphasis on the right of parent , on the need for firm parental leadership , and on my conviction that firmness make for not only better-behaved child but for happy ones. '' Changing of Guard In Child Authorities After give up his New York practice in 1947 , Dr. Spock be affiliate with the Mayo Clinic in Rochester , Minn. , and go on to serve a professor of child development at the University of Pittsburgh from 1951 to 1955 and at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland from 1955 to 1967 , when he retire from teaching. Over the next year , he keep active `` writing article and book , keep up with correspondence , go out on frequent speaking tour , '' he write in a 1989 volume of memoir , `` Spock on Spock. '' He continue to make change in his baby and child care book , and the fourth edition in 1976 be revise largely , a he say in a preface , `` to eliminate the sexist bias of the sort that help to create and perpetuate discrimination against girl and women. '' One change be to refer to the baby and child a `` she '' as well a `` he. '' Another be in description of the parent ' roles. `` I always assume that the parent take the great share of young child ( and of the home ) would be the mother , whether or not she want an outside career , '' he say in the preface. `` Yet it 's this almost universal assumption that lead to woman feel a much great compulsion than men to sacrifice a part of their career in order that the child will be well care for , '' he go on. `` Now I recognize that the father 's responsibility be as great a the mother's. '' By early 1990 , when Dr. Spock be 86 , the 71-year-old Dr. Brazelton , who tirelessly address parent ' group , have become the country 's most visible contemporary authority on raise baby and young children. And Dr. Penelope Leach , a British psychologist-author , have also join the top echelon of expert to whom new parent be turn for advice. But Dr. Spock remain one of the most widely read authority on child-rearing. In 1976 , the year that the fourth edition of his baby and child care book come out , he be divorce from his first wife , Jane , whom he marry in 1927. In an interview shortly before the divorce , she note that he have dedicate the late revision of the book to her and that he have acknowledge that she have give him much help in write it. `` Feminist group land on him like a ton of brick because they think his book be sexist , '' Jane Spock say , `` So in the process of take sexism out of his book , he do this dedication to me. '' She say she should have be consider the co-author of the book , and then , a she put it , `` I would have be ask on television show , too , and I would have be ask what I think about things. I might have be more of a somebody. But I do n't think he could stand it , share the spotlight. You know how people are. '' Later in 1976 , Dr. Spock be marry to Mary Morgan , whom he meet through her work arranging conference for professionals. `` Spock on Spock , '' subtitle `` a Memoir of Growing Up With the Century , '' be write in collaboration with her. In an interview in 1994 , soon after Dr. Spock 's 91st birthday , Ms. Morgan say his good health and longevity stem from his life style , which still include rowing. In those day he begin each day with an hour 's meditation , 30 minute of yoga , a shiatsu massage , a hot sesame oil massage and a macrobiotic breakfast of brown rice , miso soup and vegetables. Nonetheless , he say at the time , `` It surprise me very much to find I get to be 91. '' In an interview last month , Ms. Morgan say that she and her husband live on a budget of roughly $ 100,000 a year , but that their saving have be deplete by 24-hour nursing and by other kind of care for the doctor , who come down with pneumonia six time last year and have be in decline health. She have decide to appeal for assistance from friend by mean of a letter-writing campaign and through fund-raising party at the time of the publication of the next edition of the baby and child care book. Dr. Spock have two son from his first marriage , and they do not comment about her appeal. But Ms. Morgan say the family be divide over whether the doctor should enter a nursing home , which would cost less. His home care in January , 1998 cost over $ 16,000 -- which be largely not cover by Medicare and private insurance. `` They want to put him in a nursing home and I would n't do it , '' she say , `` And I say I will stay beside him till the day I die. '' She say their income have dwindle by half because the baby and child care book 's sale have fall off since people be wait for the next edition. Last month , Gina Centrello , the president of Pocket Books , say they have decide to help pay his medical bills. In addition to his wife , Ms. Morgan , Dr. Spock be survive by two son , Michael of Illinois and John of California ; a stepdaughter , Ginger Davison of Tennessee ; four grandchild ; one great-granddaughter ; and two sister , Sally Jordy of Rhode Island and Marjorie Spock of Maine. In 1994 Dr. Spock express some very mixed view about child-rearing in his book `` A Better World for Our Children : Rebuilding American Family Values. '' `` When I look at our society and think of the million of child expose every day to it harmful effect , I be near despair , '' he wrote. He bemoan `` the progressive loss of value in this century '' and `` the fact that our present society be simply not working. '' But he add a hopeful note. `` Of course we can not return to the 'good old day , ' `` he say , `` But we can bring back some of those traditional family value and stability. Our great hope be to bring up child inspire by their opportunity for be helpful and loving. '' Books Written By Dr. Spock Baby and Child Care 1946 A Baby 's First Year 1954 Feeding Your Baby and Child 1955 Dr. Spock Talks With Mothers 1961 Problems of Parents 1962 Caring for Your Disabled Child 1965 Dr. Spock on Vietnam 1968 Decent and Indecent 1970 A Teenager 's Guide to Life and Love 1970 Raising Children in a Difficult Time 1974 Spock on Parenting 1988 Spock on Spock : a Memoir of Growing Up With the Century 1989 A Better World for our Children 1994 Those currently in print be : Dr. Spock on Parenting ( Pocket Books , 1988 ) Dr. Spock 's Baby and Child Care , sixth edition ( Dutton , hardcover edition ; Pocket Books , mass market and trade paperback edition , 1992 ) A Better World for Our Children ( National Press Books , hardcover edition ; Contemporary Books , trade paperback edition , 1994 )