January 3 , 1998 OBITUARY Helen Wills Moody , Dominant Champion Who Won 8 Wimbledon Titles , Dies at 92 By ROBIN FINN Helen Wills Moody , arguably the most dominant tennis player of the 20th century and the first American-born woman to achieve international celebrity a an athlete , die Thursday at a convalescent home in Carmel , Calif. She be 92 and have be in fail health for several years. She be affectionately but accurately know a Little Miss Poker Face for her dispassionate on-court behavior. Wills , who never appear for a match without her signature stark white visor , win 31 Grand Slam title in her 15 year of competition. She hold the No. 1 world ranking for eight year and do not lose a set while amass a 180- match win streak from 1927 to 1933. Match point for or against her often pass unnoticed by Wills , a product of her legendary concentration. According to her biographer Larry Engelman , she adhere to a simple mantra during the match : `` Every shot , every shot , every shot. '' She win the first of her 19 Grand Slam single title a a pigtailed 17-year-old in 1923 at the national championship in Forest Hills , N.Y. Bothered by back pain and a disinclination to turn professional , she retire from tennis altogether in 1938 after win a record eighth Wimbledon title at age 32. That record remain until 1990 , when Martina Navratilova capture her ninth single championship at Wimbledon. Wills follow the game closely in her late year , watch match on television , and she seem never to have lose her competitive edge. `` She admire Martina Navratilova greatly a a tennis player who break her record , '' say Jeanne Cherry , a Los Angeles tennis historian. `` I once ask her how she felt about Martina break her record , and she say , `` Well , you know , she pump iron. '' No less a champion than Don Budge , 11 year her junior , call Wills `` one of my idols. '' Like Moody , Budge be bear in California 's Bay area. `` I remember rid to Berkeley on my bicycle to watch her practice , '' he say yesterday from his home in Dingmans Ferry , Pa. In addition to her eight Wimbledon single title , Wills capture seven United States single title , win the French championship four time and earn gold medal in single and double at the 1924 Olympics. Moody also win 12 United States , French and Wimbledon double and mixed double title with eight different partners. Budge be one of those who team with her in mixed doubles. `` She hit the ball hard than most , except maybe Steffi Graf , '' Budge said. `` Her footwork do n't have to be great. She would control the play because she hit the ball so hard. '' Stalwart from the baseline but unafraid of ambush her rival at the net , Wills be less a ruthless opponent than an indefatigable one. Like her flamboyant European role model , Suzanne Lenglen , Wills use men a her practice partner , the good to overpower her contemporaries. Reclusive by nature and dub the Garbo of the tennis tour by Alice Marble , one of the many opponent who felt ignore by her , Wills nonetheless live a most public and , at time , storybook existence. Renowned for her Greek profile as sell a her intimidate athletic prowess , she take tea with the British Prime Minister , be the subject of poetry by Louis Untermeyer and count King Gustaf V of Sweden and Charlie Chaplin among her admirers. In 1930 Chaplin describe `` the movement of Helen Wills play tennis '' a the most beautiful sight he have ever seen. Wills be an artist by avocation. She receive a degree in fine art along with a Phi Beta Kappa key from the University of California , and paint throughout her life. She be delight to be choose a the model for Diego Rivera 's two-story mural `` The Riches of California , '' commission for $ 2,500 in 1930. Wills and the first of her two husband , the financier Frederick Moody , invite Rivera and his wife , the painter Frieda Kahlo , to a celebratory tea after the mural 's unveiling at the former San Francisco Stock Exchange. For Wills , who confess to suffer the intangible pang of `` a restless heart , '' tennis and painting be the best antidote for melancholy. She maintain an artist 's studio at her residence in San Francisco and later in Carmel , once sell 40 painting for $ 100 each and illustrate her own article for The Saturday Evening Post. Wills also become a champion of fashion , particularly on the tennis court. Like the exotic Lenglen , the first of a new breed of female tennis player who abandon the long skirt dictate by the era , Wills advocate sensible garb on the court and blame trail hemline for woman 's ineptitude at the net. She term them `` a mental as well a a physical hazard '' and always wear a knee-length pleated skirt during play. Born in Centerville , Calif. , on Oct. 6 , 1905 , Wills spend her childhood in Berkeley and receive her initial tennis tutelage from her father , Dr. Clarence Wills. For her 14th birthday , her parent give her a membership in the Berkeley Tennis Club , where a volunteer coach , William Fuller , arrange daily match for her. Wills be a bit of a fanatic , play every day and bent on defeat every opponent. At 15 , on her first attempt , who win the national junior championship in 1921. Just two year later , at 17 , she become the second-youngest United States national champion by dethrone Molla Mallory , the defend champion. Wills begin a lengthy tenure at the top by receive the No. 1 United States rank after their match at Forest Hills. She go to Europe for the first time in 1924 , and lose the Wimbledon final to Britain 's top player , Kitty McKane. But after that auspicious debut , she prevail in all eight of her other Wimbledon finals. Perhaps Wills 's most infamous match , and certainly the one she extol a the focal point of her play career , be her only meeting with Lenglen , the queen of the continent , in a much ballyhooed showdown at Cannes in 1926. Lenglen be 26 and tactically superior ; Wills be 20 and physically stronger. Lenglen win the raucous encounter , 6-3 , 8-6. There be a prizefight atmosphere , with ticket scalp at a then-shocking rate of $ 50 each , and an international gallery of spectator that include King Gustaf , a group of stowaway French schoolboy in a eucalyptus tree at one end of the court and Wills 's future husband , Frederick Moody , who introduce himself to her after the match. Wills be fond of note that although she lose the match , she not only gain perspective on necessary change to her game , which tend to be without nuance and rely on batter her opponent into submission with repetitious forehand ground stroke , but also gain a husband. She and Moody divorce in 1937 , and she marry Aidan Roark , a film writer and note polo player , two year later. She leave no survivors. `` Whatever Helen do , she have to be the best at be , '' say Edward Chandler , a San Francisco attorney who be a lifelong friend of Wills. `` She never really seem to replace tennis. She stop play at 82 , but she be outspoken in her admiration for Chris Evert , she despise Jimmy Connors for the way he behave and she be very happy to see Pete Sampras come along , because he seem a throwback to the old school . ''