March 2 , 1998 OBITUARY Theodore Schultz , 95 , Winner Of a Key Prize in Economics By PETER PASSELL Theodore W. Schultz , an economist at the University of Chicago whose research on agriculture and education be honor with a Nobel Memorial Prize in 1979 , die Thursday at a nursing home in Evanston , Ill. The cause of death be an infection that do not respond to treatment , his family said. Mr. Schultz be 95. The eldest of eight child bear on a farm near Arlington , S.D. , Mr. Schultz never go to high school. Despite the opposition of his parent , he do attend South Dakota State College , earn bachelor 's and master 's degree in agricultural economics in 1926. He go on to graduate school at the University of Wisconsin and , arm with a Ph.D. , join the faculty of Iowa State College in 1930. At Iowa State , then a land grant college with little tradition of scholarship , he organize what come to be one of the best economics department in the country. Among the faculty he recruit be a young man with a freshly mint Ph.D. from the University of California name John Kenneth Galbraith. Mr. Schultz leave Iowa State in 1943 after a bitter battle over academic freedom. One of his colleague have write an essay compare margarine favorably with butter a a way of economize on resource for the war effort. Dairy interest protest -- the vegetable oil-based spread be view a a commercial threat -- and the college administration try to prevent publication. While Mr. Schultz successfully lead the charge against censorship , he leave for the University of Chicago. `` That incident provoke some serious soul-searching , '' recall D. Gale Johnson , a fellow agricultural economist , push land grant school to broaden their mission to include truly independent research. At the University of Chicago , Mr. Schultz again show his talent for organization. `` When he arrive , '' say James Heckman , an economist at the university , `` the economics department be a mess of bickering. '' By the early 1960 's , under Mr. Schultz 's leadership , it have emerge a a center of innovative economic thinking. But the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science be not hand out for exceptional management skills. Mr. Schultz be widely credit for bring agricultural economics into the mainstream , focus on how education , technology and financial incentive have significantly raise productivity. `` He 's a transitional figure who bridge the gap between the old-style study of institution and modern economics '' that rely on theory and statistical analysis , Mr. Heckman said. Mr. Schultz 's focus on education a a key to raise productivity lead to the modern emphasis on `` human capital '' a a factor in production. Indeed , his work pave the way for the Nobelist Gary Becker 's more celebrated analysis of human skill a a source of productivity growth. Perhaps Mr. Schultz 's most important insight be that farmer could play a key role in economic development , provide they be give the right incentives. That may seem obvious today. Agricultural change be critical to American development in the 19th century. And development specialist now look to free-market agriculture to jump-start the badly lagging economy of Africa. But in the 1950 's and 1960 's , development planner have a Soviet model in mind -- one in which agriculture 's only role be to fee the industrial labor force. Mr. Schultz formally retire in 1970 but remain an active researcher and colleague until he fracture his hip in 1990 and become bedridden. He be survive by two daughter , Elaine Glickman of Winnetka , Ill. , and Margaret Schultz of Chicago , and a son , T. Paul Schultz of Madison , Conn. Correction : March 12 , 1998 , Thursday An obituary on March 2 about Theodore W. Schultz , an economist whose research on agriculture and education be honor with a Nobel Memorial Prize , refer incorrectly to his effort , while on the faculty of Iowa State , to hire the economist John Kenneth Galbraith. Though he recruit Mr. Galbraith , Mr. Galbraith choose to go to Harvard .