July 23 , 1998 OBITUARY Alan B. Shepard Jr. Is Dead at 74 ; First American to Travel in Space By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD Alan B. Shepard Jr. , the first American to fly in space , lift national spirit at a decisive moment of cold war anxiety , and later one of only 12 astronaut to walk on the Moon , die late Tuesday night at a hospital in Monterey , Calif. He be 74 and live in Houston and Pebble Beach , Calif. The family would not disclose the cause of death , say only that it come after a long illness. But another former astronaut , Senator John Glenn of Ohio , say Mr. Shepard have be suffer from leukemia. On the morning of May 5 , 1961 , Mr. Shepard become an immediate American hero. A lean , crew-cut former Navy test pilot , then 37 , he begin the day lie on his back in a cramped Mercury capsule atop a seven-story Redstone rocket fill with explosive fuel. After four tense hour of weather and mechanical delay , he be shoot into the sky on a 15-minute flight that graze the fringe of space , at an altitude of 115 mile , and end in a splashdown in the Atlantic Ocean 302 mile downrange from Cape Canaveral , Fla. Though not much by today 's standard , the brief suborbital flight have stop a whole country in it track , wait anxiously at radio and television sets. When the message of success come through -- with a phrase that would enter the idiom , `` Everything be A-O.K. ! '' -- everyone seem to let out a collective sigh of relief. Yuri Gagarin of the Soviet Union may have be first into space , 23 day before , and have fly a full orbit , but with Mr. Shepard 's flight the United States finally have reason to cheer. In fact , Mr. Shepard 's success be credit with give President John F. Kennedy the confidence to commit the nation to the goal of land men on the Moon within the decade. He announce the goal to Congress on May 25. Daniel S. Goldin , head of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration , say the Shepard flight be `` a tremendous statement about tenacity , courage and brilliance , '' add with a tone of linger awe : `` He crawl on top of that rocket that have never before fly into space with a person aboard and he do it. That be an unbelievable act of courage. '' Dr. John M. Logsdon , a political scientist at George Washington University and author of `` The Decision to Go to the Moon , '' say , `` One can make the argument that the success of the Shepard flight enable the decision to go to the Moon. '' The historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. , a member of the Kennedy White House staff , recall that the Gagarin flight and then the Bay of Pigs fiasco in Cuba a few day later have give `` Americans a slight inferiority complex. '' Then the Shepard flight produce `` a great exhilaration and renew our confidence in our capacity a a nation. '' President Clinton hail Mr. Shepard a `` one of the great hero of modern America. '' Ten year after the first flight , Mr. Shepard make a comeback from a serious inner-ear problem , call Meuniere 's syndrome , that have ground him. And it be also a comeback flight for the space program. On Jan. 31 , 1971 , he take off for the Moon in Apollo 14 , the first lunar mission since the near-disaster of Apollo 13 the year before. He and Edgar Mitchell spend 33 hour on the Moon , a visit make memorable by Mr. Shepard 's take several spirited whack at golf ball with a makeshift six-iron he have take along. In the weak lunar gravity , the ball sailed. `` He live every golfer 's dream , '' Mr. Clinton remark , `` take a six iron and hit the ball , in his word , 'for mile and miles. ' `` Mr. Shepard be one of the original seven Mercury astronaut choose in 1959 by the fledgling space agency and introduce with great fanfare. His death leave four survivor : Scott Carpenter , L. Gordon Cooper , Walter Schirra and Senator Glenn , who at 77 be train for a kind of farewell flight on the space shuttle in October. Mr. Glenn in 1962 become the first American to orbit the earth. Virgil I. ( Gus ) Grissom die in a cockpit fire during a launching-pad training exercise in 1967. Donald K. ( Deke ) Slayton die of cancer in 1993. In 1974 , Mr. Shepard retire from both NASA and the Navy , where he have achieve the rank of rear admiral. Already wealthy from real estate and other investment , he become chairman of the Marathon Construction Corporation in Houston and later found his own business company , Seven Fourteen Enterprises. The name recognize his two mission , Freedom 7 and Apollo 14. Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. be bear on Nov. 18 , 1923 , in East Derry , N.H. , where his father , a retired Army colonel , be in the insurance business. Young Alan take odd job at a local airfield to learn more about planes. His education begin in a one-room country school , continue with high school at the Pinkerton Academy in nearby Derry and be complete at the United States Naval Academy , where he graduate in 1944. He serve briefly on a destroyer in the Pacific in World War II before turn to aviation. After flight training in Texas and Florida and service on aircraft carrier in the Mediterranean , he enter test-pilot training at Patuxent River , Md. , elevate himself into the elite of military aviation. When NASA ask 110 test pilot to volunteer to be astronaut , Mr. Shepard make the list and be one of seven chosen. Recalling the early day in the astronaut corp , Senator Glenn say yesterday : `` That group be toss into a maelstrom of activity , attention , travel and training in preparation for those early Mercury flights. It become obvious to all of u very early in our training that Al be a highly intelligent , dedicated leader whose high motivation toward accomplish our mission be a true inspiration to all. '' The seven astronaut be highly competitive , each vying to be first to fly in space , and Mr. Shepard often seem to be the most determined and cocky of the group. As the author Tom Wolfe write year later in `` The Right Stuff , '' ( Farrar , Straus , Giroux , 1979 ) Mr. Shepard present two different face to his colleague , `` both the Icy Commander and Smilin ' Al , '' but he `` set a standard of coolness and competence that would be hard to top. '' Mr. Shepard make no secret of his intense dislike of Mr. Wolfe 's book , particularly some of it character study and it concentration on some of the astronaut ' after-hours pursuits. On a tour promote his own book , `` Moon Shot , '' ( Turner Publishing ) write with Mr. Slayton , Mr. Shepard often say , `` We want to call ours 'The Real Stuff , ' since his be just fiction. '' Mr. Shepard be among three finalist for the first flight , the others be Mr. Grissom and Mr. Glenn. By May 2 , when the decision be announce , Mr. Shepard know he would be only the first American in space , not the first ever. American space manager have schedule a piloted Mercury flight in March , but problem with a test in January trouble the engineer , who decide on another unmanned test. On April 12 , the Russians continue their string of space triumph by put Major Gagarin in space for a full orbit. The historian Dr. Walter A. McDougall , in his book `` The Heavens and the Earth : A Political History of the Space Age , '' write that `` Gagarin 's flight be a second Sputnik '' and when Mr. Shepard 's flight three week later last only 15 minute on a suborbital trajectory , `` The space gap , in the eye of the world , have widened. '' The Soviet press agency Tass sneer that the Freedom 7 flight `` can not be compare with the flight of the Soviet space ship Vostok. '' In the power rivalry of the cold war , the space race have become a kind of moral equivalent of war , and in those early year after the first Sputnik satellite in October 1957 , the Soviet space force seem to be win hand down. The United States felt it prestige ebb with each Soviet launch. Dr. McDougall note that a poll take after the Shepard flight reveal that Western Europeans believe the Soviet Union to be ahead in total military strength by 41 percent to 19 percent , and in overall scientific achievement by 39 percent to 31 percent. On that May 5th morning , these thing be not on Mr. Shepard 's mind. Because of the many delay , he have an unremitting urge to urinate , but no way to get relief in his cocoon of a silver space suit. He keep plead with the controller for a break. They would not relent. Mr. Shepard describe the experience in `` Moon Shot. '' `` You hear me , '' he radio to the controllers. `` I 've get to pee. I 've be in here forever. The gantry be still right here , so why do n't you guy let me out of here for a quick stretch ? '' `` No way , Alan , '' Gordon Cooper reply , after a consultation with Dr. Wernher von Braun , the rocket scientist. `` Wernher say no. '' Finally , Mr. Shepard suggest that he be allow to urinate in his suit. But that might short-circuit the medical sensors. `` Tell 'em to turn the power off , '' the desperate astronaut ordered. They do , and relief finally come to Mr. Shepard , not long before he make history. In a decision by President Kennedy , which contrast with the Soviet policy of secrecy , the launch be broadcast live on radio and television. The capsule separate smoothly from the rocket. A few minute into the mission , Mr. Shepard take over manual control from the autopilot , put the craft through some prescribed maneuvers. For five minute , at maximum altitude and travel more than 5,000 mile an hour , the astronaut experience the weightlessness of space. `` Boy , what a ride ! '' he say later. Yet , he say , the trip be `` pleasant and relaxing , '' with no effect on his movement and efficiency. The flight be almost flawless , and so be the splashdown in the Atlantic. `` On the way to the carrier I felt relieve and happy , '' the astronaut say later. `` I know I have do a pretty good job. '' Whether or not he use the expression A-O.K. be problematic. Years later , a reporter ask Mr. Shepard if he have indeed say A-O.K. , and where do the term come from. `` Ask Shorty Powers , '' he say enigmatically , refer to Col. John ( Shorty ) Powers , who be press officer to the first astronauts. It be Colonel Powers who have pass on the quote to reporters. Three day later , Mr. Shepard and his wife , the former Louise Brewer , be entertain by the Kennedys at the White House , then whisk to New York for a ticker-tape parade in the old Lindbergh tradition. Behind the scene , space , military and budget official be meet to draw up recommendation for take bold step to catch and surpass Soviet space achievements. A memorandum , hand to President Kennedy the day of Mr. Shepard 's White House visit , conclude , `` Of all the program plan , perhaps the great unsurpassed prestige will accrue to the nation which first send a man to the moon and return him safely to earth. '' On May 25 , Mr. Kennedy tell Congress , `` This nation should commit itself to achieve the goal , before this decade be out , of land a man on the moon and return him safely to earth. No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind or more important for the long-range exploration of space. And none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish. '' Dr. Logsdon of George Washington University say it be doubtful that Mr. Kennedy would have issue such a challenge , if the Shepard flight have failed. At a dinner celebrate the 30th anniversary of the flight , Mr. Glenn say : `` Al 's flight and my flight -- it be almost like we turn a corner. There be a feeling we be come back. There be a great outpouring of public spirit. '' Mr. Shepard call it `` just the first baby step , aim for big and well things. '' His word would be echo eight year later by Neil A. Armstrong a he step on the Moon with the declaration , `` One small step for man , one giant leap for mankind. '' Mr. Shepard almost do not make it to the Moon himself. Before he could train for a second space flight in the Gemini Project , he develop inner-ear problems. Thomas P. Stafford , a retired astronaut , recall yesterday that he and Mr. Shepard have be choose for the first Gemini mission. `` It be a huge blow in his life , '' Mr. Stafford say of the medical problem that ground Mr. Shepard. `` He be anxious to get back into space , to ride again. '' Instead , for nearly a decade , Mr. Shepard be firmly root to NASA managerial job , mainly direct the astronaut corps. Mr. Stafford recall him a a natural leader , who operate `` with more stick than carrot and would lay down the law , say here 's how it 's go to be , guys. '' After surgery to correct the ear problem in 1968 , Mr. Shepard be clear to fly again and be assign to what turn out to be the third lunar landing. Although his first flight have be only 15 minute , the Apollo 14 journey to the Moon add 216 hour to his log book and round out an astronaut career that also include a Congressional Space Medal of Honor. In his last year , he still have time for work promote the space program and have join the other surviving Mercury astronaut , and Betty Grissom , the widow of Gus Grissom , in found the Mercury Seven Foundation , base in Titusville , Fla. , near Cape Canaveral. The foundation raise money for scholarship for science and engineering student in college. He be it president and chairman until last October. Besides his wife of 53 year , the survivor include two daughter , Laura Snyder and Juliana Coleman Jenkins , and six grandchildren. Funeral arrangement be pending. 1957 Aug. 26 -- The Soviet Union successfully launch a `` super longdistance '' intercontinental ballistic rocket , accord to Tass. Oct. 4 -- Sputnik 1 , the first man-made satellite , be launch by the Soviet Union. Nov. 3 -- Sputnik 2 , carry the dog Laika , be launch into orbit. Dec. 3 -- The first attempt to launch an American satellite , Vanguard , end in explosion. 1958 Jan. 31 -- Explorer 1 , the first American satellite be launched. July 29 -- President Dwight Eisenhower sign legislation establish the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Oct. 7 -- NASA organize Project Mercury to launch a manned capsule into orbit. 1959 April 2 -- After a series of the most rigorous test ever give to U. S. test pilot , seven astronaut be select for Project Mercury. Sept. 12 -- Soviets launch Luna 2 spacecraft , which make first crash-landing on moon 's surface. Oct. 18 -- Luna 3 send back the first photograph of the back side of the moon. 1960 Nov. 8 -- John F. Kennedy , who have campaign partly on the basis of a `` missile gap , '' be elect President. 1961 Jan. 12 -- A chimpanzee , Ham , make the first flight in a Mercury capsule. April 12 -- Soviets put first man in space a Yuri A. Gagarin orbit Earth once. May 5 -- Alan B. Shepard become first American in space with a 15-minute suborbital flight in Freedom 7 capsule , reach an altitude of 116.5 miles. May 25 -- President Kennedy commit the United States to put a man on the moon and return him to Earth by the end of the decade. 1962 Feb. 20 -- John H. Glenn become first American to orbit the Earth. Oct. 22-28 -- The U.S. and the Soviet Union come to the brink of war before Nikita Krushchev agree to withdraw missile from Cuba. 1963 June 16 -- Soviets launch first woman in space , Valentina V. Tereshkova , who orbit the Earth 48 times. 1967 Jan. 27 -- Fire erupts on Apollo 1 space capsule kill astronaut Virgil I. Grissom , Edward H. White 2d , and Roger Chaffee. 1968 Dec. 21-27 -- Apollo 8 becomes first man vehicle to orbit the Moon , carry Frank Borman , James A. Lovell Jr. and William A. Anders. 1969 July 20 -- Apollo 11 arrives at the Moon. Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin become the first human to walk on the Moon. 1971 Feb. 6 -- Alan Shepard , the Apollo 14 commander , become the first person to play golf on the moon .