March 22 , 1998 OBITUARY Galina Ulanova Is Dead at 88 ; A Revered Bolshoi Ballerina By MICHAEL SPECTOR MOSCOW , March 21 -- Galina Ulanova , whose uncanny blend of unabashed emotionalism and lyrical restraint make her one of the great dancer of the 20th century , die here today. She be 88. Revered in Russia from the moment she make her debut in Leningrad 's Maryinsky Ballet in 1928 , she rivet the Western world in 1956 when she travel with the Bolshoi Ballet to London 's Royal Opera House. There she astonish critic and fan alike with her performance a Juliet and Giselle. Inspired by Prokofiev 's score to 'Romeo and Juliet ' ( one of three he write for the ballerina ) and by the bold choreography of Leonid Lavrovsky , Miss Ulanova 's dancing , and that of the Bolshoi , help make the case after Stalin 's death that Russian classical ballet remain the fine in the world. 'The impact of the Bolshoi have be overwhelm , ' write John Martin , The New York Times 's dance critic , when the company travel for the first time to New York in 1959. 'And it will be something of a calamity if we ever allow ourselves to recover.' Even with the advance publicity about the majesty of Miss Ulanova 's role a Juliet , American critic find themselves astounded. 'To see a legend assume the dimension of reality before u , ' Mr. Martin write about her dancing in 'Romeo and Juliet , ' 'and in the process lose nothing of the quality of legend , be a rare and wonderful experience.' It be , however , an experience that Russian ballet fan be able to enjoy for decades. Galina Sergeyevna Ulanova be bear in 1910 in St. Petersburg -- the home of Fokine , Balanchine , Petipa , Nijinsky and so many other legend of Russian dance. She be teach there by her mother -- who also dance professionally -- before enter the famous ballet school there. She join the Maryinsky Theater in 1928 , the same year she complete her classical dance training , and she would live long enough to see it become the Kirov and then revert , when the Soviet Union dissolve , to it original name. It be there that she make her name in Mr. Lavrovsky 's 'Romeo and Juliet , ' as well a in such classical staple a 'Swan Lake ' and 'Giselle. ' In 1944 , Miss Ulanova be transfer -- reportedly after a personal request by Stalin -- to the Bolshoi in Moscow. She dance with the Bolshoi until 1960 , and for most of that time she be the company 's and the Soviet Union 's chief soloist. Miss Ulanova perform most of the great role in classical ballet , include the lead in 'Giselle , ' 'Swan Lake , ' 'Cinderella ' and 'Sleeping Beauty. ' Such be her power that when Mr. Martin criticize -- mildly -- her performance in 'Swan Lake ' during the 1959 New York tour , Pravda respond the next day by accuse him and The Times of be 'bent on continue the cold war.' Despite her star status -- and the tension that can cause -- Miss Ulanova be highly popular , eventually become a teacher to the great dancer -- include Yekaterina Maksimova , Nina Timofeyeva and the current Bolshoi director , Vladimir Vasilyev -- who follow her. 'On many occasion people try to push u into conflict , ' Maya Plesetskaya , who replace her in 1960 a the Bolshoi 's leading female dancer , write two year ago in her memoirs. 'It could never happen.' Miss Plesetskaya have only praise for the woman whom she remember see for the first time on the day in 1939 that Hitler 's Foreign Minister , Joachim Von Ribbentrop , arrive in Moscow to sign the notorious pact between Germany and the Soviet Union. 'She be an angel and she dance like one , ' she wrote. Few star be able to handle the demand of dance into their 40 's , but Miss Ulanova -- who be 49 when she strike New York like a thunderbolt -- be one of them. Still , she often vow that she would retire when she be 50 and she did. Unlike most of her contemporary , who return frequently into their dotage for special performance , Miss Ulanova then devote the rest of her life to teaching. She receive nearly every medal the Soviets bestow on their most accomplished citizen , include the Order of Lenin and the Stalin Award. Although she try to remain politely uninvolved in party politics -- always an impossibility at the time -- she be twice name a Hero of Socialist labor. President Boris N. Yeltsin , recover at his dacha from his most recent illness , issue a statement today praise Miss Ulanova a a rare Russia genius. 'She be the great ballerina of the 20th century , ' he said. 'Her life and the art of dance to which she have give her soul have become part of Russian and world culture. Ulanova have always be for u the symbol of conscience , honor and dignity. She be a true artist . '