April 1 , 1998 OBITUARY Bella Abzug , 77 , Congresswoman And a Founding Feminist , Is Dead By LAURA MANSNERUS Bella S. Abzug , New Yorker , feminist , antiwar activist , politician and lawyer , die yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan. She be 77. She die of complication follow heart surgery , say Harold Holzer , who be her spokesman when she serve in Congress. She have be hospitalize for week , and have be in poor health for several year , he said. Ms. Abzug represent the West Side of Manhattan for three Congressional term in the 1970's. She bring with her a belligerent , exuberant politics that make her a national character. Often call just Bella , she be recognizable everywhere by her big hat and a voice that Norman Mailer say `` could boil the fat off a taxicab driver 's neck. '' She oppose the Vietnam War , champion what be then call woman 's liberation and be one of the first to call for the impeachment of President Richard M. Nixon. Long after it cease to be fashionable , she call her politics radical. During her last campaign , for Congress in 1986 , she tell The New York Times , `` I be not a centrist. '' Bella Abzug be a founding feminist , and an endure one. In the movement 's giddy , sloganeer early day , Ms. Abzug be , like Betty Friedan and Gloria Steinem , an icon , the hat bobbing before the camera at march and rallies. After leave the House in January 1977 , she work for woman 's right for two more decades. She found an international woman 's group that work on environmental issues. And she be a leader of a conference of nongovernmental organization that parallel the United Nations ' fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing in 1995. Even then , she continue to rankle. Former President George Bush , on a private visit to China that coincide with the Beijing conference , say to a meeting of food production executive : `` I feel somewhat sorry for the Chinese , have Bella Abzug run around. Bella Abzug be one who have always represent the extreme of the woman 's movement. '' When told of Mr. Bush 's remark , Ms. Abzug , 75 and in a wheelchair , retort : `` He be address a fertilizer group ? That 's appropriate. '' Her forceful personality and direct manner make her a lightning rod for criticism from those who oppose the idea of hold a woman 's conference. After Bob Dole , then the Senate majority leader , say he could not imagine why anyone `` would want to attend a conference co-chaired by Bella Abzug , '' she respond that she be not run the meeting but simply participate with more than 30,000 other woman over how best to achieve equal rights. But much of what Ms. Abzug agitate for -- abortion right , day care , law against employment discrimination -- be by that time mainstream political fare. In Congress , `` she be first on almost everything , on everything that ever matter , '' say Esther Newberg , Ms. Abzug 's first administrative assistant and one of many staff member who quit but remain devoted. `` She be first to call for Richard Nixon 's impeachment , first to call for an end to the war. '' Ms. Abzug make enemy easily -- `` Sometimes the hat and the mouth take over , '' Ms. Newberg say -- but Ms. Abzug saw that a a consequence of a refusal to compromise , as well a a matter of sport. Of her time in the House , Ms. Abzug write in a journal that be publish in 1972 a `` Bella , '' `` I spend all day figure out how to beat the machine and knock the crap out of the political power structure. '' She work relentlessly at organize and coalition-building. A founder of Women Strike for Peace and the National Women 's Political Caucus , she spend a lifetime prod for change , with a lawyer 's enthusiasm for political channel , through organization from the P.T.A. to the United Nations. She make friend easily , too. `` She 's fierce and intense and funny , '' say her longtime friend Gloria Steinem. `` She take everyone seriously. When she argue with you fiercely , it 's because she take you seriously. And she 's willing to change her mind. That 's so rare. '' Her First Speech , In a Subway Station Bella Savitzky Abzug be bear on July 24 , 1920 in the Bronx , the second daughter of Jewish immigrant from Russia. Her father , Emanuel Savitzky , whom Ms. Abzug later describe a `` this humanist butcher , '' ran ( and name ) the Live and Let Live Meat Market on Ninth Avenue in Manhattan. She say she know from the age of 11 that she want to be a lawyer , and not long afterward give her first public speech , in a subway station , while collect for a Zionist youth organization. She go from Hunter College , where she be student body president , to Columbia University Law School , where she be an editor of The Law Review , to a practice represent union workers. Ms. Abzug trace the wearing of her trademark wide-brimmed hat to those days. She once recall : `` When I be a young lawyer , I would go to people 's office and they would always say : 'Sit here. We 'll wait for the lawyer. ' Working woman wear hats. It be the only way they would take you seriously. `` After a while , I start like them. When I get to Congress , they make a big thing of it. So I be watching. Did they want me to wear it or not ? They do n't want me to wear it , so I did. '' All the while , she be a leftist and an agitator. Later , exasperate with her Congressional aide , she write : `` I just do n't understand young people today , quite frankly. Our struggle be political , ideological and economic , and we felt we could n't make something of ourselves unless we better society. We saw the two together. '' In the 1950 's , Ms. Abzug 's law practice turn to other case identify with the left. One client be Willie McGee , a black Mississippian convicted of rap a white woman and sentence to death. Ms. Abzug , who be pregnant at the time , argue the case in Mississippi while white supremacist group threaten her. Though the Supreme Court stay the execution twice , Mr. McGee be eventually executed. She also represent people accuse of Communist activity by Senator Joseph McCarthy 's Congressional committee and it counterpart in Albany. In the 1960 's , Ms. Abzug become an antiwar activist. A founder of Women Strike for Peace , she become it chief lobbyist , protest nuclear testing and , later , the Vietnam War. She organize insurgent Democrats into other group , too , become a leader of the movement against President Lyndon B. Johnson and a prominent figure in the 1968 Presidential campaign of Senator Eugene McCarthy. During those year , Ms. Abzug start navigate New York City politics. She and her husband , Martin , move from Mount Vernon , the Westchester suburb where they have raise their two daughter , to a town house at 37 Bank Street in Greenwich Village. In 1970 , Ms. Abzug run for Congress. The 19th Congressional District , which snake from low Manhattan to the West 80 's , have four register Democrats to every Republican and have be represent in Congress for seven term by Leonard Farbstein , a solid but rather somnolent liberal. Ms. Abzug win the Democratic primary with 54 percent of the vote. Campaign Became A Women 's Crusade At this point , Bella Abzug become national news , a flash of local color in a political year. She seem to be everywhere , clap back and jab biceps. Her campaign headquarters next to the Lion's Head , a writer ' and journalist ' bar in Greenwich Village , be also a day-care center for her legion of female volunteers. The woman 's crusade she lead bring considerable , if sometimes derisive , attention. Though she eventually take 55 percent of the vote , she have genuine Republican opposition , unusual in an era when New York 's main political action consist of various Democratic faction knife one another. The Republican-Liberal candidate be Barry Farber , a well-known radio talk show host. Mr. Farber draw many Democrats who resent Mr. Farbstein 's humiliation or be simply put off by Ms. Abzug 's style. To her chagrin , Mr. Farber accuse Ms. Abzug , who advocate direct negotiation between Israelis and Arabs , of flag in her support of Israel. For year after that , she make a point of state her Jewish credential , date to childhood : her family be religious and she go regularly to synagogue ( though she be bother that woman be relegate to the back row of the balcony ) , study Hebrew and be enrol for a time at the Jewish Theological Seminary. When Ms. Abzug go to Washington , she seek an appointment to the Armed Services Committee. She want a resolution call for an immediate withdrawal from Vietnam and she vow to take on the military-industrial complex. She want to end the draft. She want national health insurance , money for day-care center and housing , and more money for New York City , all to be pay for with billion siphon from the Pentagon 's budget. She get little of this , but during the next six year `` she be indefatigable , '' Ms. Newberg recalled. `` She yell a lot , only because she could n't get everything done. '' And if she could n't , Ms. Newberg add , it be partly because `` her agenda be too pure for her moment in time. '' Ms. Abzug do become expert at parliamentary rule , work them skillfully and be famously well prepared for every vote , hear and committee spat. The `` sunshine law '' require govern body to meet publicly come out of a subcommittee she headed. She coax fund for New York from the Public Works Committee. She be a co-sponsor of the woman 's equal right amendment. `` She be one of the most exciting , enlightened legislator that ever serve in the Congress , '' say Representative Charles B. Rangel of Manhattan , with whom Ms. Abzug sometimes collaborate and sometimes sparred. From her first day on Capitol Hill -- the day she dismay her colleague by introduce her Vietnam resolution -- Ms. Abzug deride the Congressional club , the seniority system , the log-rolling and back-scratching. She do not spare fellow Democrats ; when she speak of liberal , it be usually dismissively. She badger the House leadership over committee appointment and votes. She badger the President , too. Invited to a reception at Richard Nixon 's White House , she accept ( while write in her journal , `` Who want to listen to his pious idiocy ? '' ) , then announce to Nixon in the receiving line that her constituent demand a withdrawal from Vietnam. For all of her railing against Democrats who go along to get along , Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill name her one of his dozen assistant whip , and by most account she work well with some of the crusty fixture in the House. Still , a 1972 report by Ralph Nader estimate that Ms. Abzug 's sponsorship of a measure often cost it 20 to 30 votes. Her reputation a an irritant come from all quarters. Jimmy Breslin write of a campaign worker who repair to the Lion 's Head one night , hold his side and swear never to work for Ms. Abzug again. `` She punch me , '' he explain , in a quarrel over scheduling. The next day , Mr. Breslin report , Ms. Abzug call the aide. `` Michael , I call to apologize , '' she said. `` How 's your kidney ? '' Mr. Breslin also recount the Congresswoman 's introduction to Sol Linowitz , the former chairman of the Xerox Corporation and a Democratic Party luminary : `` Are you the man that use to be head of the Xerox ? '' Ms. Abzug asked. `` That 's right , '' Mr. Linowitz replied. `` I 'm glad to meet a big shot , '' Ms. Abzug said. `` I 'm in hock $ 35,000 on my campaign. '' Ms. Abzug acknowledge loneliness in her year in Congress. `` Outside of Martin and the kid , I do n't feel very relate to most people at this point , '' she write in 1971. `` I feel detach in social situations. I 'm always think about other thing , about Congress , about the issue , about the political coalition I 'm try to organize. It never leave me. I even have trouble relate to some of my close friend , though God know I still love them , even if they do n't know it. '' Always , she return to Manhattan to spend weekend with her husband. She have marry Martin Abzug in 1944. The two New Yorkers meet on a bus in Miami , when both be on the way to a Yehudi Menuhin concert. Mr. Abzug , a stockbroker and an author of two published novel , have next to no interest in politics. In an interview in 1970 , he murmur , while his wife be out of the room , `` The political bug be a curious bug. '' But he be , she say , her best friend and supporter , and `` one of the few unneurotic people leave in society. '' Corrosive Ambition Hampers a Career Ms. Abzug 's own ambition be too corrosive for many people , even -- or , perhaps , especially -- for her fellow New York Democrats. When the State Legislature slice up her district in 1972 , they urge her to challenge one of the two conservative incumbent Democrats in adjoin district , Representative John J. Rooney or Representative John M. Murphy. Instead , she oppose a liberal Democrat , William Fitts Ryan , in the 20th District , encompass the Upper West Side and the Riverdale section of the Bronx. The primary be bitter and , eventually , politically expensive to Ms. Abzug. Bill Ryan be one of the early hero of the city 's insurgent Democrats , an early opponent of the Vietnam War and a genuinely well-liked man who , a many of his constituent know , be wag a gallant fight against cancer. Mr. Ryan defeat Ms. Abzug in the Democratic primary but die before the general election. The Democratic County Committee appoint Ms. Abzug a the candidate to replace him , but she be challenge by Mr. Ryan 's widow , Priscilla , who run on the Liberal line. Ms. Abzug win in November , but she have make dedicate enemy who believe she be an overly aggressive politician who would not hesitate to attack anyone who get in her way. Ten year later , she be deny a seat in the state 's delegation to the national party 's biannual conference because New York leader consider her disruptive. In 1976 , she give up her House seat to run for the Senate. She lose in the primary , to Daniel Patrick Moynihan , by a margin of only 1 percent. Two more campaign quickly followed. ( In a 1978 interview , she say : `` I 'm a politician. I run for office. That 's my profession. '' ) She lose to Edward I. Koch in a crowded mayoral primary in 1977. The next year , run for the House again , she lose , again by just 1 percent , to a little-known Republican , S. William Green. She be appoint co-chairwoman of President Jimmy Carter 's National Advisory Committee on Women , and then , after disagree with him over economic policy , be dismissed. The majority of the committee member resign in protest. Ms. Abzug , unapologetic , say with a shrug , `` I 've get to find myself another big , nonpaying job. '' Her next and last campaign be in 1986 , this time for a House seat in Westchester County. She win the primary in a burst of the old , ebullient campaigning style , but lose in November to Joseph J. DioGuardi , the Republican incumbent. It be during that campaign that Martin Abzug died. Her friend say Ms. Abzug never recovered. Nine year later , she say , , `` I have n't be entirely the same since. '' There be one more bid for office , for her old House seat on the Upper West Side , when she announce her candidacy to replace Representative Ted Weiss on his death just before the 1992 election. But she be quickly eliminate from the field at the party convention. During the next decade , Ms. Abzug suffer from ill health , include breast cancer , but continue to practice law and work for woman 's groups. She write a book , `` Gender Gap , '' with her old friend Mim Kelber. She start a lobbying group call Women U.S.A. and found the Women 's Environment and Development Organization , a group that work with international agencies. In addition to her daughter , Eve and Liz , Ms. Abzug be survive by her sister , Helene Alexander of Great Neck , N.Y. `` I 've be describe a a tough and noisy woman , a prizefighter , a man hater , you name it , '' Ms. Abzug say of herself in `` Bella. '' `` They call me Battling Bella , Mother Courage and a Jewish mother with more complaint than Portnoy. '' `` There be those who say I 'm impatient , impetuous , uppity , rude , profane , brash and overbearing. Whether I 'm any of these thing or all of them , you can decide for yourself. But whatever I be -- and this ought to be make very clear at the outset -- I be a very serious woman . ''