March 5 , 1998 OBITUARY Fred W. Friendly , CBS Executive and Pioneer in TV News Coverage , Dies at 82 By ERIC PACE Fred W. Friendly , the former CBS News executive who be a towering figure in the evolution of news coverage on television , die Tuesday at his home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx. He be 82. As a CBS News producer , Mr. Friendly and his longtime partner , Edward R. Murrow , virtually invent the news documentary on television , pioneer such technique a the use of original film clip , live , unrehearsed interview , and the use of field producer who supervise report on location. He win 10 Peabody Awards and numerous other prize for television journalism. A big , impose man who hurl idea and opinion around like Olympian thunderbolt , Mr. Friendly , a both producer and president of CBS News , stand at the center of some of the most influential and contentious moment in the early history of television journalism. His work include the best-remembered documentary ever produce , Mr. Murrow 's dismantling of Senator Joseph McCarthy and his demagogic anti-Communist campaign inside the United States Government. He also produce Mr. Murrow 's other groundbreaking documentary include `` Harvest of Shame '' in 1960 , an expose on the hardship of migrant workers. Later , a president of CBS News from 1964 to 1966 , he clash frequently with the network 's management over his effort to get more news on the air. His often caustic criticism of what he maintain be the television network ' lack of commitment to quality news coverage continue through the years. `` TV be big than any story it report , '' he say in a 1966 interview. `` It 's the great teaching tool since the printing press. It will determine nothing less than what kind of people we are. So if TV exists now only for the sake of a buck , somebody 's go to have to change that. '' In his post-CBS career , a a professor at Columbia University and a writer on television affair , Mr. Friendly be a forceful defender of the First Amendment and argue in favor of fairness and integrity in electronic news coverage. As broadcast consultant to the Ford Foundation on television , he strive to improve news coverage by public television stations. In 1974 , while teach at Columbia , he begin a series of private conference for news organization about ethical problem in report the news. The conference evolve into seminar that have be broadcast on television. In 1984 he begin produce what have become widely know a `` The Fred Friendly Seminars '' for public television. The seminar have bring together journalist and politician , judge , educator and others discuss crucial issue of the day. The program have become a notable feature of public broadcasting. Mr. Friendly have no active role in produce the seminar after the early 1990's. But his wife , Ruth , continue a editorial adviser. Mr. Friendly 's television production and his professional life be full of strife and action. With his outsized presence and strong jaw , he have a high-keyed , purposeful air about him , which , the poet Carl Sandburg say , make him `` look a if he have just get off a foam-flecked horse. '' Mr. Friendly 's manner -- his restless intellect , curiosity , and desire to stimulate debate -- make it difficult for him not to dominate almost any gathering. His wife describe that force of personality some year ago when , speak at a ceremony where Mr. Friendly and she be receive another of their many award , she say , `` We all come under Fred 's gravitational pull. '' Don Hewitt , the longtime executive producer of the CBS television news program `` 60 Minutes , '' say : `` Fred Friendly and Ed Murrow 's 'See It Now ' be the lodestar we all steer by. '' Mr. Hewitt add , `` Television news have n't be around long enough to have a lot of giant ; we can ill afford to lose one of the few we do have. '' A 'Lucy ' Rerun Forces a Showdown Mr. Friendly have a long , intense relationship with CBS and it management , head by it founder , William S. Paley. Mr. Paley have once be Mr. Murrow 's close friend , but Mr. Friendly be always suspicious of Mr. Paley 's true commitment to CBS News. Of the famous McCarthy documentary , for example , Mr. Friendly remark in `` In All His Glory , '' Sally Bedell Smith 's biography of Mr. Paley , `` Bill Paley be proud of the McCarthy broadcast but more retroactively. He be proud but determine it would n't happen again. '' The clash continue over subsequent `` See It Now '' documentary , which tackle other hotly debate issue include civil right , government secrecy and tobacco 's role in cause lung cancer ( which , by 1965 , would claim the life of Mr. Murrow , a chain-smoker ) . A 1955 documentary about a land scandal in Texas lead to the loss of the program 's sponsor , Alcoa , which be then expand it interest in Texas. Mr. Paley be able to use the defection of the sponsor a an opportunity to expand `` See It Now '' to an hour but switch it to an occasional series of special , make room for a more commercial program to follow the hit `` The $ 64,000 Question. '' The program Mr. Paley choose be `` My Favorite Husband , '' which introduce Lucille Ball to CBS. It be not the last time the star would intersect with Mr. Friendly 's career. The `` See It Now '' special -- caustically label by CBS insider `` See It Now and Then '' -- still arouse considerable debate , and in 1958 , with Mr. Paley say `` I do n't want this constant stomachache every time you do a controversial subject ! '' a he punch his own midsection , `` See It Now '' leave the air. Mr. Friendly 's final battle a a commercial television executive come , a he saw it , over the issue of CBS 's responsibility to carry live telecast of important government proceedings. The showdown come in February 1966 , when one of his CBS superior , John A. Schneider , whom Mr. Friendly felt he should never have have to report to , decide that the network should broadcast a rerun of Ms. Ball 's hit `` I Love Lucy , '' instead of live coverage of a Senate committee hear on Vietnam. `` It be not a matter of decide between two broadcast , '' Mr. Friendly write later , `` but a choice between interrupt the morning run of the profit machine -- whose only admitted function be to purvey six one-minute commercial every half-hour -- or elect to make the audience privy to an event of override importance take place in a Senate hearing room at that very moment. '' But , a Mr. Friendly report in his 1967 book , `` Due to Circumstances Beyond Our Control , '' Mr. Schneider , a CBS group vice president , tell him the hearing would not be broadcast , `` and say that housewife be n't much interested in Vietnam. '' A spate of fence follow at CBS headquarters , highlight by a characteristically theatrical move by Mr. Friendly , when he send a letter of resignation to The New York Times without CBS 's knowledge and before the situation have be decided. Though Mr. Friendly 's attorney try to resolve the conflict , Frank Stanton , the network 's president , say that inform The Times take the matter out of CBS 's hands. The resignation be accepted. Dreaming Up Idea For 'Hear It Now' In `` The Powers That Be , '' David Halberstam describe Mr. Friendly a `` a man who always come equip with his own precipice from which to jump. '' Despite the protracted drama surround the resignation , Mr. Friendly contend that what be involve `` be a matter of conscience. '' Mr. Friendly frequently cite the name of Mr. Murrow in his preaching on the ethic of broadcast journalism , and it be surely a the producer for Mr. Murrow that Mr. Friendly achieve national influence and fame. He be a little-known radio executive in 1948 when he meet Mr. Murrow and propose make an album of recording of world leader and other newsworthy people speak in the recent past. Mr. Murrow like the idea and collaborate with him in bring out the album , `` I Can Hear It Now , '' which be release at Thanksgiving 1949 and be a huge success. In the year that follow , the two men work together first on `` Hear It Now , '' a CBS radio program , and then on `` See It Now , '' it television sequel. Mr. Friendly 's imagination and forceful implementation of his idea win him great influence within the network and the industry. His strong-willed way also attract criticism. Some television people say that Mr. Friendly be a bully -- he often raise his voice -- and that his influence stem largely from his connection with Mr. Murrow. Others saw him a a seeker of publicity who try to elevate himself to equal stature with Mr. Murrow , who be more widely perceive to have be the drive force behind much of their great work. Later Mr. Friendly be criticize by some working in network news a be isolate in academia and out of touch with the new reality -- and limitation -- of the business of broadcast journalism. But Mr. Friendly , in his role a producer of Mr. Murrow 's best-known work , do much to establish the television news documentary a a journalistic form that concern itself with area of controversy and day-to-day news. From it open moment , on Nov. 18 , 1951 , `` See It Now '' set precedents. Its first shot show , on split screen , both the Brooklyn Bridge and the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco. It be the first live , coast-to-coast commercial broadcast. The program arouse controversy even before the McCarthy report. A 1953 program chronicle the case of Milo Radulovich , an Air Force lieutenant dismiss from the service because his father and sister be accuse of be Communist sympathizers. As a result of the broadcast , the Air Force reinstate him. Fearing it content , neither CBS nor the sponsor have be willing to promote the program at all. Mr. Friendly and Mr. Murrow put up $ 1,500 of their own money to purchase an ad in The Times. Similarly , the McCarthy program get on the air only because of the determination of Mr. Murrow and Mr. Friendly to risk their reputation on the outcome. It be widely think to have be instrumental in the Senator 's eventual loss of influence and prestige. Roots in Radio In Providence , R.I. It be at radio station WEAN in Providence , R.I. , that Mr. Friendly 's career in broadcast began. He have be bring up in the city , and have study at Providence Business College , after move from New York , where he be bear Oct. 30 , 1915 , the son of Samuel Wachenheimer , a jewelry manufacturer , and Theresa Friendly Wachenheimer. His name at birth be Ferdinand Friendly Wachenheimer , but he begin use the name Fred Friendly when he go into radio work , and he assume the name legally in 1938. In his four year at WEAN , Mr. Friendly originate a series of dramatized biographical program about such figure a Harvey Firestone , Thomas Alva Edison and Guglielmo Marconi. He leave the station in 1941 and serve in the Army in the China-Burma-India Theater in World War II , rise to the rank of master sergeant and working a a reporter for an Army newspaper , The CBI Roundup. After the war , Mr. Friendly work for a time for NBC radio , where he introduce a panel quiz show , `` Who Said That ? '' and produce `` The Quick and the Dead , '' a four-part radio documentary about the birth of the atomic bomb. He be ask to join CBS in 1950. After leave CBS , he become Edward R. Murrow professor of journalism at Columbia 's School of Journalism. He retire from that post in 1979 , but continue to teach at the Journalism School. Mr. Friendly 's first marriage , to the former Dorothy Greene , end in divorce. In 1968 , he marry Ruth Weiss Mark , a Scarsdale schoolteacher , who survive him. He be also survive by three child from his first marriage , Andrew , Lisa and David ; three stepchild , John , Michael and Richard Mark , and 10 grandchildren. His many writing include another book , `` The Good Guys , the Bad Guys and the First Amendment : Free Speech vs. Fairness in Broadcasting , '' publish in 1976. Numerous friend and colleague remember him yesterday a a man of enormous energy and commitment , whose personality and impact on journalism be as overwhelming a his physical size. `` Fred be a fierce and mighty warrior , '' say Dan Rather , `` for the best ethic and principle in journalism , for the First Amendment , for his friend and for his country. He never give up , he never give in ; he never back down and he never back up . ''