May 16 , 1998 OBITUARY Frank Sinatra Dies at 82 ; Matchless Stylist of Pop By STEPHEN HOLDEN Frank Sinatra , the singer and actor whose extraordinary voice elevate popular song into an art , die on Thursday night in Los Angeles. He be 82. The cause be a heart attack , say his publicity agent , Susan Reynolds. Ms. Reynolds say his fourth wife , Barbara , his son , Frank Jr. , and daughter , Tina and Nancy , be at his side at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. She say he would be give a private funeral. Widely hold to be the great singer in American pop history and one of the most successful entertainer of the 20th century , Sinatra be also the first modern pop superstar. He define that role in the early 1940 's when his first solo appearance provoke the kind of mass pandemonium that later greet Elvis Presley and the Beatles. During a show business career that span more than 50 year and comprise recording , film and television as well a countless performance in nightclub , concert hall and sport arena , Sinatra stand a a singular mirror of the American psyche. His evolution from the idealistic crooner of the early 1940 's to the sophisticated swinger of the 50 's and 60 's seem to personify the country 's loss of innocence. During World War II , Sinatra 's tender romanticism serve a the dreamy emotional link between million of woman and their husband and boyfriend fight overseas. Reinventing himself in the 50 's , the starry-eyed boy next door turn into the cosmopolitan man of the world , a bruised romantic with a tough-guy streak and a song for every emotional season. In a series of brilliant conceptual album , he codify a musical vocabulary of adult relationship with which million identified. The haunted voice heard on a jukebox in the wee small hour of the morning lament the end of a love affair be the same voice that jubilantly invite the world to `` come fly with me '' to exotic realm in a never-ending party. Sinatra appear in 58 film , and win an Academy Award a best support actor for his portrayal of the feisty misfit soldier Maggio in `` From Here to Eternity '' ( 1953 ) . As an actor , he could communicate the same complex mixture of emotional honesty , vulnerability and cockiness that he project a a singer , but he often choose his role indifferently or unwisely. It be a a singer that he exert the strong cultural influence. Following his idol Bing Crosby , who have pioneer the use of the microphone , Sinatra transform popular singing by infuse lyric with a personal , intimate point of view that convey a steady current of eroticism. The skinny blue-eyed crooner , quickly nickname The Voice , make horde of bobby-soxers swoon in the 1940 's with an extraordinarily smooth and flexible baritone that he wield with matchless skill. His mastery of long-lined phrasing inspire imitation by many other male crooner , notably Dick Haymes , Vic Damone and Tony Bennett in the 1940 's and 50 's and most recently the pop jazz star Harry Connick Jr. After the voice lose it velvety youthfulness , Sinatra 's interpretation grow more personal and idiosyncratic , so that each performance become a direct expression of his personality and his mood of the moment. In express anger , petulance and bravado -- attitude that have largely be exclude from the acceptable vocabulary of pop feeling -- Sinatra pave the way for the unfettered vocal aggression of rock singers. The change in Sinatra 's vocal timbre coincide with a precipitous career descent in the late 1940 's and early 50's. But in 1953 , Sinatra make one of the most spectacular career comeback in show business history , re-emerging a a coarser-voiced , jazzy interpreter of popular standard who put a more aggressive personal stamp on his songs. Almost singlehandedly , he help lead a revival of vocalized swing music that take American pop to a new level of musical sophistication. Coinciding with the rise of the long-playing record album , his 1950 's recording -- along with Ella Fitzgerald 's `` song book '' album salute individual composer -- be instrumental in establish a canon of American pop song literature. With Nelson Riddle , his most talented arranger , Sinatra define the criterion for sound , style and song selection in pop recording during the pre-Beatles era. The aggressive uptempo style of Sinatra 's mature year spawn a genre of punchy , rhythmic belting associate with Las Vegas , which he be instrumental in establish and popularize a an entertainment capital. By the late 1950 's , Sinatra have become so much the personification of American show business success that his life and his art become emblematic of the temper of the times. Except perhaps for Hugh Hefner , the founder of Playboy magazine , probably nobody do more to create a male ideal in the 1950's. For year , Sinatra seem the embodiment of the hard-drinking , hedonistic swinger who could have his pick of woman and who be the leader of a party-loving entourage. That personality and wardrobe , borrow in part from his friend Jimmy Van Heusen , the talented songwriter and man about town who like to insouciantly sling his raincoat over his shoulder , be , in turn , imitate by many other show business figures. It be a style Sinatra never entirely abandoned. Even in his late year , he would often stroll onto the stage with a drink in his hand. On a deep level , Sinatra 's career and public image touch many aspect of American cultural life. For million , his ascent from humble Italian-American root in Hoboken , N.J. , be a symbol of ethnic achievement. And more than most entertainer , he use his influence to support political candidates. His change of allegiance from pro-Roosevelt Democrat in the 1940 's to pro-Reagan Republican in the 1980 's parallel a seismic shift in American politics. By the end of his career , Sinatra 's annual income be estimate in the ten of million of dollar , from concert , record album , real estate venture and holding in several company , include a missile-parts concern , a private airline , Reprise Records ( which he found ) , Artanis ( Sinatra spell backward ) Productions and Sinatra Enterprises. Songs of Love Inspiring Romances Sinatra leave his imprint on score of popular song and be the background voice , it seem , for the romance of most Americans , from the early to the second time around. Among the standard he record at least three time be `` All or Nothing at All , '' `` Angel Eyes , '' `` Autumn in New York , '' `` I Concentrate on You , '' `` I Get a Kick Out of You , '' `` I 'll Be Seeing You , '' `` I 'll Never Smile Again , '' `` I 've Got a Crush on You , '' `` I 've Got You Under My Skin , '' `` Nancy ( With the Laughing Face ) , '' `` Night and Day , '' `` One for My Baby , '' `` September Song '' and `` Stormy Weather. '' His personal signature song include `` Put Your Dreams Away '' ( his 1945 theme ) and later `` Young at Heart '' ( 1954 ) , `` All the Way '' ( 1957 ) , `` It Was a Very Good Year '' ( 1965 ) , `` Strangers in the Night '' ( 1966 ) , `` My Way '' ( 1969 ) and `` New York , New York '' ( 1980 ) . For decade , his private life , with it many romance , feud , brawl and association with gangster , be grist for the gossip columns. But he also have a reputation for spontaneous generosity , for help singer who be start out and for support friend who be in need. And over the year he give hundred of million of dollar to various philanthropies. Sinatra be bear in Hoboken on Dec. 12 , 1915 , the only child of Martin Sinatra , a boilermaker and sometime boxer from Catania , Sicily , and his wife , Natalie Garavante , who be nickname Dolly. The young Francis Albert Sinatra attend Dave E. Rue Junior High School and Demarest High in Hoboken. He decide to become a singer either after attend a Crosby concert or see a Crosby film sometime in 1931 or 1932. His mother encourage his ambition , allow him to drop out of high school. In 1935 , after two year of local club date , he join three other young men from Hoboken who call themselves the Three Flashes. The quartet rename itself the Hoboken Four and win first prize on `` Major Bowes 's Original Amateur Hour. '' After several month with the group , Sinatra decide to go it alone , and in the late 1930 's he have his first important nightclub engagement , at the Rustic Cabin , a roadhouse in Alpine , N.J. Local radio exposure bring him to the attention of Harry James , the trumpet player who have recently leave Benny Goodman to form his own band. James sign Sinatra for $ 75 a week , and the singer make his first concert appearance with the James band in June 1939 and his first record the next month. A New Family And a New Fame Early that year , he marry his longtime sweetheart , Nancy Barbato. They have three child : Nancy , who be bear in 1940 ; Franklin Wayne ( later shorten to Frank Jr. ) , bear in 1944 , and Christina ( Tina ) , bear in 1948. Six month after Sinatra sign with Harry James , Tommy Dorsey invite him to join his band , which be far more popular. Released without protest from his contract by James , Sinatra remain with Dorsey from January 1940 until September 1942. His first successful record with the band be `` Polka Dots and Moonbeams. '' Six month after join Dorsey , he score his first No. 1 hit , `` I 'll Never Smile Again , '' a dreamy ballad he sing with the Pied Pipers , the vocal group then lead by Jo Stafford. Determined to be the first singer since Crosby to have a successful solo career , he split from Dorsey , who hold him to a contract that give the band leader 43 1/3 percent of the singer 's income for the next decade. Eventually Sinatra , with his record label , Columbia , and his booking agency , MCA , buy out the contract. In addition to `` I 'll Never Smile Again , '' Sinatra leave behind several classic early recording with Dorsey. They include `` Star Dust '' ( 1940 , with the Pied Pipers ) , `` This Love of Mine '' ( 1941 ) and `` There Are Such Things '' ( 1942 , with the Pied Pipers ) . Sinatra 's last concert with Dorsey be in September 1942. Three month later , he make history at the age of 27 with his first solo appearance at the Paramount Theater in New York City. Billed a an `` extra add attraction '' on a program headline by Benny Goodman , Sinatra appear on Dec. 30 and set off a public hysteria that make headlines. Within week he have sign lucrative contract with Columbia Records , R.K.O. Pictures and the radio program `` Your Hit Parade. '' The adulation reach a high point on Oct. 12 , 1944 , the opening day of a three-week return engagement at the Paramount , when 30,000 fan -- most of them bobby-soxers -- form a frenzied mob in Times Square. `` It be the war year , and there be a great loneliness , '' Sinatra , who be keep from the draft by a punctured eardrum , later recounted. `` I be the boy in every corner drugstore who 'd go off , draft to the war. That be all. '' From 1943 to 1945 , he be the lead singer on `` Your Hit Parade '' and at the same time begin record for Columbia. Because of a musician ' strike , the accompaniment on his first several recording session for the label be a vocal chorus call the Bobby Tucker Singers , instead of an orchestra. In June 1943 , however , Columbia rereleased a recording he have make in September 1939 with Harry James. The recording , `` All or Nothing at All , '' which have sell 8,000 copy in it first release , sell over a million. Once the musician ' strike be settle in November 1944 , Sinatra begin record with Axel Stordahl , who have be a trombonist and lead arranger with Tommy Dorsey. Stordahl 's sweet string-laced setting for Sinatra 's recording silhouette a yearning voice that one writer compare to `` wear velveteen. '' Until Sinatra leave Columbia for Capitol Records in 1953 , Stordahl remain his principal arranger. He also brilliantly exploit the song of Sammy Cahn and Jule Styne , who tailor many of their ballad to Sinatra 's voice and style. Riding High in April , Shot Down in May Sinatra 's first movie appearance be in 1940 , sing with the Dorsey band in `` Las Vegas Nights. '' He make his movie act debut in 1943 , in `` Higher and Higher , '' an innocuous bit of froth that be describe by Bosley Crowther , movie critic for The New York Times , a `` a slapdash setting for the incredibly unctuous reading of the Voice. '' The film be follow by `` Step Lively '' ( 1944 ) and `` Anchors Aweigh '' ( 1945 ) , the first of three movie in which Sinatra play Gene Kelly 's sidekick. In these early film , Sinatra , often wear a sailor suit and project a skinny soulfulness , play a wide-eyed innocent who be shy with women. In 1945 , he also make `` The House I Live In , '' a 10-minute patriotic plea for racial and religious tolerance that win him a special Academy Award. Like his mother , Sinatra be an ardent Democrat and supporter of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt 's New Deal. He visit the White House in 1944 and campaign for Roosevelt in his bid for a fourth term a President. Sinatra 's popularity remain at a peak through 1946 , when he have 15 hit singles. Then it begin a gradual slide that steepen after 1948 and hit bottom in 1952. As early a November 1947 , an appearance at the Capitol Theater in New York draw disappointing attendance. Only 4 Sinatra single make the Top 10 in 1947 , and the number drop to one in 1948. Although he have show himself to have an engage screen presence , his film career have not make him a top box-office star. From 1946 to 1949 , he appear in five MGM musical -- `` Till the Clouds Roll By '' ( 1946 ) ( in which he sing `` Ol ' Man River '' in a white suit ) , `` It Happened in Brooklyn '' ( 1947 ) , `` The Kissing Bandit '' ( 1948 ) , `` Take Me Out to the Ball Game '' ( 1949 ) and `` On the Town '' ( 1949 ) -- and one R.K.O. film , `` The Miracle of the Bells '' ( 1948 ) , in which he be miscast a a priest. After two more unsuccessful picture , `` Double Dynamite '' ( 1951 ) and `` Meet Danny Wilson '' ( 1952 ) , his movie career all but evaporated. Part of the public disenchantment come after the columnist Robert Ruark denounce him in 1947 for have socialize with the deported gangster Lucky Luciano in Cuba. The suggestion that the singer consort with criminal make him a target of the conservative press , which resent his pro-Roosevelt political stance. For the rest of Sinatra 's career , story of his relation with the underworld dog him , and he react angrily to the charges. Divorce and Remarriage ; Career Troubles While his career be in decline in the late 1940 's , his marriage to Nancy Barbato also unraveled. In 1949 he have begin an affair with the movie star Ava Gardner. The relationship become public the next year , and on November 7 , 1951 , one week after his divorce be final , he marry her in Philadelphia. Passionate but stormy , the marriage last just less than two years. MGM announce their separation in October 1953 , and they be divorce in 1957. ( She die in 1990. ) Those personal upheaval , include a suicide attempt , coincide with increase tension between Sinatra and Columbia Records after Mitch Miller take the company 's creative rein in 1950. In an ever more desperate search for a hit single , Sinatra let himself be coerce into record inferior material , the most notorious example be `` Mama Will Bark , '' a 1951 novelty duet with the television personality Dagmar that include dog imitation by Donald Baine. Although his voice have begin to reflect the strain he be under , he still make some powerful recording , include `` April in Paris , '' the anguished `` I 'm a Fool to Want You '' and rendition of `` Castle Rock '' and `` The Birth of the Blues '' that anticipate the swing Sinatra of the mid-50's. Sinatra 's phenomenal resurgence begin in 1953 with the release of `` From Here to Eternity , '' Fred Zinnemann 's film version of James Jones 's best-selling novel about American G.I. 's in Hawaii on the eve of World War II. His portrayal of Maggio , the combative Italian-American soldier who be beat to death in a stockade , his spirit unbroken , win him rave review , an Oscar and renew public sympathy. In April 1953 , Sinatra , then 37 , have sign with Capitol Records. A cautious deal , the contract be for only one year , with no advance. Sinatra arrive at Capitol just when his voice have lose most of it youthful sheen , but the move prove fortunate. Only five year earlier , the long-playing record have be introduce , and the longer form encouraged Sinatra , who bring remarkable introspective depth to the interpretation of lyric , to make cohesive album-length emotional statements. In his second recording session for Capitol , in late April 1953 , Sinatra be team with Nelson Riddle , who become the most important of the several arranger with whom he work during his decade with the label. A trombonist who have also work with Tommy Dorsey , Riddle pioneer in augment a big-band lineup with string , and he be the master of an elegant pop impressionism that enhance Sinatra 's vocal image of urbane sophistication. On a series of classic pop album for Capitol , the singer and arranger virtually reinvent swing music for a more opulent era. That process begin with their first single release , `` I 've Got the World on a String , '' which hit the pop chart in the summer of 1953. It continue with the album `` Songs for Young Lovers , '' release in early 1954 , and `` Swing Easy , '' which come out six month later. The collaboration hit it artistic peak with three albums. `` In the Wee Small Hours , '' a 16-cut collection of classic torch song sing in a quietly anguish baritone , be release in the spring of 1955. `` Songs for Swingin ' Lovers , '' release a year later , define Sinatra in his adult `` swinging '' mode. It include what many regard a his great record performance : Cole Porter 's `` I 've Got You Under My Skin. '' `` Frank Sinatra Sings for Only the Lonely , '' release in the summer of 1958 , expand on the mournful , introspective tone of `` Wee Small Hours '' by add shading that be at once jazzy and more operatic. The album , which include his classic recording of `` What 's New , '' inspire Linda Ronstadt 's hit 1983 album `` What's New , '' which in turn spur a revival of interest in elegant 50 's pop styles. Sinatra 's Capitol album be among the first so-called concept album in the way they explore different adult approach to love and invoke varied aspect of the singer 's personality. These be the fun-loving hedonist ( `` Songs for Swingin ' Lovers '' and it equally brilliant 1957 follow-up , `` A Swingin ' Affair '' ) , the romantic confidant ( `` Close to You , '' record with the Hollywood String Quartet ) , the jet-set playboy ( `` Come Fly With Me '' ) , the romantic loner ( `` Where Are You ? , '' `` No One Cares '' ) and the harden sensation-seeker ( `` Come Swing With Me '' ) . The Hit Maker And Prolific Actor In 1959 , `` Come Dance With Me ! , '' a hard-swinging album arrange by Billy May , win Sinatra his first Grammy Awards , for album of the year and best male vocal performance , and stay on the sale chart for 140 week , long than any other Sinatra album. Sinatra 's career a a maker of hit single be also rejuvenated. `` Young at Heart , '' which hit the pop chart in February 1954 , reach No. 2 on Billboard 's pop single chart , and `` Learnin ' the Blues '' reach No. 1 the follow year. His other significant hit from the late 1950 's include `` Love and Marriage , '' ( which be write for a television production of `` Our Town , '' in which Sinatra play the Stage Manager ) , `` The Tender Trap '' ( 1955 ) , `` Hey ! Jealous Lover '' ( 1956 ) , `` All the Way '' ( 1957 ) and `` Witchcraft '' ( 1958 ) . During this period , the versatile team of Jimmy Van Heusen and Sammy Cahn , who have become partner in 1954 , function almost a Sinatra 's house songwriter , supply both movie song hit and the title song for albums. After `` From Here to Eternity , '' Sinatra 's movie career boom , with the role many and varied. He play the perennial gambler Nathan Detroit in the film adaptation of the Broadway musical `` Guys and Dolls '' ( 1955 ) , a heroin addict in `` The Man With the Golden Arm '' the same year and an Army investigator track a would-be assassin in the political thriller `` The Manchurian Candidate '' ( 1962 ) . His performance in `` The Man With the Golden Arm '' win him an Academy Award nomination for best actor. In his good movie role -- play a would-be Presidential assassin in `` Suddenly '' ( 1954 ) , the comedian Joe E. Lewis in `` The Joker Is Wild '' ( 1957 ) and a vulnerable intellectual in `` Some Came Running '' ( 1958 ) -- Sinatra convey an outsider 's edgy volatility that match the film-noirish mood of his more introspective albums. His role in the film musical `` High Society '' ( 1956 ) and `` Pal Joey '' ( 1957 ) as well a `` Guys and Dolls '' effectively play off his scrappy , streetwise image. Assessing his film career , the critic David Thomson say Sinatra have a `` pervasive influence on American acting : he glamorize the fatalistic outsider ; he make his own anger intriguing , and in the late 50 's especially he be one of our dark male icons. '' `` Sinatra be a noir sound , '' he say , `` like saxophone , foghorn , gunfire and the quiet weeping of woman in the background. '' Chairman of the Board , Leader of the Rat Pack Sinatra remain a top box office draw for nearly a decade , and his success a both singer and actor lead the New York radio personality William B. Williams to nickname him Chairman of the Board of show business. The name stuck for the rest of his long career. At a time when restraint on sexual and social behavior have begin to loosen a bit , the high-living Sinatra , who enjoy gamble and womanize , become in the popular press the embodiment of the swinger , a concept repeatedly invoke by his album titles. In the 60 's , Sinatra appear to be America 's quintessential middle-aged playboy. `` Ocean 's Eleven '' ( 1960 ) be the first of three Sinatra film to feature the star surround by the hard-drinking , high-living clique -- nickname the Rat Pack -- that include Dean Martin , Peter Lawford , Sammy Davis Jr. and Joey Bishop. The group be an outgrowth of a social circle that have center on Humphrey Bogart , who die in 1957. The Rat Packers would appear together in three more lighthearted caper : `` Sergeants Three '' ( 1962 ) , `` Four for Texas '' ( 1963 ) and `` Robin and the Seven Hoods '' ( 1964 ) . This be the other side of Sinatra. As carefully a he plumb his music , after 1960 he seem largely to be walk through his movies. Las Vegas Playground And Kennedy Campaign One of the Rat Pack 's favorite playground be Las Vegas , where Sinatra be a pioneer entertainer. In 1953 , he buy a 2 percent interest in the Sands Hotel , and eventually become a corporate vice president. He earn $ 100,000 a week in his frequent performance at the Sands and use the hotel for record album and make movies. After support Adlai Stevenson 's bid for the Presidency in 1956 , Sinatra work avidly for John F. Kennedy in 1960 and supervise the newly elect President 's inaugural gala in Washington in January 1961. But his pro-Kennedy sentiment cool after the President cancel a weekend visit to Sinatra 's house because the singer have play host to the Chicago mob bos Sam Giancana and his associates. And in 1963 , the singer lose his Nevada gambling license after Giancana be see in the Cal-Neva gambling casino in which the singer hold a major interest. The license be restore in 1981. By the 1970 's , Sinatra have turn to the right. He become a supporter of Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan. Sinatra 's record career enter a major new phase when he form his own record company , Reprise , in late 1960. Since the new label overlap his Capitol contract , for about a year he record for both labels. In 1963 , he sell his record company to Warner Brothers , retain a one-third interest. In association with Warner Brothers , he also set up his own independent film production company , Artanis. Beginning with `` Ring-a-Ding-Ding ! '' in 1961 and for the next 20 year , Sinatra record more than 30 album for Reprise. By this time , his voice have harden and coarsened. Except for `` Francis Albert Sinatra and Antonio Carlos Jobim , '' a remarkable 1967 collaboration with the Brazilian songwriter , guitarist and singer in which he sing very softly , his ballad sing tend toward the stentorian , often with a noticeable edge of macho toughness. The coarsening of his voice , however , help give his sing an extra rhythmic punch. Looking Back Brings Its Rewards Increasingly , his album have a self-consciously retrospective air. `` I Remember Tommy . . . '' ( 1961 ) look back to his day with the Dorsey band. `` Sinatra 's Sinatra '' ( 1963 ) consist entirely of newly record Sinatra favorites. His 50th birthday in 1965 be celebrate with the release of two deliberately monumental album , `` September of My Years '' and `` A Man and His Music , '' an anthology of his career that he narrate and sang. `` September of My Years , '' whose title anthem of middle-aged nostalgia be custom-written by Sammy Cahn and Jimmy Van Heusen and arrange by Gordon Jenkins , win Grammys for album of the year and best male vocal performance. Sinatra score a double triumph in 1966 when `` A Man and His Music '' be vote album of the year , and `` Strangers in the Night , '' his first No. 1 single in 11 year , win record of the year. The string of hit continue with a Top 5 hit , `` That 's Life '' ( 1966 ) , and `` Something Stupid '' ( 1967 ) , a duet with his daughter Nancy. In 1969 he have a substantial hit with `` My Way , '' an adaptation of a French ballad , `` Mon Habitude , '' by Claude Francois , Jacques Revaux and Giles Thibaut , with English lyric by Paul Anka. Along with `` New York , New York , '' which he record for a three-disk set , `` Trilogy : Past , Present , Future '' ( 1980 ) , it become one of the signature song of his late years. The moment when Sinatra and his style of music seem the least fashionable be in the late 1960 's , when the youthful rock counterculture dominate popular music. Sinatra be no fan of rock-and-roll , have once dismiss it a music `` sung , play and write for the most part by cretinous goons. '' He do make tentative effort to adapt to change style , try his hand at song by Jim Croce , Jimmy Webb , Neil Diamond , Neil Sedaka , John Denver , Paul Simon , Joni Mitchell , Stevie Wonder , Peter Allen , Billy Joel and the Beatles , among others. But even sing soft rock , he never sound entirely comfortable. His surprise marriage in 1966 to the actress Mia Farrow , then 21 ( 30 year his junior ) , seem in part to be a search for a youthful connection. They be divorce in 1968. As a film actor , Sinatra continue to work steadily through the 1960's. Besides his Rat Pack jaunt , his film include `` Come Blow Your Horn '' ( 1963 ) , `` Von Ryan 's Express '' ( 1965 ) , `` Tony Rome '' ( 1967 ) , `` The Detective '' ( 1968 ) and `` Dirty Dingus Magee '' ( 1970 ) . Retirement ? Could It Be ? Doing That His Way In June 1971 , Sinatra announce his retirement during a gala concert at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion in Los Angeles , but it last only two years. He return with the album `` Ol ' Blue Eyes Is Back , '' the title of which give him his last show business nickname. In 1976 he marry for the fourth time , to Barbara Blakely Marx , who have be marry to Zeppo Marx. She survive him , along with his daughter , his son and two grandchildren. His recording and film become less frequent. In 1980 , after a six-year hiatus , he release `` Trilogy : Past , Present , Future , '' a concept album in which a Gordon Jenkins oratorio imagine the singer a an intergalactic traveler. It be follow by the moody `` She Shot Me Down '' ( 1981 ) and the jazzy `` L.A. Is My Lady '' ( 1984 ) . Sinatra return to film in 1977 with a television movie , `` Contract on Cherry Street , '' which be poorly receive , a be his last major Hollywood role , a an age detective in `` The First Deadly Sin '' ( 1980 ) . In 1984 , he briefly appear a himself in `` Cannonball Run 2. '' For his 75th birthday in 1990 , Capitol and Reprise each release extensive , elaborately package Sinatra retrospectives. Columbia have release a six-disk anthology four year earlier. Sinatra work vigorously for the 1980 Presidential campaign of his close friend Ronald Reagan , and produce and direct a three-hour inaugural gala that be show in an edited form on television in 1981. In 1985 he be give the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the nation 's high civilian award. Even after he stop make record and movie , Sinatra continue to give concerts. In the early 1980 's , he be pay $ 2 million for four concert in Argentina and $ 2 million for nine concert in Sun City , South Africa. Sun City appearance by Sinatra , who have always support civil right cause , draw sharp criticism from anti-apartheid groups. In 1982 , he sign a $ 16 million three-year contract with the Golden Nugget Hotel in Atlantic City. In 1988 and 1989 , Sinatra be still list in Forbes magazine a among the 40 rich entertainer , with an annual income estimate at $ 14 million in 1989 and $ 12 million in 1988. But when he be require to submit a financial statement to the Nevada Gaming Commission for a renewal of his gamble license in 1981 , he claim a surprisingly modest net worth of just over $ 14 million. Sinatra 's life be rock in 1986 by the publication of `` His Way , '' Kitty Kelley 's best-selling unauthorized biography , which focus on his volatile personality , his personal feud , his streak of violence and his relationship over the year with organized-crime figures. It be a harsh portrait that nevertheless acknowledge Sinatra 's role a a musical icon. The Concert Giver And Singer of Solo Duets Sinatra tour the world in 1989 with Sammy Davis Jr. and Liza Minnelli in a concert package bill a `` the ultimate event. '' It be one of the grander bill in a rigorous touring schedule that he maintain into his late 70's. He tour with Shirley MacLaine in 1992. Increasingly during his performance in later year he resort to use electronic prompter at the front of the stage to read lyrics. In 1993 , at the age of 77 , Sinatra have an astounding recording-career comeback with `` Frank Sinatra Duets , '' a collection of 13 Sinatra standard rerecorded with such pop star a Barbra Streisand , Tony Bennett , Aretha Franklin , Luther Vandross and Bono of the Irish rock group U2. The record be widely criticize for be an engineering stunt , since none of the guest singer be actually in the recording studio with Sinatra , who record his part separately. The record nevertheless sell over two million copy in the United States. A year later , there be a weak follow-up use a different roster of guests. Sinatra 's last concert be on Feb. 25 , 1995 , at the Palm Desert Marriott Ballroom in Palm Desert , Calif. Assessing his own ability in 1963 , Sinatra sound a note that be quintessentially characteristic : forlorn and tough. `` Being an 18-karat manic-depressive , and have live a life of violent emotional contradiction , I have an overacute capacity for sadness as well a elation , '' he said. `` Whatever else have be say about me personally be unimportant. When I sing , I believe , I 'm honest. '' Swingin ' and in Films THE SINGER With the November 1995 release of Frank Sinatra 's complete work on Reprise , the entire catalogue on all label be available on compact disk. Here be a selective discography. Tommy Dorsey/Frank Sinatra : Alltime Greatest Hits , Vol. 4 ( RCA ) The Voice ( Columbia ) Frank Sinatra : The Voice , The Columbia Years , 1943-1952 ( 4 CD 's , Columbia ) Swing Easy/Songs For Young Lovers ( Capitol ) In the Wee Small Hours ( Capitol ) Songs for Swingin ' Lovers ( Capitol ) This Is Sinatra ! ( Capitol ) Close to You ( feature the Hollywood String Quartet ) ( Capitol ) A Swingin ' Affair ( Capitol ) Where Are You ? ( Capitol ) Come Fly With Me ( Capitol ) Ring-A-Ding-Ding ! ( Reprise ) September of My Years ( Reprise ) Moonlight Sinatra ( Reprise ) Francis Albert Sinatra and Antonio Carlos Jobim ( Reprise ) She Shot Me Down ( Reprise ) Frank Sinatra Duets ( Capitol ) THE ACTOR Frank Sinatra appear in 58 movie , win an Oscar for his performance a Maggio , the doomed G.I. in `` From Here to Eternity '' ( 1953 ) . He play everything from a shy sailor in `` Anchors Aweigh '' ( 1945 ) to a tough Army investigator in `` The Manchurian Candidate '' ( 1962 ) , a tormented drug addict in `` The Man With the Golden Arm '' ( 1955 ) and a daring prisoner of war in `` Von Ryan 's Express ( 1965 ) . Here be some of his films. Higher and Higher ( 1943 ) Anchors Aweigh ( 1945 ) On the Town ( 1949 ) From Here to Eternity ( 1953 ) The Man With the Golden Arm ( 1955 ) Guys and Dolls ( 1955 ) High Society ( 1956 ) Pal Joey ( 1957 ) The Joker Is Wild ( 1957 ) Some Came Running ( 1959 ) Ocean 's Eleven ( 1960 ) The Manchurian Candidate ( 1962 ) Come Blow Your Horn ( 1963 ) Robin and the Seven Hoods ( 1964 ) Von Ryan 's Express ( 1965 ) Tony Rome ( 1967 )