July 24 , 1999 OBITUARY Hassan II of Morocco Dies at 70 ; A Monarch Oriented to the West By JOSEPH R. GREGORY King Hassan II , who rule Morocco for 38 year , act a a go-between in Egyptian-Israeli effort to make peace and prolong the life of his 300-year-old dynasty in an era when monarchy in Libya , Egypt , Iraq and Iran fell to socialist revolution or the force of militant Islam , die yesterday in Rabat. He be 70. The cause of death be a heart attack , Crown Prince Sidi Mohammed , the King 's eldest son and successor , announce on state television. The King , who have be in fragile health since he be hospitalize in the United States four year ago for lung problem , have be admit earlier in the day to the Avicenne hospital in Rabat , the capital , with an acute lung infection , accord to a statement by the palace. Moroccan television say the funeral would be Sunday. The White House say that President Clinton plan to attend. As King , Sidi Mohammed be expect to continue his father 's policy , include close tie with Washington and active pursuit of peace in the Middle East. The United States and it ally consider King Hassan one of the most Western-oriented of Arab leader , a ruler who outmaneuver Islamic militant in his country and stand out among his peer for his openness to rapprochement with Israel. Through the year he act a an intermediary in Middle East diplomacy , help to arrange a visit to Jerusalem in 1977 by Egypt 's President , Anwar el-Sadat , and during the 1980 's , meeting with the Israeli leader Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres when other Arabs shun them. A master at manage Morocco 's complex quilt of ethnic and ideological force , he maintain a hold on power that be by turns iron-fisted and deftly offhand. He survive half a dozen assassination attempt and uprisings. On one occasion , he intimidate the leader of rebel troop by look him in the eye and recite the first verse of the Koran. Another time , when pilot of his air force attack his Boeing 727 jetliner , the King , himself a pilot , seize the radio and shout , `` Stop firing ! The tyrant be dead ! '' -- fool the rebel into break off their attack. The heir to the Alawite dynasty , which claim direct descent from the Prophet Mohammed and rule the Sharifian empire of the Western Sahara , Hassan II be the author of Morocco 's first Constitution. But he be at heart an autocrat , and democracy waxed and wan at his pleasure. He tolerate opposition party and a relatively free press that could offer opinion on policy matters. But criticism of the monarchy be forbidden , and his ruthlessness in crush opponent be criticize by human right groups. Economic and political reform proceed steadily through his year in power. Though the pace be slow than his critic would have like , say William Zartman , director of African Studies at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore , many would agree that the country be good off during the final year of his reign than it be when he come to power. His success lay in an ability to be different thing to different people. He keep Morocco 's elite content with royal patronage and institute market-oriented reform that improve the life of the urban middle class. He use his position a `` Commander of the Faithful '' to woo the rural peasantry , quadruple the number of mosque and build the world 's large , the Great Mosque of Hassan the II. Completed in 1993 , the 54-acre complex be build on the edge of the sea near Casablanca , with a tower more than 650 foot tall and equip with a laser that beam at night toward Mecca. `` He have deep understanding from the early day of the tribal mentality of Morocco and the importance of the throne a a unifying force , '' say Robert H. Pelletreau , a former Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs , who know the King well. `` He be a superb student , and he could be exceedingly charming. '' Moroccans say of King Hassan that he have `` baraka , '' or `` blessedness , '' an Arabic expression for a charismatic person bless with divine protection. Yet when he ascend the throne on Feb. 26 , 1961 , most observer expect him to fail. Worked With Father To Buttress Monarchy Moulay Hassan ben Mohammed Alaoui be bear on July 9 , 1929 , the old of six child of Sultan Sidi Mohammed ben Youssef. Most of Morocco be then a protectorate of France , except for section govern by Spain in the northwest and southern coast and the city of Tangier , an international zone. As World War II unfold , resistance to colonial rule grew. After the fall of France , the Free French force promise independence if Morocco would cooperate in the war against the Axis , a promise that Paris prove unwilling to keep. After the war , tension rise between the Sultan and the French , but the young Prince Moulay Hassan be educate a befit the heir of two tradition : He attend the imperial college at Rabat , where instruction be in Arabic and French. Later he earn a law degree from the University of Bordeaux and serve in the French Navy aboard the battleship Jeanne d'Arc. But his father 's agitation for Moroccan self-government continue , and in 1953 the French force the Sultan into exile. In 1954 and 1955 , a rioting and guerrilla warfare increase , Prince Moulay 's father regain his title , and the following year , Morocco win independence. Prince Moulay work with his father , now Mohammed V , to maintain the monarchy 's authority during a time of social discontent and the conflict expectation of those who fight for Moroccan independence. In 1957 , he become the commander in chief of the Royal Moroccan Army , which be splinter between officer who have be loyal to the French and the former rebels. Prince Moulay keep the military occupy with civilian project , and lead it to victory against rebel Berber tribesman in the Rif mountain in 1958. But in the shantytown of Rabat , Casablanca and other city , opposition simmer against the royal house. Though the monarchy look to Paris and Washington for financial support , it need to placate the leftist opposition. Declaring neutrality in the cold war , the Prince make overture to Moscow and accept Soviet military aid. `` As an Islamic people , '' he tell The Associated Press in 1961 , `` we have the right to practice bigamy. We can wed East and West and be faithful to both. '' Such comment cause consternation in Western capitals. So do the reputation of the young Prince , whom the Western press often portray a a playboy who like gambling and actress and be overly concern with his wardrobe. After Mohammed V die of heart failure follow what be expect to be a minor operation , Prince Moulay , who have be name Prime Minister in 1960 , move quickly to establish his rule. His Constitution , which be ratify in 1962 , guarantee freedom of the press and of religion , and create an elected legislature. But the new Parliament , fracture by bitter rivalry , prove ineffectual. The new King retain the power to name the Prime Minister , disband the legislature and control the army. In the mid-1960 's , student agitation lead to a wave of rioting and arrests. Opposition figure flee abroad or be imprison ; some be executed. In 1965 Mehdi Ben Barka , a prominent nationalist and opposition leader , be kidnap in Paris and never see again. The King 's right-hand man , the Minister of Interior , Mohammed Oufkir , be link to the disappearance , but the case be never pressed. In June of that year , Hassan dissolve Parliament and institute a state of emergency , wield absolute power until a new Constitution be adopt in 1970. The Constitution restore limited parliamentary government , but discontent simmer amid continue poverty and official corruption. How He Overcame Two Deadly Coups On July 10 , 1971 , King Hassan invite some 400 prominent Moroccans , diplomat and other guest to his seaside palace of Skhirat near Rabat to celebrate his 42d birthday. The festivity end in a burst of gunfire a more than 1,000 mutinous troop attack the palace , hurl grenade and spray the ground with small-arm fire. Nearly 100 guest be kill and more than 125 wounded. The King hid in a bathroom. When the firing die down , he re-emerge to find himself face to face with one of the rebel commanders. Keeping eye contact , he recite the opening verse of the Koran , and the rebel knelt and kiss his hand. Loyal troop crush the revolt , kill more than 150 rebel and capture 900 others , many of them young military cadets. A dozen high-ranking , conservative officer be executed. Mohammed Oufkir be name Minister of Defense. A little more than 12 month later , on Aug. 16 , 1972 , the King be return from Paris aboard his private Boeing 727 when it encounter an unscheduled escort of four Royal Moroccan Air Force F-5 fighters. As the Boeing approach Rabat 's airport , the fighter fire on the plane , knock out an engine and score other hits. The Boeing land safely , but the renegade pilot continue to strafe the runway until Hassan radio them , say the King have be killed. The rebel break off the attack. Within hour , key participant in the coup be arrest and shot. One of their leader prove to be General Oufkir , who apparently have be secretly involve in the early attack on the palace. According to official report , the general committed suicide , but his body be supposedly find with several wounds. His widow and six child be place under house arrest and be not release until February 1991 , in an amnesty mark the King 's 30 year in power. Uniting Moroccans Over Western Sahara As the 1970 's unfolded , the King take several step to damp domestic turmoil. In 1973 he put through measure to increase Moroccan ownership and employment in company do business in Morocco and also redistribute farmland own by foreigner to rural peasants. `` He alternate very cleverly between the kind of reform that would be popular with the people and the kind of reform popular with the rule elite and in do so be popular with both , '' say Mr. Pelletreau , the former American diplomat. In November 1975 , in a move that would unite Moroccans against a common foe , Hassan reassert his country 's authority over the Western Sahara , a region claim by both Morocco and Mauritania but still officially under Spanish administration , by truck some 350,000 civilian under army escort to the region , where they stag a march. The move help secure Morocco 's claim but ignite a war with guerrilla of the Polisario Front , who have be fight for independence from Spain. Libya and Algeria support the guerrilla in their war against the Moroccan Army. In 1984 , the King sign an accord with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi that end Libyan back for the insurgents. Algeria , plague by it own domestic problem , could give them only minimal support. Militarily , Morocco eventually triumph , agree to a cease-fire with Polisario in 1991 that leave the country in control of most the region. The Polisario Front continue to hang on , but the United Nations be schedule a referendum in March to determine the future of the region 's 300,000 people. Seen a Bridge To the Israelis King Hassan be adept at manage Arab-Israeli relation , and he like to say he view Morocco 's Jewish population , which number around 8,000 , a a bridge between Israelis and Arabs. During World War II his father , Mohammed V , have defy the Axis and protect his country 's Jews. In 1956 , the year of Moroccan independence , there be about 275,000 Jews in Morocco. Most be allow to emigrate to Israel , Europe and elsewhere. During the Arab-Israeli war of 1967 and 1973 , King Hassan contribute a nominal number of troop to support Egypt and Syria. Nevertheless , he keep his channel open with Israel. In 1982 he be the host of a meeting of Arab leader in Fez where he push through agreement on a peace plan that call for the creation of a Palestinian state with Jerusalem a it capital but implicitly recognize Israel 's right to exist. The plan , though reject by Israel , lay the groundwork for the King to meet with Prime Minister Peres in 1986 , a meeting that cause the King to be criticize by Arab leaders. He respond by say they have neither the ability to make war on Israel nor the willingness to make peace. In September 1993 , Morocco give de facto recognition to Israel by welcome Prime Minister Rabin , mark the first official visit by an Israeli leader to an Arab nation other than Egypt. Despite such bold gesture , he be careful to play both side of a conflict when necessary. After the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990 , he send 1,300 troop to Saudi Arabia , a gesture that please the West. At the time he express sympathy for the plight of Iraqi suffer under United Nations sanction and order member of the Moroccan royal family to supervise the collection of supply to ease their plight. Gradual Freedom And Continuing Poverty Despite aid from the West , sporadic reform effort , and an estimated $ 2 billion a year send home by Moroccans work abroad , the economic situation during the 1990 's remain difficult for most of Morocco 's 25 million people , two-thirds of whom be under the age of 25. In the census of 1994 , the urban population exceed the rural population for the first time. Unrest generally decline in the city , where most of the economic reform be concentrated. Although unemployment remain a problem and the strain of a relatively slow pace of development continue , political freedom gradually increased. In the early 1990 's , pressure from human right group reduce the number of political prisoner and report of incident of torture declined. In recent year , the King push his version of `` Hassanian democracy , '' which have widen political freedom while retain the decisive power of the King. After election last year , in which leftist party gain the large bloc of seat , the King appoint an old leftist adversary , Abdurrahman Youssufi , a Prime Minister , but the new Government have be widely criticize for fail to fulfill election promise to deal with poverty and other social problems. Like his father , the Crown Prince come to the throne with the reputation of a playboy. At 35 , he be still single in a society that emphasize family ties. He be educate in France , where he receive a degree in law and study international relations. In addition to Arabic and French , he speak Spanish and English. In recent year , a illness cause the King to withdraw progressively from active public life , the Crown Prince begin to take a more active role in public a second in command of the Moroccan military and in help to direct Government aid to the poor. In February the King send the Crown Prince a his representative to the funeral of King Hussein of Jordan. With Sidi Mohammed 's accession to the throne , his young brother Moulay Rashid will become Crown Prince. In addition to his two son , the King be survive by his wife , Lalla Latifa , a commoner who be officially describe a the Mother of the Royal Children , and three daughters. Palace official say the transition will bring no change in key Moroccan policy , include the longstanding alliance with the United States and strong support for peace between Israel and it Arab neighbors. The aide also say Sidi Mohammed would continue his father 's policy of insist on Moroccan sovereignty over the disputed territory of the Western Sahara. Nonetheless , the Crown Prince be expect to take his distance from some of his father 's close adviser , principally the Interior Minister , Driss Basri , who in his 20 year in that post have be associate with hard-line policy toward domestic opposition from both the left and the Islamic fundamentalist , who have be exclude from form party to compete in elections. Aides to King Hassan say recently that Sidi Mohammed be likely to move hard-liners in his father 's entourage aside in effort to accelerate democratic reform that his father have initiate in recent years. Despite his move toward democracy , throughout his reign King Hassan remain jealous of preserve the symbol of his monarchy. He refuse , for instance , to abandon the practice of have his subject show their fealty by kiss his hand , even though adviser urge him to end it. Whether he don a business suit to meet with Western leader or appear in traditional white robe to preside over religious ceremony , the King be a leader of command presence , an eloquent orator in Arabic who speak excellent French and capable English. `` His golf outing be the picture of an Oriental potentate , '' recall Mr. Pelletreau , the diplomat. `` He would be accompany by a vast entourage. If he want to sit , chair would appear , and his guest would be offer sherbet. '' Through intelligence , charm and cunning , he steer an absolute monarchy into the modern world. `` He shelter Morocco from the various political wind that blow across the Arab world and cause such turmoil in other country , '' Mr. Pelletreau say .