February 9 , 1999 OBITUARY Iris Murdoch , Novelist and Philosopher , Is Dead By RICHARD NICHOLLS Iris Murdoch , a prodigiously inventive and idiosyncratic British writer whose 26 novel offer lively plots , complex character and intellectual speculation , die yesterday at a nursing home in Oxford , England. She be 79 and have Alzheimer 's disease. Her struggle with Alzheimer 's be document recently in `` Elegy for Iris , '' a memoir by her husband , the critic and novelist John Bayley , who be at her bedside when she died. Miss Murdoch 's first novel be publish in 1954 and in a career that last for more than four decade , her fiction receive many honor , include the Booker Prize for `` The Sea , the Sea , '' the Whitbread Literary Award for Fiction for `` The Sacred and Profane Love Machine '' and the James Tait Black Memorial Prize for `` The Black Prince. '' Although she be make a Dame of the British Empire , she rarely garner the attention give to gaudier contemporaries. She spend much of her career quietly teach and write , away from lecture tour , prize committee and television appearances. Along with novel , she produce a half a dozen work on philosophy , several play , critical writing on literature and modern idea and poetry. Miss Murdoch have a background in philosophy -- she know and write about Jean-Paul Sartre , study with Ludwig Wittgenstein and be a lecturer in philosophy at Oxford University -- and her fiction grapple with such question a the nature of good and evil. This lead many who know her work superficially to assume that her novel be philosophical exploration of the origin of morality and behavior and too esoteric or intellectually rigorous for a general audience. In fact , many of Miss Murdoch 's novel be exuberantly melodramatic , offer bemuse record of romantic or erotic folly , as well a more somber battle between individual represent moral good and it opposite. Her character , draw largely from the middle class , be describe with love exactitude and in such depth that their struggle to define what it mean to live a good life take on dramatic force. In Books , Happiness And Moral Lessons Far from view fiction a another and less way of deal with philosophical question , Miss Murdoch argue that literature be mean `` to be grasp by enjoyment , '' and that the art of the tale be `` a fundamental form of thought '' in it own right. The ideal reader , she tell one interviewer , be `` someone who like a jolly good yarn and enjoy think about the book as well , about the moral issues. '' In another interview she go far , assert that good art offer `` uncontaminated '' happiness that also teach `` how to look at the world and to understand it ; it make everything far more interesting. '' Her belief in literature have it inception in her happy and book-filled childhood. Jean Iris Murdoch be bear in Dublin on July 15 , 1919 , the only child of British and Irish parents. When she be a year old her family move to London , where her father , Wills John Hughes Murdoch , join the civil service. In interview she remember that a a child she have exist `` in a perfect trinity of love. '' Her mother , the former Irene Alice Richardson , who have train a an opera singer , be a `` beautiful , lively , witty woman with a happy temperament. '' Her father begin discuss book with her early on and encourage her to read widely. She progress rapidly from Lewis Carroll ( one of her favorite ) and Robert Louis Stevenson to more adult fare. Her great pleasure in reading , and her early attempt to write story lead to the conviction , which she form a a child , that she would become a writer. She attend board school in Bristol , and in 1938 enter Somerville College , a woman 's college at Oxford , where she study the classic , ancient history and philosophy. She graduate with honor in 1942 and immediately take a job with the Treasury. In 1944 she begin work for the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration , which help Europeans displace by World War II. The somber experience of the war have a profound impact on her thinking. Close friend die while in service , and her work , often on the front line , with poor and elderly refugee be hard but instructive. If her childhood have be mostly idyllic , there be , she later note , at least one shadow fall across her memory of those year : her family member be largely `` wanderer , '' cut off from their Irish relation and their roots. Working with refugee lead her to reflect far on the place of the exile in modern society , as well a on the source of evil , raise question that she would pursue in many novels. After leave the United Nations , Miss Murdoch take up further study in philosophy at Cambridge University , where she work with Wittgenstein. While she express no last allegiance to his school of thought , she say her study with him spur her development a a writer. In 1948 she become a fellow and tutor at St. Anne 's College at Oxford , where she remain for 15 year a a lecturer in philosophy. It be a particularly heady time for anyone concern with the study and application of philosophical thought ; new school of philosophy be contend for primacy and often combative work be be produce to define these emerge disciplines. Miss Murdoch have meet Sartre , the most visible proponent of existentialism , while work with refugee in Belgium. Existentialism , with it focus on individual will , appeal to her , but she find it emphasis on the primacy of the self disturbing. Her first publish work , `` Sartre : Romantic Rationalist '' ( 1953 ) , be a serious , clear explanation of existentialism and it place in contemporary thought. While it be balance , it be not uncritical : Miss Murdoch felt that existentialism encourage an almost hermetic focus on the self , ignore the corrosive implication of such a perspective on society. Her study pay special attention to Sartre 's fiction. She have already write and discard several novel , but now she have become absorb with how fiction express idea and the way fiction and idea could best be blended. `` Under the Net , '' her first publish novel , appear to generally positive reviews. It focus on the picaresque adventure of a free-spirited Irishman make the round of some of the more raffish area of London and Paris. A reviewer in The Times Literary Supplement say the work seem to announce the emergence of `` a brilliant talent. '' The novel signal the beginning of an industrious and prolific career. Miss Murdoch publish , on average , a novel every two year for the next four decades. Her work , while vary in set and tone , rarely move far from several central preoccupation and themes. She first encounter existentialist writing while work with refugee , and she draw deeply from her fascination with those experience in her second novel , `` Flight From the Enchanter '' ( 1956 ) . It concern the well-intentioned , conventionally liberal Rose Keep , who attempt to offer solace to two Polish brother , refugee from the war. Her effort founder because she can not see the brother a something more than symbol of displaced , wound humanity. Revisiting Themes Of Pure Love The double-edged nature of love figure often in Miss Murdoch 's fiction. True love , she assert in the essay `` The Sublime and the Good , '' be perhaps the best way to overcome isolation and the absorption with one 's cripple and constrict self. `` Love be the extremely difficult realization that something other than oneself be real , '' she argued. Many of the figure in her fourth novel , `` The Bell '' ( 1958 ) , be cripple by their inability to clearly see , and thus to truly love , those around them. `` The Bell '' reach a new level of sophistication for Miss Murdoch , display element that would become hallmark of her fiction : effortless shift between the grim and the humorous ; deft marshaling of a large , vary cast of character and numerous subplots , and creation of fable or myth that could suggest the struggle between true and diminished form of love. In many of Miss Murdoch 's novel , romantic disaster , suicide and even murder be set in motion by a character who be brilliant and ferociously self-absorbed. Such figure , usually men , often go beyond egotism into evil. In `` A Fairly Honorable Defeat '' ( 1970 ) , a biologist who help create biological weapon set out to destroy those around him. But goodness , Miss Murdoch suggest , while imperil , be also resilient. In `` The Sacred and Profane Love Machine '' ( 1974 ) , the only character who come close to true altruism be destroyed. But the novel suggest that her death may have open the heart of those around her to a good , more responsible life. `` The Sea , the Sea '' ( 1978 ) , which receive the Booker Prize , be consider one of Miss Murdoch 's best novels. Its protagonist , a retired theatrical director try to win back his first love , be not so much evil a simply self-absorbed and dangerously certain of his limited view of the world. `` A Severed Head '' ( 1961 ) be a black farce about infidelity , incest and violence. Storytelling And Large Truths Miss Murdoch be always balance the demand of storytelling with the more urgent need to examine how the truth of a fleeting life reflect the large , permanent truth of existence. `` The Red and the Green '' chart the fate of two friend who find themselves on opposite side during Ireland 's 1916 Easter rebellion against British rule. `` The Nice and the Good '' follow the effort of a decent man to uncover the reason for a colleague 's suicide and extricate himself from the seamy web of blackmail and the occult that he uncovers. `` Italian Girl '' trace the struggle of a young man to liberate himself from the corrosive effect of family secret and a shallow , destructive image of love. The tension generate by this iconoclastic approach to fiction have make Murdoch 's novel unique and controversial. Her fiction take a distinctive vigor and texture from it combination of the usual element of a tale with a sustain , sophisticated inquiry into such concept a the define characteristic of goodness , the nature of morality , the place of faith in everyday life and the conflict between spiritual and carnal love. When most other writer be content to dwell on the heated specific of individual life or to simply offer a catalogue of society 's ill , Miss Murdoch dare to suggest that fiction should be a mean of deal with life 's large and most basic issue and a way to learn about moral behavior. This quest `` for a passion beyond any center of self , '' a David Bromwich write in The New York Times Book Review , make her fiction unlike that of any other contemporary Western writer. It also let her in for both considerable acclaim and criticism. Harold Bloom , while praise her `` formidable combination of intellectual drive and storytelling exuberance '' in a review of her novel `` The Good Apprentice '' in The Times , and note her `` mastery '' in `` represent the maelstrom of fall in love , '' also find that her narrative voice often lacked authority , `` be too qualify and fussy. '' Anthony Burgess , while note the highly original `` synthesis of the traditional and revolutionary '' in her work and praise her talent for create story that be `` both thoroughly realistic yet at the same time load with symbol , '' also argue in his 1967 book `` The Novel Now '' that her character be too often `` catch up in a purely intellectual pattern. '' In a memorable phrase , he contend that , while Miss Murdoch have a rare ability `` to dredge that world of the strange and mysterious '' that rest `` on the boundary of the ordinary , '' her work rarely offer a convincing portrait of the more common realm of life. In a body of work so large , both admirer and critic be bind to find material to advance their argument , and this be true as well in her late novel , such a `` The Message to the Planet '' ( 1989 ) and `` The Green Knight '' ( 1994 ) . But neither criticism nor praise seem much to affect her. She say that she never read her reviews. She rarely read modern writer , prefer the British and European novelist of the 19th century ( Jane Austen , Charles Dickens , George Eliot , Henry James , Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky ) , with whom she felt an affinity , describe them a `` moralistic writer who portray the complexity of morality and the difficulty of be good. '' She live for many year in the small village of Steeple Aston , near Oxford , in a house crowd with book and paintings. The quiet life there , and in the house in Oxford to which she move in 1986 , have be describe memorably by her husband , an Oxford don , in `` Elegy for Iris , '' his memoir of their life together. John Bayley fell in love with Iris Murdoch when he be in his late 20 's and she be in her early 30 's ; she pass his window on a bicycle. `` I indulge the momentary fantasy that nothing have ever happen to her ; that she be simply bicycle about , wait for me to arrive , '' he wrote. `` She be not a woman with a past or an unknown present. '' They be marry in 1956 ; he be her only close survivor. The novelist Mary Gordon , review `` Elegy for Iris '' in The Times , touch on their relationship. `` Radical privacy , seal compartment of her life off from each other , be always a condition of Iris Murdoch 's selfhood , and anyone who marry her have to deal with that. From the beginning , she have friendship that she keep from Bayley , and love affair that he be mean to understand have nothing to do with him. There be some hint that this be not always easy , but Bayley rise to the challenge. '' Ms. Gordon then quote Mr. Bayley 's memoir : `` In early day , I always think it would be vulgar -- as well a not my place -- to give any indication of jealousy , but she know when it be there , and she soothe it just by be the self she always be with me , which I soon know to be wholly and entirely different from any way that she be with other people. '' Slipping Into A Baffling Darkness In 1995 Miss Murdoch tell an interviewer that she be experience severe writer 's block , note that the struggle to write had leave her in `` a hard , dark place. '' In 1996 , Mr. Bayley announce that she have Alzheimer 's disease , which she have suffer for five year by the time she died. Her final three week be spend in a nursing home. If `` Elegy for Iris '' offer a move evocation of a great love story , it also provide a grim record of watch the personality of a loved one gradually dwindle under the burden of fear , bafflement and grief. She be , Miss Murdoch confide to one of her friend , `` sail into the darkness. '' Mr. Bayley 's description of his struggle to understand his wife 's suffering , to find way to ameliorate it and to come to grip with the physical demand of his new responsibility and to understand the conflicting emotion arouse in him by the experience be exact , penetrate and unsparing. Miss Murdoch become like `` a very nice 3-year-old , '' her husband say , and she need to be feed , bath and changed. The note on which the book conclude , however , be one of reconciliation , and of a painfully win serenity. `` Every day , '' Mr. Bayley write of their life together in Miss Murdoch 's last year , `` we be physically closer. . . . She be not sail into the dark. The voyage be over , and under the dark escort of Alzheimer 's , she have arrive somewhere. So have I . ''