February 8 , 1999 OBITUARY Death of a King ; Cautious King Took Risks In Straddling Two Worlds By JUDITH MILLER King Hussein of Jordan , who die yesterday at 63 , successfully straddle two world in more than four tumultuous decade on the throne. Cautious by instinct and habit , King Hussein take pride in his Western impulse and his Arab root , though he acknowledge that the combination sometimes produced policy that even admirers criticize a erratic and conflicting. He be the Middle East 's longest-reigning ruler , but take little comfort from mere survival. Though he once say he yearn for a `` hero 's death '' like that of Yitzhak Rabin , the Israeli enemy he ultimately embrace a his `` brother '' and `` partner in peace , '' King Hussein succumb not to the fanatic 's bullet but to cancer , non-Hodgkins lymphoma , which he have suffer for eight months. His twin legacy -- peace with his neighbor , include Israel , and a fairly tolerant , stable society at home -- would be impressive in any context. But they be particularly so give the often violent politics of the Middle East and the unpromising country whose stewardship he inherit while still a teen-ager. Personally courageous , modest and unfailingly polite , King Hussein be know for his political tolerance , pardon even those who have try to kill him. Though he have make war against Israel in 1967 , he be the only Arab leader secure enough to kneel before Israeli family who have lose child in a terrorist attack on his soil in 1997 , offer his condolences. King Hussein spend the final month of his life work relentlessly for peace and a succession that he hop would insure both his immediate family 's control of the throne and political stability in Jordan. Less than two week before his death , he stun the world by bypass his younger brother , Prince Hassan , 51 , and designate his eldest son , 37-year-old Abdullah , a heir to the throne. In a long , bitter letter to his brother explain his decision and publicize a deep family rift , King Hussein assail Prince Hassan 's performance a Regent , say his brother 's palace supporter -- climber , he call them -- have try to `` destroy Jordan '' by spread vicious gossip about his wife and child and work to divide and politicize the army. The King also suggest that Prince Hassan , his appoint heir for 34 year , have oppose Hussein 's wish that his own son succeed his brother a King. King Hussein say the family discord have give him many sleepless night and prompt him to intervene `` from my sickbed '' at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota to end the intrigue and political jockeying for power. But he compliment Prince Hassan for his `` sincere effort '' and his loyal acceptance of his demotion. The decision not only take Jordan and the United States by surprise , but it also demonstrate that King Hussein , though ail and in pain , remain the undisputed ruler of his kingdom until the last day of his life. The King 's Last Grasp At a Middle East Peace Apart from settle the succession , King Hussein 's last effort be aim at advance peace between the Arabs and Israel , a goal that have elude two generation of his Hashemite family. Drawn and pale , and make bald by four round of chemotherapy , he have leave the Mayo Clinic last October to attend the Wye summit talk in Maryland and help President Clinton coax Israeli and Palestinian negotiator into conclude the next phase of their peace accord. `` If I have an ounce of strength , I would have do my utmost to be there and to help in any way I can , '' he say in an emotional , impromptu speech at the signing ceremony. Saying there have be `` enough destruction , enough death , enough waste '' during the five decade of Arab-Israeli conflict , he plead for accommodation. `` We have no right to dictate through irresponsible action or narrow-mindedness the future of our child or their child 's child , '' the King said. A short man who use his deep , mesmerizing voice to maximum political effect , King Hussein be to a large extent a reflection and prisoner of his geography. The leader of a slip of land the size of South Carolina , seven-eighths of it desert , without oil or other valuable resource , he be surround by far more powerful nation , many of them intermittently hostile. And over two-thirds of Jordan 's more than 4.5 million people be Palestinian , many of whom feel little allegiance to him , his family or their adopt country. Commenting on King Hussein 's lack of option , former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger write in 1979 , in his book `` White House Years , '' that the King `` have the capacity neither for independent action nor for blackmail , which be the stuff of Middle Eastern politics. '' Nevertheless , by chart a mostly centrist , pragmatic course and avoid the radical passion and fashionable political trend that destabilize or topple several other hereditary leader in the Middle East , King Hussein create a relatively peaceful , conservative , modern country whose citizen enjoy decent government and more political freedom than those of most other Arab nations. Setbacks , Then Recovery On the Diplomatic Front His rule be notable for both bold diplomatic stroke and strategic blunder , some of them necessary , he felt , to secure his throne. Among the latter be his decision not to join the American-led coalition that force President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to end his five-month-long occupation of Kuwait in 1991. And in 1967 he ignore private assurance and call for restraint by Israel in favor of join Egypt and Syria in their war against it. This cost him half of Jerusalem and all the territory on the western side of the Jordan River , the West Bank , which his grandfather have win in the 1948-1949 war against Israel. But after each setback , King Hussein recover his political equilibrium and turn adversity to his advantage. Reputed among Jordanians to enjoy baraka , or God 's blessing , for dodge at least 12 assassination attempt and 7 plot to overthrow him , the King ultimately accomplish what his grandfather have be unable to do : in 1994 he secure a stunning peace with Israel , which he call his reign 's `` crown achievement. '' In July 1994 , stand on the White House lawn beside Prime Minister Rabin , King Hussein initial an accord that technically end the state of war between the neighboring countries. And three month later , in an emotional ceremony in his own land , he become the third Arab leader to sign a formal peace treaty with Israel. `` I have at last carry out the will of King Abdullah , '' he declare on the White House lawn , refer to his grandfather. Indeed , the legacy of political pragmatism and the fate of Abdullah , Jordan 's first King , strongly shape his rule. In the summer of 1951 , when he be 15 , King Hussein saw his grandfather gun down at the entrance of the silver-domed Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem. King Hussein say another bullet have ricochet off a medal on the uniform he have be tell to wear by his grandfather , who have become a scapegoat of Arabs furious over their humiliating defeat by Israel in 1948-49 and of Palestinians angry at King Abdullah 's secret meeting with Israeli leaders. In a memoir , King Hussein say he have learn painful , important lesson from witness the killing of Abdullah , a `` wonderful old man '' and a `` man of desert way to whom I owe more than I can say. '' In an interview more than 30 year later , the King say he would never forget how Abdullah 's aide , his `` so-called friend , '' have scatter in all direction `` like frightened woman in the night '' minute after the killing , or how they have open political intrigue within hours. The first rule he learn , the King say in his memoir , be `` the unimportance of death : that when you have to die , you die , '' a fatalism he manifest at critical moment throughout his life. `` I also saw that ruler can not depend on their adviser to save or guide them , that they must make their own decision and go their own way , '' he say in an interview in 1993. This determination to keep his own counsel , and to be prepare to suffer the consequence of rash action , allow him to brush aside the savage criticism periodically direct at him by Westerners and Arabs alike. Though he share Abdullah 's commitment to the Arab cause , the assassination reinforce his skepticism about fellow Arab rulers. And from that day on , he carry a gun or keep one within easy reach. Finally , the assassination teach him that if he be to pursue Jordan 's strategic interest by maintain his grandfather 's dialogue with Israel , such contact have to remain secret. Even toward the end of his life , King Hussein refuse to discuss detail of what Israelis estimate be more than 500 hour of talk with every Israeli leader except Menachem Begin , a series of contact that the King initiate in 1963. A Crown Prince 's Son , Yet Reared in Poverty Descended from a powerful Arabian family that trace it lineage to the Muslim prophet Mohammed , Hussein ibn Talal ibn Hussein be bear in Amman , Jordan , on Nov. 14 , 1935 , to Crown Prince Talal and Princess Zein. His family , like his country , be desperately poor. His baby sister die of pneumonia `` in the bitter cold of an Amman winter , '' he later wrote. The family house have no heat. Abdullah have be bear and raise among the tribe of the Arabian Desert , but Hussein , in contrast , be educate at Victoria College in Alexandria , Egypt , and at Harrow and the Royal Military Academy at Sandhurst in Britain. Indeed , his Hashemite family owe much to Britain. To protect against French encroachment on British interest in Palestine , and to reward the family for lead the Great Arab Revolt against the Ottomans , who be ally to Germany , in 1916 , Winston Churchill , then the Colonial Secretary , have carve Transjordan out of Syria in 1921 , agree to finance the emirate with a modest subsidy and give it to Abdullah to rule under British mandate. In 1946 Transjordan become independent. Abdullah , who never abandon the dream of re-creating and rule a modern Arab empire , become King and rename his country the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. Unlike other Arab leader , Abdullah -- like his grandson Hussein -- quickly grasp that he would have to deal with the Zionists. Contacts between them begin as early a 1926 , and in 1946 Abdullah and Jewish leader agree informally that Jordan would not oppose establishment of a Jewish state if the Zionists support his rule over the Arab part of Palestine. But after war erupt in 1948 , Abdullah invade the newborn state of Israel , win control of half of Jerusalem and the West Bank. After Abdullah 's assassination , Prince Talal , who have be treat at a Swiss clinic for schizophrenia , take the throne. When his attack worsen , Parliament remove him , on Aug. 11 , 1952 , less than a month after Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt help topple King Farouk in a military coup. Hussein , then 16 , be proclaim Jordan 's King just a intense Arab nationalism be take hold throughout the region. King Hussein always relish physical if not political danger. As if the extraordinary challenge of sheer survival be not sufficient , he parachute , fly stunt in his jet plane and race high-performance car and motorcycle across the desert ( insist in his late year on be photograph with a helmet a an example of safety to his people ) . Risk become second nature , `` what water be to fish , '' he tell a journalist. Compounding the risk , he chain-smoke cigarette , a habit he try innumerable time to break. King Hussein himself concede that at first he make many mistake a ruler. `` Those early year be hard for me , '' he say once in an interview. `` I learn late. '' In 1956 , when Arab nationalist passion be run high and conservative monarchy like his be a constant target of coup and assault , King Hussein try to damp grow popular unrest by dismiss Sir John Bagot Glubb , the British general who command Jordan 's Arab Legion. He also abandon liberal measure that he and his father have adopt , declare martial law and call out the army against his own people. As the immediate threat to his rule recede , King Hussein gradually replace British protector with Americans , whose influence be grow in the Middle East a Britain 's faded. According to senior Jordanian and American official , tie between the Central Intelligence Agency and King Hussein be cement in 1957 and 1958 , when American intelligence official learn of a coup plot involve Jordanian diplomat and warn the King. Relations like those , an American airlift of oil in 1958 when Jordan be boycott by Egypt , Syria and Iraq , and monthly check from the C.I.A. help persuade the King that Washington be a reliable ally. ( The C.I.A. payment reportedly end in 1977 , when their disclosure embarrass the King. ) A Costly Decision to Go To War Against Israel King Hussein fare less well in his second crisis : the 1967 Arab-Israeli war. Although Israel have urge restraint , he fly to Cairo shortly before the war to sign a defense treaty with President Nasser , despite Nasser 's early plot against him. Although the King later concede that he have know he be take a risk by side with Syria and Egypt , he say he have fear the fury of his people , many of them Palestinians , more than Israel. A senior Jordanian official say most Jordanians so strongly favor the war that the King 's choice , in fact , be between `` war and civil war. '' It be a costly decision. As a result of the 1967 war , Israel control all of Jerusalem and the West Bank. Thousands of Palestinian refugee flee into arid Jordan , increase the population by about half. Three-quarters of the population of Amman be now of Palestinian origin , make it the large Palestinian city. Unlike other Arab ruler , King Hussein offer the refugee citizenship and a passport. In 1970 , Yasir Arafat and the Palestine Liberation Organization , which increasingly view King Hussein a vulnerable and an obstacle to it struggle , challenge the Hashemites ' control of Jordan. In despair at the prospect of a civil war , the King later acknowledge , he briefly pondered abdication , a he would again during other crises. Instead , he decide to confront Mr. Arafat. Though Mr. Arafat subsequently maintain that the Jordanian Army kill as many a 20,000 in put down the unrest , conservative estimate put Palestinian loss at 2,000. While King Hussein have not seek that test of will , his legitimacy be never challenge again. On the Sidelines In the 1973 War Drawn once into an Arab war with Israel , King Hussein would not be seduce a second time. Before the 1973 war , Israeli diplomat say , he caution Israel that Egypt and Syria be plan to fight , but his warning be discounted. And while the King send a Jordanian armored brigade to fight alongside Syrian force , he avoid fight Israel along their common border , a decision that preclude the loss of still more land. Moreover , his quiet contact with Israel continue even during the war. According to a recent book by an Israeli journalist , Samuel Segev , Hussein secretly persuade Israel 's Chief of Staff to divert artillery fire from a hill on the Golan Heights where the King be schedule to address the troop he have send to help the Syrians. King Hussein never comment publicly on account like those , but friend and diplomat say such disclosure by Israeli official infuriate him. The King pay a high political price for his 1970 assault on the P.L.O. and his de facto abstention from the 1973 war. At a meeting in Rabat , Morocco , in 1974 , the Arab League anoint the P.L.O. a the `` sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. '' Since Jordan be then more than half Palestinian and have rule the West Bank between 1948 and 1967 , the Arabs have decide , in effect , that he could no longer protect what amount to his own national interest , he say in an interview a decade later. In his fourth major crisis , the Persian Gulf war in 1991 , King Hussein in effect side with radical Arab passion in his tilt toward Saddam Hussein. He insist at the time -- and even later -- that he have be seek a peaceful solution and have be neutral , say , `` I take the side of peace. '' But his stance infuriate Saudi Arabia and other gulf nation , not to mention Washington , whose gift and foreign aid have help him to survive and Jordan to prosper. American official understand the King 's need to placate President Hussein of Iraq , give Jordan 's economic dependence on Iraqi trade and the passionate pro-Iraqi stance of most Jordanians , especially Palestinians , who saw an Iraqi victory a the first step toward regain a homeland. But American patience snap in February 1991 when King Hussein give an emotional speech condemn the air strike against Iraq a `` a war against all Arabs and Muslims '' aim at `` destroy all the achievement of Iraq '' and place the entire region `` under foreign domination. '' The King once again pay a high price. The gulf state suspend aid , cost Jordan almost a billion dollar a year , and the influx of some 300,000 more Palestinian refugee from Kuwait and elsewhere in the gulf severely strain Jordan 's economy. In Washington , the King , who own a home in Potomac , Md. , that he share with his American-born wife , become persona non grata. The King Is Returned To U.S. Good Graces In November 1992 and even more dramatically in May 1993 , the King try to repair his relation with the United States by distance himself from Saddam Hussein , with whom he have once enjoy the warm of tie -- frequent visit , nighttime barbecue and deep conversation while fish for carp. Saying Iraqis be suffer gravely under the American-led boycott , he conclude that it be time for the Iraqis to embrace democratic government and end Mr. Hussein 's dictatorial rule. Eventually a combination of fading American memory of the gulf war , intense lobbying in Washington on the King 's behalf by Israeli leader and Jordan 's strategic role a a buffer between Iraq , Syria and Israel produce warm relation with the new Democratic Administration. On June 18 , 1993 , President Clinton meet King Hussein at the White House for the first time. While proud of his family 's and his country 's Arab heritage , King Hussein always understand the need to maintain contact with Israel. The first meeting between the King and a succession of Israeli leader take place in mid-1963 at the London home of his doctor when he have yet to consolidate power. Subsequent session be hold in Paris , in tent , in desert trailer , aboard boat , on a Red Sea island , even in a Mossad safe house north of Tel Aviv. Though widely rumor among politically well connect Israelis , the meeting be almost never discuss in public. For King Hussein , who have few illusion about the dangerous neighborhood in which he live or the perfidy of many of his neighbor , Israel be an insurance policy against Egyptian , Syrian , Palestinian and even Iraqi ambitions. He always promise that one day he would forge a formal peace and normal relation with Israel , a goal he doggedly and often dangerously pursue throughout his rule. At the same time , he insist that a peace must be comprehensive , reject the notion that Arab nation could make separate accommodation with Israel. For that reason , he later assert in interview , he oppose the Camp David peace accord between Israel and Egypt in 1978 and their peace treaty the next year. Despite his intense misgiving about Mr. Arafat 's prior history and future intention , he be among the first Arab leader to endorse the Madrid peace talk sponsor by the Bush Administration in October 1991. He and Osama el-Baz , an adviser to President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt , be influential in persuade the Palestinians to take part in the ground-breaking talks. To encourage the effort and keep the P.L.O. under some check , he agree to include Palestinian representative a nominal member of the Jordanian delegation , thus defuse Israel 's objection to direct negotiation with the Palestinians. A First Bout of Cancer , And a Change of Focus But the talk between Israel and it Arab enemy , which continue in Washington after the Madrid conference , drag on inconclusively month after month. Without the knowledge of most of the official negotiate in Washington , Prime Minister Rabin have bless a secret effort by his Foreign Minister , Shimon Peres , to seek a breakthrough directly with the P.L.O. in Oslo. King Hussein be not informed. Efforts to make peace between Jordan and Israel ware give unexpected impetus from a traumatic development in the summer of 1992 : King Hussein be find to have cancer. At the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota , he undergo surgery on his urinary tract. In September he return to Jordan to a tumultuous welcome. Unable to imagine their country without him , more than a million Jordanians -- then almost a third of his kingdom -- line the road between the airport and the capital to welcome him home , wave banner , picture and placard , cheer , chant and weeping. His illness and the fervor of his welcome intensify his determination to make peace , King Hussein say shortly before the treaty with Israel be sign in 1994. While he have be `` overwhelm by the warmth , by the feeling of the people '' upon his return , he say , `` I felt an element of fear -- of insecurity -- about what might happen if I be not there , so I know that I have to do everything I could , in whatever time I have leave , to achieve peace and make it work. '' In October 1992 , Jordan and Israel agree in write for the first time that their common goal be a formal peace treaty within the framework of a comprehensive Arab-Israeli settlement. But in the summer of 1993 , the P.L.O. and Israel stun the world -- and King Hussein -- by announce that the Oslo talk have produce a peace agreement between them. The King felt shunt aside and fear that his poor country would be freeze out economically while billion of dollar pour into the West Bank and Gaza. Still , the King ignore those concern and welcome the accord. On Sept. 14 , a day after the Oslo agreement be make official at the White House , Jordan and Israel sign their own agenda outline the treaty they hop to reach. In November , King Hussein and Foreign Minister Peres sign understanding on economic relation and other form of cooperation at a secret meeting in Amman. And in July 1994 , Israel and Jordan end the state of war that have exist between them for nearly half a century , sign a declaration on the White House lawn that pave the way for a formal peace. This peace come on Oct. 26 , 1994 , in another stirring ceremony witness by President Clinton at Wadi Arava , a barren strip of desert between Jordan and Israel. `` This be without a doubt my proud accomplishment : leaving my people a legacy of peace , '' the King say in an interview in Nadwa Palace in Amman shortly before the ceremony. No Arab leader be more openly upset by the assassination of Prime Minister Rabin of Israel in November 1995 than King Hussein. Traveling openly to Jerusalem for the first time since it loss to Israel in the 1967 war , he weep openly at the funeral of his former enemy , his `` brother. '' `` It be peace that have be assassinate , '' King Hussein say in his tribute a Mr. Rabin 's body be lay to rest under the pine and cypress of Mount Herzl , the cemetery of Israel 's military and spiritual heroes. Disillusionment Grows With New Israeli Leader When Benjamin Netanyahu become Israel 's Prime Minister in 1996 , King Hussein say Arab alarm over the change of government be overwrought , and express confidence that the election would not undermine the quest for peace. But he grow disillusion with Mr. Netanyahu 's leadership , which in the King 's view seriously erode support for peace within Jordan. While the King be note that he have risk domestic discontent by overtly pursue peace , Mr. Netanyahu be authorize expansion of Jewish settlement in the West Bank and housing project in East Jerusalem , and take other measure that offer a contrary , hawkish vision. In a severe blow to relation in September 1997 , Mossad agent seek to kill a militant Islamic leader from Hamas on the street of Amman , but failed. The bungle affair threaten King Hussein 's need to balance his inclination toward peace with Israel against his need to keep faith with his Palestinian constituent and avoid offend Arab neighbors. By the spring of 1998 , many Jordanians be openly deride the treaty with Israel a `` the King 's peace , '' argue that the agreement have bring them no tangible gain. Instead of get well , the economy turn worse. The Government become less tolerant of dissent. The sense of crisis in Iraq also make many Jordanians fear that once again they would somehow end up pay the price. But King Hussein refuse to break with Mr. Netanyahu , fear such a step would cause great instability , which would drive away the foreign investment that his country so desperately needs. The King 's political trouble be overshadow by illness once again in mid-1998. In July , he tell his brother , Crown Prince Hassan , in a letter make public in Jordan that a new round of test at Mayo show that he probably have cancer of the lymph gland , which be usually fatal. An Image a a Playboy Never Quite Outlived In a radio broadcast from the Mayo Clinic in late July , King Hussein say he have undergone chemotherapy for the first time. `` My general condition be excellent , my mind be clear and my morale be high , '' he say , depart from the traditional secrecy that prevail in most Arab capital when ruler fall ill. `` This be a new battle among the many battle and , with God 's help , we will fully overcome this problem. '' In more than 46 year on the throne , King Hussein have 4 wife , father 11 child and adopt a 12th. Besides Prince Hassan , he have another brother , Mohammed , a sister , Basma , and 15 grandchildren. Even in his early year a King , many woman be draw to him , and vice versa. A superb dancer who love party , the young King quickly establish a reputation a a playboy that he never fully overcame. His first marriage , to Sherifa Dina Abdul Hamid , a Cambridge-educated intellectual and an old , distant cousin , end after 18 months. Ms. Hamid , a lively , independent woman who find sleepy Amman dull , have one child , a daughter. But she and King Hussein have little else in common. Though they part amicably , she later marry a Palestinian commando who have take part in the 1970 uprising against the King. The King 's second wife be Toni Avril Gardiner , whom the King name Muna , Arabic for My Wish. The shy daughter of an English colonel at the British Embassy , Muna have little interest in politics and refuse to be designate Queen. She and King Hussein have four child , include Abdullah. The marriage end in 1972. The King then marry Alia Baha ud-Din Toukan , the daughter of a prominent Palestinian diplomat from Nablus , on the West Bank , who have settle near Amman. He and the popular Queen have two child and adopt a daughter. Alia be kill in a helicopter accident in 1977. In 1978 , King Hussein take a fourth wife , an American , Lisa Halaby , the daughter of Najeeb E. Halaby , a Texan descend from a Syrian family who head the Federal Aviation Administration and then become chairman and chief executive officer of Pan American World Airways. The Queen be know a Noor , or Light , in Arabic. She and King Hussein have two son , Hamzeh and Hashem , and two daughter , Iman and Rayah. Queen Noor and the King grow particularly close during his long fight with cancer. According to family friend , she urge him to designate her son Hamzeh a heir instead of Prince Hassan. While conclude that Hamzah , who be now 18 , be still too young for the job , Hussein do pas over his loyal , long-serving brother in favor of Abdullah , his eldest son , who name Hamzeh his Crown Prince yesterday. In an interview with Life magazine shortly before his death , King Hussein say his illness have be a `` bonding '' experience for him and Queen Noor , with whom relation have occasionally be strained. Expressing his love for her , the King say , `` It be everything. '' Chart : `` A King 's Life '' NOV. 14 , 1935 Hussein ibn Talal ibn Hussein be bear to Crown Prince Talal and Princess Zein. 1948 The state of Israel be create with the end of the British Mandate in Palestine. 1950 Jordan annex the West Bank. 1951 Hussein 's grandfather , King Abdullah , be assassinate in Je 2/3ru 2/3sa 2/3lem. Hussein , who be at his side , be unhurt. 1952 He be proclaimed King , replace his father , who be declare unfit to rule. 1953 Formally assume his constitutional power at age 18. 1960 Briefly mobilize troop against Syria after Prime Minister Hazza al-Majali of Jordan be kill by a bomb place by Syrian agents. 1967 In the Arab-Israeli war , Israel capture the West Bank and East Jerusalem from Jordan. 1970 A civil war break out after Yasir Arafat challenge the Hashemites ' control of Jordan. 1974 Avoids confrontation with Israel in the 1973 war , but lose his status a the representative of the Palestinian people when the Arab League transfer the role to the Palestine Liberation Organization. 1988 Disengages Jordan from the West Bank , clear the way for the Palestinians to declare a state. 1990-91 Infuriates Washington and his Arab neighbor with his support of Saddam Hussein of Iraq ( show here in 1988 ) in the confrontation follow the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. 1991 Endorses the Madrid peace con 2/3fer 2/3ence. His inclusion of Palestinians in the Jordanian delegation smooth the way for their talk with Israel. 1992 Is find to have cancer and undergoes surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota. 1993 Meets with President Clinton at the White House for the first time. 1994 Signs a declaration with Israel end the state of war that have last since 1948. 1998 Returns to the United States for cancer treatment. In October he attend peace talk in Wye , Md. , and help Mr. Clinton coax Israeli and Palestinian negotiator into conclude an accord. 1999 Home in Jordan , he change the line of succession by pass the crown from his brother to his son Abdullah. He die Feb. 7 .