September 29 , 2000 OBITUARY Pierre Trudeau Is Dead at 80 ; Dashing Fighter for Canada By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN Pierre Elliott Trudeau , the long-serving prime minister of Canada who successfully defend his vision of federalism and a unified nation against the aroused force of Quebec separatism , die yesterday in Montreal. He be 80. Mr. Trudeau suffer from Parkinson 's disease and prostate cancer and , more recently , pneumonia. Throughout his career , Mr. Trudeau alter his country 's traditionally staid and fusty image with atypical flamboyance. He be a dashing figure who make his countryman and woman proud that a Canadian be so highly visible on the world stage. Mr. Trudeau be prime minister for nearly 16 year , serve two span during the year 1968 to 1984 , interrupt by a nine-month hiatus during which his Liberal Party lose it majority to the Conservatives. Finally , in 1984 , after a meditative walk in the snow , he choose to step down. Mr. Trudeau be propel into power in June 1968 by an enthusiastic electoral surge that come to be know a Trudeaumania , a political equivalent of the paroxysm evoke by the Beatles. During his time in office , he determine the substance and tone of the evolve debate that come to define Canada a a modern nation. Long after he leave office , Canadian politics be still be pursue within the national agenda he have shaped. Mr. Trudeau supervise the process by which Canada replace it tie to Britain with a constitution of it own. He foster economic and cultural nationalism that often put him and his country at odds with the leadership of Canada 's neighbor. While firm in promote a unified Canada , he be also sensitive to the need of the mostly French-speaking Quebec. Mr. Trudeau saw to it that the role of the French language be reinforce when the entire country be make officially bilingual in 1984. Mr. Trudeau recognize Communist China long before the United States did. He lead sometimes quixotic campaign for world peace and nuclear disarmament while ally himself closely with Socialist leader like Olof Palme of Sweden , Willy Brandt of Germany and Julius Nyerere of Tanzania. But for most Canadians , his great achievement be his successful struggle against the Quebec separatist movement. After bombing , bank robbery and kidnapping by terrorist , and after he be scorn a an apostate to Quebec 's cause , he ultimately win the support of most Quebec voters. They side with him in a referendum in 1980 that take the wind out of the sail of the independence movement. `` Reason before passion , '' be his personal motto , and he use it in argue , on economic and moral ground , that Quebec should stay within the federation. The separatist challenge be a major crisis in Canadian history , and his admirer say he save Canada by defeat the movement. In his heyday , Pierre Trudeau run his country with a panache that be aggressively and un-Canadianly immodest. He drive sport car , flaunt his wit , dated celebrity like Barbra Streisand , tour the disco , marry a former flower child much young than himself and once , in an act of apparent insouciance , be photograph a he pirouette alone in Buckingham Palace while other guest walk off to meet Queen Elizabeth. Many year later James Coutts , one of Mr. Trudeau 's aide , disclose that far from be spontaneous , the pirouette , like many other attention-getting gesture , have be plan and even rehearse by the prime minister. As Michael Valpy , a political columnist for The Globe and Mail , note in 1998 on the occasion of Mr. Trudeau 's 79th birthday , the prime minister have become impressed early in his political career by an idea advance by Marshall McLuhan , the philosopher of media. McLuhan believe that the public see prominent figure a if they be wear mask , and that it be the character of the mask that the public identifies with , not the person behind it. Mr. Valpy , who be marry to Deborah Coyne , a constitutional lawyer who be also the mother of Mr. Trudeau 's young child , a daughter , maintain that the mask Mr. Trudeau select be that of the warrior chief. He add : `` It would require a Joseph Campbell to explain to Canadians -- the beaver people of peace , order and good government -- why they find magic in a warrior chief 's mask. But magic they find , serve up by a practiced and consummate magician. '' Defining Canadian-ness Annoyed the Neighbors Another Canadian commentator , Richard Gwyn , maintain that Canadians be fascinate with Mr. Trudeau precisely because his image be not the way they saw themselves but the way they want to be seen. `` He tease , taunt , inspires and bug the hell out of Canadians because they know he be utterly un-Canadian -- but exactly what they want other people to think Canadians be like , '' Mr. Gwyn write in a collection of essay call `` Trudeau 's Shadow. '' In a country so devote to understatement , Mr. Trudeau 's ascendancy mark a radical departure. His success be compare to the transformation of style and leadership that take place eight year earlier in Washington when John F. Kennedy be elect president. Predictably , such a change draw complaint at home and abroad. In the United States , Mr. Trudeau 's assertion of Canadian prerogative frequently raise eyebrow and indignation. There be the time , for example , when he refer to a Washington bureaucrat a `` a pipsqueak. '' There be protest in America when he try to limit American investment in Canada , particularly in the oil industry. And when he urge NATO to make a dovish retreat from it first-strike nuclear strategy , the Reagan administration think him to be naive , dangerous and presumptuous. Still , like all Canadian leader , he remain preoccupy by his country 's relationship with the United States and even charm critic with comment like those he offer in 1969 after meet President Richard M. Nixon in Washington : `` Living next to you be in some way like sleep with an elephant. No matter how friendly and even-tempered be the beast , if I can call it that , one be affect by every twitch and grunt. '' And when Mr. Trudeau retire 15 year later , James Reston write in his column in The New York Times : `` Some of u down here think he be a good neighbor and a good friend. We like his crusty arrogance and the rise in his lapel. He give u his truth a he saw it , even if we do n't always like it. '' Joseph Philippe Pierre Ives Elliott Trudeau be bear on Oct. 18 , 1919 , in Montreal. His father , Charles-Emile Trudeau , the son of French-speaking Quebec farmer , be a lawyer then on his way to wealth a the owner of a chain of gas stations. He also acquire profitable mine , the Belmont amusement park in Montreal and the Royals , the city 's minor-league baseball team. His mother , Grace , be of mixed Scottish and French descent. The family speak mostly French at home , but Mr. Trudeau could not remember a time when he do not also speak English. At a Jesuit high school where he study Latin and Greek , he systematically test teacher in contrarian debate. `` I realize that I must never interrupt a teacher to make an impertinent remark , because that would be certain to infuriate him , '' Mr. Trudeau write in 1993 in a book he call simply `` Memoirs. '' `` But if I wait until he pause and then I slip in a wisecrack , the class would burst out laugh before he have a chance to get angry. '' He say the pleasure of such moment lead him to a lifelong habit of `` oppose conventional wisdom and challenge prevail opinions. '' In 1940 he enter the University of Montreal , only vaguely aware that the war in Europe `` might constitute the most dramatic adventure the men of my generation would ever confront. '' But a he also observe , `` If you be a French-Canadian in Montreal in the early 1940 's , you do not automatically believe that this be a just war. We still know nothing of the Holocaust , and we tend to think of this war a a settling of score among the superpowers. '' In any case , he do not enlist ; he even rally against conscription of French-Canadians. In 1943 he graduate with a degree in law , and after clerk in a law office he go to Harvard for graduate study in political economy. At Harvard , he recall , he be make to understand the parochialism of Quebec , meeting professor , refugee from Europe , who do make him aware of `` miss one of the major event of the century. '' Until he be 30 , he spend his time in study and travel. He leave Harvard for Ecole de Sciences Politiques in Paris , where he roar across the city on a motorcycle and taste from a rich and fashionable intellectual menu : the Christian leave , the worker-priest movement , orthodox Marxism , classical liberalism , existentialism and particularly personalism , an attempt associate with the writer Jacques Maritain to reconcile the need of individual and society. A year later he be study at the London School of Economics , principally with Harold Laski , the eminent professor of political science who be also the chairman of the British Labor Party. Mr. Trudeau have write that his basic philosophy of government be establish there , at a time when Britain be on the verge of institute the welfare state. Girdling the Globe To Learn About Home In the spring of 1948 , Mr. Trudeau set off on a slow voyage of discovery , ostensibly to do research for a doctoral dissertation , never complete , on the interplay of Christianity and Marxism in Asia. Actually , a he later explain , he be embark on a different odyssey , eager to mix with local people and to see and sense the world. He be arrest in Arab Jerusalem on suspicion of be an Israeli spy. He be detain when he cross the new and tense border between Pakistan and India. He hitchhike across an Indochina already rent by war factions. He be in China during the 1949 revolution there. His presence at a lawyer ' meeting in Moscow lead to instruction to American immigration official in the anti-Communist 1950 's to deny him admission if he try to enter the United States. After two year , Mr. Trudeau return home dismay that the authoritarian government of Maurice Duplessis and the local ecclesiatical establishment that have rule Quebec since his childhood be still in firm control. He commit himself to work for a `` democratic revolution '' in the province , seek separation of church and state , electoral reform and educational changes. He found an intellectual quarterly , Cite Libre , and use it page to call for a coalition of democratic force against the Duplessis regime. In 1961 he become a law professor at the University of Montreal , which earlier have steadfastly shun him for be too radical and anticlerical. By this time a quiet revolution be well under way in Quebec , with urban , cosmopolitan and secular value rise to challenge the old culture and the old politics. In 1965 Mr. Trudeau join the Liberal Party and win election to the House of Commons. In Parliament , he sympathize with many grievance of the French-Canadians , advocate support for their language and culture. But at the same time he steadfastly oppose any legislative action that would give them special status. He be a federalist , and he despair of any separatist solution that suggest ghettos. `` French-Canadians must refuse to be enclose within Quebec , '' he write in one of his essays. `` The die be cast in Canada : there be two main ethnic and linguistic group ; each be too strong and too deeply root in the past , too firmly bind to a mother culture to engulf the other. But if the two will collaborate at the hub of a truly pluralistic state , Canada could become the envied seat of a form of federalism that belong to tomorrow 's world. '' He be quickly single out by Prime Minister Lester Pearson , who name him to his cabinet in 1967 a minister of justice and concurrently attorney general. He produce legislation expand social welfare , tighten gun control and liberalize law relate to divorce , abortion and homosexuality. When Mr. Pearson announce his intention to resign , Mr. Trudeau compete with 19 others for the post of party leader , which carry with it the prize of prime minister. Mr. Trudeau be victorious , and on April 20 , 1968 , he be swear in a Canada 's 15th prime minister and it third of French descent. Three day later he dissolve Parliament , call for general elections. Mr. Trudeau campaign on the promise of `` a just society , '' urge the rich province to pay for program in the poorer ones. He concede that the expanded program he want would mean high tax , but declare , `` If you want pie in the sky , you 'll have to vote for another party. '' It all go over well with the voter , and on June 25 , propel by `` Trudeaumania , '' the electorate give the Liberals a comfortable majority. But the euphoria be shatter in 1970 when a terrorist group , the Front de la Liberation de Quebec kidnap James Cross , a British diplomat , and a week later seize Pierre Laporte , a minister in the Quebec provincial cabinet. As a condition of their freedom , the Front demand the release of member who have be imprison on charge or conviction of murder , bank robbery and bombing carry out in the pursuit of separatism. While demonstrator rally in support of the Front and nonviolent supporter of separatism call stridently for full appeasement of the kidnapper , Mr. Trudeau painfully and reluctantly invoke the War Measures Act to protect Canada from a `` cancer of an arm , revolutionary movement. '' Using provision of the act , he send thousand of troop to Montreal and cancel some civil liberties. Some 400 people be arrest and detain without charges. Two day later , on Oct. 17 , a message from the Front tell authority where they could find the body of Mr. LaPorte. Four men be eventually charge with his murder and imprisoned. Mr. Cross be then release , and his captor be allow to leave for Cuba. Mr. Trudeau 's tough response prove highly popular , and terrorism effectively cease in Quebec. But the issue of separatism for Quebec do not disappear. Indeed it keep grow , advance no longer simply by terrorist but by popular politician of the Parti Quebecois , notably Rene Levesque , an old friend of Mr. Trudeau who be to become his chief opponent on the issue. By 1976 the separatist party have take control of the provincial government. Paradoxically , it be the success of Mr. Trudeau 's policy toward Quebec that lead to his brief ouster from office in the election of May 1979. With the risk of Quebec 's secession seemingly end by his effort , the western province be encourage to lash out against Mr. Trudeau 's party , which they view a favor federal power at the expense of the authority of their provinces. The Liberals win no seat west of Winnipeg , and Joe Clark , the leader of the Progressive Conservative Party , become prime minister. But then Mr. Levesque inadvertantly come to Mr. Trudeau 's rescue. Realizing that the election have remove the strong proponent of federalism from power , Mr. Levesque felt it opportune to prepare a referendum that would ask the people of Quebec whether they want to empower provincial official to begin negotiation on independence. But by that act he strengthen Mr. Trudeau 's support throughout the country. Some of those who have vote against him , think the separatist danger have end , now openly miss his voice. And Mr. Clark quickly stumbled. He lose a vote of no confidence , and new election be ordered. Mr. Trudeau rally impressively , and by March 1980 , he be once more prime minister. He immediately set off to challenge the Parti Quebecois in Mr. Levesque 's referendum , schedule for May. A Bitter Debate On Canada 's Meaning The debate become personal and nasty , with Mr. Levesque , who be seek a yes vote , at one point dismiss the prime minister 's argument against the proposition. `` His name be Pierre Elliott Trudeau. and this be the Elliott side take over , and that 's the English side , so we French-Canadians in Quebec ca n't expect any sympathy from him , '' Mr. Levesque said. The prime minister counterattacked. He cite the Ryans , the Johnsons and the O'Neills -- who despite their Anglo-Saxon name be famous French-Canadian political families. Then he declare : `` Of course my name be Pierre Elliott Trudeau. Elliott be my mother 's name. It be the name borne by the Elliotts who come to Canada more than 200 year ago. My name be a Quebec name. But my name be a Canadian name also. `` It worked. On May 20 , 1980 , 59.6 percent of the electorate vote no. In the showdown over the destiny of Quebec , Mr. Trudeau 's vision have overwhelm Mr. Levesque 's hope of pull an independent Quebec out of the federal system. Though only the foolhardy could claim that Mr. Trudeau 's victory over the force of separatism be permanent , none could dispute that it be profound. There be other successes. In 1982 he succeed in repatriate the Constitution by have the British Parliament pas an act that cede full responsibility for amend Canada 's national charter to Ottawa. He saw bilingualism and multiculturalism become national programs. And his vision of Canada a a compassionate and benevolent government open to the rest of the world yet different from the United States have survive his term of office. There be setback over nuclear disarmament and over his attempt to limit foreign involvement in the economy. But it be in his private life he prove most vulnerable. In 1970 , at the Club Med in Tahiti , the 51-year-old Mr. Trudeau meet Margaret Sinclair , 21 , the daughter of a Liberal Party politician from British Columbia. They be marry the next year and by 1975 they have three son , Justin , Alexandre and Michel. Soon after campaign with her husband in the 1974 election , Mrs. Trudeau suffer exhaustion and be hospitalized. When she emerge from the hospital , she become a photographer , follow rock musician and frequent nightclub , where she be often photograph in way that be humiliate to her husband. Her friendship with Mick Jagger and other pop icon provide more grist for tabloid gossip columnist on several continents. The couple separate in 1974 and be divorce in 1984 , with Mr. Trudeau get custody of the children. After step down a prime minister , Mr. Trudeau move to Montreal , where he keep largely to himself , avoid interview or public appearances. He suffer from Parkinson 's disease , but even before the symptom of his illness intensify , he keep close to home. He be always consider an aloof , insular man , and his former wife have once say that he `` destine for eternal solitude. '' His public mask , the one he have design and shape , seem to have slip away and friend who have know him for year describe him a an increasingly unhappy man. In 1998 his young son , Michel , a 23-year-old microbiologist who work a a ski instructor , be sweep to his death in an avalanche in British Columbia. Mr. Trudeau grieve privately. He be close to his survive son and until his last illness frequently visit his daughter by Miss Coyne , the lawyer , whom he have first meet professionally. The girl be bear when Mr. Trudeau be 71. Nonetheless , despite the aloofness of his last year , memory of the warrior chief persist in Canada. Fourteen year after he leave office , when a sampling of Canadians be poll about which public figure they would most want to have dinner with , Pierre Trudeau come in a close second. The only Canadian who be more popular be the hockey star Wayne Gretzky .