January 1 , 2000 OBITUARY Elliot Richardson Dies at 79 ; Stood Up to Nixon and Resigned In 'Saturday Night Massacre' By NEIL A. LEWIS Elliot L. Richardson , the archetype of the cultivated New England Brahmin who serve in an astonishingly broad range of high public position , and who be best know for his refusal during Watergate to obey President Richard M. Nixon 's order to fire a special prosecutor , die yesterday in his native Massachusetts. He be 79. Mr. Richardson die at the Massachusetts General Hospital from complication after a cerebral hemorrhage , his son Michael reported. Mr. Richardson , who be descend from some of Boston 's early settler , be sometimes refer to by friend a `` the former everything '' because of the great variety of position he hold both in Massachusetts and in the federal government. He serve a attorney general and United States attorney in Massachusetts , be second-in-command at the State Department and hold four cabinet position , more than anyone else in history. He also serve a ambassador to Britain , negotiate the worldwide treaty on the Law of the Sea and be the chief representative of the United Nations in monitor Nicaraguan election in 1990 , among other assignments. But it be Mr. Richardson 's stand during Watergate when he be Richard M. Nixon 's attorney general that be widely laud a a special moment of integrity and rectitude that secure him a place in the nation 's history. President Nixon order Mr. Richardson to fire Archibald M. Cox , the special Watergate prosecutor , but Mr. Richardson choose to resign instead. After Mr. Richardson resign , his second-in-command , William D. Ruckelshaus be fire after similarly refuse to fire Mr. Cox. Those event , on Saturday , Oct. 20 , 1973 , become know a the Saturday Night Massacre. Robert H. Bork , who be then the solicitor general and thus the Justice Department 's highest-ranking remain official , accept the assignment and fire Mr. Cox. Mr. Bork 's behavior be a source of criticism in 1987 when the Senate refuse to confirm his nomination to the Supreme Court. The order to fire Mr. Cox come a President Nixon struggle to limit the investigation that stem from the June 17 , 1972 , break-in at the Democratic Party 's headquarters at the Watergate complex. In his 1996 book , `` Reflections of a Moderate , '' Mr. Richardson recall that he come to see event clearly in the midst of that tension-drenched time. `` The more I think about it , '' he write , `` the clearer it seem to me that public confidence in the investigation would depend on it be independent not only in fact , but in appearance. '' In 1976 , he recall in an article in the Atlantic Monthly that he come to realize he be in a `` peculiar no-man 's land between the special prosecutor and the president. '' He eventually decide he be be exploit by Mr. Nixon to get rid of Mr. Cox , who be determine to obtain tape-recordings make surreptitiously in the White House. Mr. Richardson recall in the article how he go home and discuss the event with his wife , Anne. `` It be clear that I could not carry out the instruction , '' he write and his wife joke that he would be carry out of the Justice Department in a mahogany coffin. Mr. Richardson also ruminate on the cause of Mr. Nixon 's failing in the Watergate scandal , attribute it in part to his refusal to stop dwell on his political enemies. `` The second ingredient of Watergate , an amoral alacrity to do the president 's bidding , be traceable less to flaw in his own political character ( although it be reinforce by them ) than to the political and cultural evolution of twentieth century America. '' He lament that the character of the president 's men be not uniquely evil but merely an extension of the increasingly common value of `` get-ahead , go-along organization men who take on the coloration and the value system of whatever organization '' they belong to. Mr. Richardson write that he never understand how Mr. Nixon and his adviser could have assume that he would fire Mr. Cox , who have object to have limit place on his ability to subpoena White House materials. He could only have dismiss Mr. Cox for `` extraordinary impropriety , '' he say , and Mr. Cox 's position be `` not only defensible but right. '' After his resignation , Mr. Richardson be surprise and embarrass to find himself call a modern-day Sir Thomas More. But if he wear that description modestly , it also make him sought after a a moral arbiter. His role a the chief monitor when Nicaragua vote out the Sandinista government give that election credibility. When he publicly declare that he think Edwin Meese III , a fellow Republican , unfit to become attorney general , it carry great weight. Last year , he urge the House to censure President Clinton but not impeach him. After hear of Mr. Richardson 's death , President Clinton say that Mr. Richardson `` put the nation 's interest first even when the personal cost be very high. '' Elliot Lee Richardson be bear in Boston on July 20 , 1920 , the son of a prominent doctor who be professor of medicine at the Harvard Medical School. He once tell friend that he spend his year at Harvard College mostly draw cartoon for the Lampoon , the comedy magazine. But he graduate near the top of his class and enrol in Harvard Law School. He study there only a short time before enlist in the Army to serve in World War II. As a first lieutenant , he land in Normandy on D-Day with the Fourth Infantry Division. In the ensuing month he earn a Bronze Star and two Purple Hearts. Stephen E. Ambrose , the historian , write in his account of D-Day that Mr. Richardson , then a 23-year-old platoon leader , risk his life to cross a minefield to rescue another officer whose foot be blow off. Years later , Mr. Richardson , in conversation with friend , would compare his feeling at that time with those he experience when he be ask to fire Mr. Cox. He return to Harvard Law School in 1945 where he become editor and president of the Harvard Law Review. He be a law clerk for Judge Learned Hand and then for Justice Felix I. Frankfurter. A friend , Ernest J. Sargeant of Wellesley , Mass. , recall today how Mr. Richardson negotiate with Justice Frankfurter to be allow to have an hour to himself each morning to read Shakespeare. Justice Frankfurter be so impressed with Mr. Richardson that in 1953 he recommend that he be name president of Harvard even though he be only 33 year old. Although his father , two grandfather and several uncle have be physician in Boston , he choose a career in politics and public administration , start in Massachusetts. His uncle , Henry Lee Shattuck , who serve on the Boston City Council and play the Yankee antagonist to the city 's Irish-American Democrats , become Mr. Richardson 's political mentor. Mr. Richardson begin his own public career a an aide to Senator Leverett Saltonstall , a venerable Republican. He return to Boston in 1959 a the United States attorney there. In 1969 , he be appoint undersecretary of state at the State Department , a position he hold until 1970 , when he be name to head the Department of Health , Education and Welfare. He be name defense secretary at the beginning of 1973 and become attorney general after four month , serve until his resignation in October 1973. He later serve a secretary of commerce in the administration of President Gerald R. Ford. Donald Carr , a Washington lawyer who be write a biography of Mr. Richardson say his research show that no one have ever hold four cabinet posts. In 1984 he run unsuccessfully for the Republican nomination for the Senate from Massachusetts. Mr. Richardson , accord to press account at the time , have a difficult time in electoral politics. The voter , even in a Republican primary , do not easily warm to his reserved ways. He ask to be know a Muggsy in what turn out to be an ineffectual effort to appear more of a casual figure to voters. who nonetheless choose his opponent by a 2-to-1 margin. Mr. Richardson be award the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the nation 's high civilian honor , in 1998. Mr. Richardson 's wife , Anne , die last July. He be survive by three child , Nancy Carlson of St. George , Vt. , Henry of Washington , and Michael of Upper Montclair , N.J. ; a sister , Mary Conrad of Albuquerque , and a brother Dr. George Richardson of Nahant , Mass .