Overlooked No More : Karen Sparck Jones , Who Established the Basis for Search Engines A pioneer of computer science for work combine statistic and linguistics , and an advocate for woman in the field. By Nellie Bowles When most scientist be try to make people use code to talk to computer , Karen Sparck Jones teach computer to understand human language instead. In so do , her technology establish the basis of search engine like Google. A self-taught programmer with a focus on natural language processing , and an advocate for woman in the field , Sparck Jones also foreshadow by decade Silicon Valley’s current reckoning , warn about the risk of technology be lead by computer scientist who be not attune to it social implications. “A lot of the stuff she be work on until five or 10 year ago seem like mad nonsense , and now we take it for grant , ” say John Tait , a longtime friend who work with the British Computer Society. Sparck Jones’s seminal 1972 paper in the Journal of Documentation lay the groundwork for the modern search engine. In it , she combine statistic with linguistics — an unusual approach at the time — to establish formula that embody principle for how computer could interpret relationship between words. By 2007 , Sparck Jones say , “pretty much every web engine use those principles.” “Anything that do index-term weight use any kind of statistical information will be use a weighting function that I publish in 1972 , ” she say in an interview with the British Computer Society. Karen Ida Boalth Sparck Jones be bear on Aug. 26 , 1935 , in Huddersfield , England , a textile manufacturing town. Her parent be Alfred Owen Jones , a chemistry lecturer , and Ida Sparck , who work for the Norwegian government while in exile in London during World War II. When study history and then philosophy ( the department be then call moral science ) at Cambridge , she meet the head of the Cambridge Language Research Unit , Margaret Masterman , who would inspire her to enter the field. Sparck Jones later describe her a “a very strange and interesting woman” who , unusual for the time , use her maiden name professionally. Sparck Jones , too , keep her name when she marry Roger Needham , a fellow computer scientist , in 1958 , say , “It maintain a permanent existence of your own.” Sparck Jones start work for Ms. Masterman. She want to figure out how to program a computer to understand word that could have many meaning ( for example “field” ) and set about program a massive thesaurus. “A lot of the stuff she be work on until five or 10 year ago seem like mad nonsense , and now we take it for grant , ” John Tait , of the British Computer Society , say about Sparck Jones. “All word in a natural language be ambiguous ; they have multiple sens , ” she say in an oral history interview for the History Center of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. “How do you find out which sense they’ve get in any particular use ? ” In 1964 , Sparck Jones publish “Synonymy and Semantic Classification , ” which be now see a a foundational paper in the field of natural language processing. In 1972 , she introduce the concept of inverse document frequency , which measure the extent to which a rare term that appear in a particular document should be use to determine the term’s importance ; it , too , be a foundation of modern search engine because it help dictate where the document should appear in search results. Sparck Jones begin work on early speech recognition system in the 1980s. Most morning and afternoon , she and her husband , a pioneer in software security , debate theory in the Cambridge department’s tea room. Their home in Coton , just west of Cambridge , be full of book , art and find item , like an interesting piece of driftwood or a Victorian-era knife grinder. They have a second house in the same village , use it to store the overflow of their book collection and a her artist’s workshop. One of her artwork be hang at the Microsoft Research Lab. Sailing be another passion of Sparck Jones and Needham. They restore an 1872 vintage sailboat call Fanny of Cowes and race it against other old boat along the east coast of England. They choose not to have children. “They want their intellectual life , ” say Andrew Herbert , her friend and a fellow computer scientist. “They be clearly deeply in love with each other all the way through their life.” Sparck Jones have a booming voice and a puckish sense of humor. At work , she usually wear a simple uniform : bluejeans , red sweater , white blouse. She also wear a brooch , which she make from stone and part of a horseshoe. When she have to bike to a formal dinner , a one often do at Cambridge , she be know to use clothing peg to pin her dress to the handlebars. In 1982 , the British government tap Sparck Jones to work on the Alvey Program , an initiative to encourage more computer science research across the country. In 1993 , she write , with Julia R. Galliers , “Evaluating Natural Language Processing Systems , ” the seminal textbook on the topic. Sparck Jones become president of the Association for Computational Linguistics , an international group for professional in the field , in 1994. She become a full-time professor at Cambridge in 1999 — and it have bother her that it take so long. For all the year before , she have be on contract with the university , an untenured and lower-status form of academic employment refer to a “living on soft money.” “Cambridge be in many way not user-friendly , in the sense of women-friendly , ” she say of the delay. Sparck Jones die of cancer on April 4 , 2007. She be 71. Though she do not receive an obituary in The Times , her husband do , in 2003. Today , researcher be still cite her formulas. Ideas she write about be now be put into practice a artificial intelligence research become more prevalent. “It point to how far ahead of her time she be , how consequential her work be , how little it be value for the first 20 year , ” say Martha Palmer , a professor in the Linguistics and Computer Science department at the University of Colorado. Sparck Jones mentor a generation of researcher , male and female , and come up with a slogan : “Computing be too important to be leave to men.” She be ahead of her time in another respect. Decades before Silicon Valley be have it moral reckoning , Sparck Jones caution engineer to think of their work’s impact on society. “There be an interaction between the context and the programming task itself , ” she said. “You don’t need a fundamental philosophical discussion every time you put finger to keyboard , but a computing be spread so far into people’s life , you need to think about these things.”